KEYWORD: Alcohol; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant was arrested or charged with six alcohol-related incidents between 1999 and
October 2005.  At the time of his April 2005 public drunkenness charge his blood alcohol content
was 0.23.  Even though he has reduced his alcohol consumption, no longer associates with college
acquaintances, and has changed his priorities in life, the record evidence is insufficient to mitigate
or extenuate the negative security implications stemming from alcohol consumption. Clearance is
denied.
CASENO: 06-23004.h1
DATE: 06/22/2007
DATE:  June 22, 2007
In re:
-----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23004
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CLAUDE R. HEINY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant was arrested or charged with six alcohol-related incidents between 1999 and
October 2005.  At the time of his April 2005 public drunkenness charge his blood alcohol content
Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive),1
dated January 2, 1992, as amended.
2
was 0.23.  Even though he has reduced his alcohol consumption, no longer associates with college
acquaintances, and has changed his priorities in life, the record evidence is insufficient to mitigate
or extenuate the negative security implications stemming from alcohol consumption. Clearance is
denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On December 15, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating that DOHA could not make the preliminary
affirmative finding  it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security1
clearance for Applicant. The SOR set forth reasons why a security clearance could not be granted
or continued due to Alcohol Consumption and Personal Conduct security concerns.
On January 8, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and stated he did not wish to have a
hearing. A File of Relevant Material (FORM) was prepared on March 30, 2007.  On May 30, 2007,
Applicant responded to the FORM. Department Counsel having no objection to the material
submitted by Applicant, the documents were admitted into evidence. On June 6, 2007, I was
assigned the case. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The SOR alleges security concerns for Alcohol Consumption and Personal Conduct.
Applicant admits to the following: that he consumed alcohol, at times to excess, which resulted in
intoxication starting in 1995 and ending in October 2005.  In July 1999, Applicant was charged with
disorderly conduct, found guilty, and fined $335.  In December 2003 and May 2004, he was charged
with public drunkenness, found guilty, and fined approximately $217 and $197, respectively.  In
October 2004, he was cited for having an open container of alcohol, found guilty, and fined $80.
In April 2005, he was charged with public drunkenness with a blood alcohol content (BAC) of
0.23%.  He pleaded guilty to the charge and was fined $218.  In October 2005, he was charged with
public drunkenness after having consumed 20 beers.  He was found not guilty because the incident
occurred on private property.  His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a
thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 24-year-old systems analysis who has worked for a defense contractor since
October 2005 and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  His professor states he is impressed by
the level of effort Applicant has put into his classes and toward obtaining his M.S. degree.  His
professor believes Applicant is a dedicated, determined, reliable and hard-working student.
Applicant’s supervisor states Applicant has a strong work ethic and has become a dedicated working
professional.  Applicant often works late to ensure assigned tasks are completed timely.  Applicant
consistently exceeds his production requirement and has become a valued member of the team.
Applicant’s priest believes Applicant is an extremely mature and serious person. 
3
Applicant admits he has abused alcohol in the past.  Applicant’s alcohol usage occurred
“periodically to somewhat frequently in high school, and became habitual in college.” (Applicant’s
response to FORM) Applicant states he has “learned to limit my alcohol consumption to social
situations and don’t consume alcohol nearly to the extent that I have in the past.”  (Applicant’s
response to FORM) Applicant has discussed his past alcohol arrests and problems with his priest.
In June 2005, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive Positions, Standard
Form (SF) 85. (Item 6)  Question 14 asked him if he had used marijuana during the previous year.
He answered "No" to the question.  Applicant interpreted this question to mean was he currently
using drugs.  He used marijuana during college, but was neither addicted to it nor a habitual user of
it.  He last used marijuana in late April 2005 or early May 2005.  Applicant asserts his action “was
purely a mistake of an irresponsible college kid, who blew threw the questionnaire without giving
it the attention that it deserved.  I regret making this mistake and fully intend to be more attentive
and assertive when filling out similar questionnaires.”  (Applicant’s response to FORM)
In October 2005, Applicant completed an SF 86, but this time indicated he had used
marijuana from August 2001 to May 2005. (Item 5, page 31) In July 2006, Applicant disclosed his
drug use to an investigator to correct the mistake of the omission.  The record is silent as to whether
he volunteered this information without being asked about his drug usage or if it was in response
to a specific inquiry by the investigator. 
In April 2005, Applicant was arrested for public drunkenness having a BAC of 0.23%.
Applicant saw this arrest as an eye opening experience.  He was nearing the end of this college
experience and decided he needed to create a more positive future for himself.  He vowed to change
his life.  In October 2005, he returned to his college to attend a football game.  He consumed 20
beers and was again arrested for public drunkenness.  Applicant saw his arrest as a wake-up call.
It made him realize he was "screwing up (his) life and jeopardizing (his) future." (Item 4, page 2)
In January 2006, Applicant started on his Masters Degree in electrical engineering while
working full time.  In June 2006, he was promoted.  In July 2006, his work performance was good
enough for him to be allowed to work 10 hours of overtime per biweekly period.  His work quality
continued to improve and he was approved for 32 hours of overtime per biweekly period. In the
Spring of 2007, due to his work performance he was approved for the maximum overtime per
biweekly period of 40 hours.
Also in June 2006, he moved into his own apartment and is now paying $1,279 per month
rent.  He also pays for his schooling from his salary.  In March 2006, Applicant met a woman and
is now engaged to be married in July 2007.
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to be considered when evaluating a person’s
eligibility to hold a security clearance. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions
(MC) are set forth for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each decision must be a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole person concept, and the factors listed in Section 6.3 of the Directive. The adjudicative
guidelines are to be applied by administrative judges on a case-by-case basis with an eye toward
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.152
4
making determinations that are clearly consistent with the interests of national security. The
presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not determinative
of a conclusion for or against an applicant.  However, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole,
I conclude the relevant guidelines to be applied here are Alcohol Consumption and Personal
Conduct.
BURDEN OF PROOF
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an applicant. Initially, the
Government must establish, by substantial evidence, that conditions exist in the personal or
professional history of the applicant which disqualify, or may disqualify, an applicant from being
eligible for access to classified information. The burden of proof in a security clearance case is
something less than a preponderance of evidence, although the government is required to present
substantial evidence to meet its burden of proof.  Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but
less than a preponderance of the evidence. All that is required is proof of facts and circumstances
which indicate an applicant is at risk for mishandling classified information, or that an applicant
does not demonstrate the high degree of judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness required of persons
handling classified information.  Additionally, the government must prove controverted facts alleged
in the SOR.  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to present
evidence to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government's case.  Additionally, an applicant has the
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.2
As noted by the United States Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,
528 (1988), “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” A person who has access to classified
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence.
The government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national
security.  Security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. 
CONCLUSIONS
The Government has satisfied its initial burden of proof under Alcohol Consumption,
Guideline G.  A history of excessive alcohol consumption raises a security concern because of the
potential for deliberate or inadvertent mishandling of classified information due to intoxication.
Excessive alcohol consumption is of concern because it often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment, criminal conduct, unreliability, failure to control impulses, and increases the risk of
unauthorized disclosure of classified information due to carelessness.  The record evidence raises
a security concern under this guideline. 
Between July 1999 and October 2005, Applicant was arrested or citied six times for alcohol-
related incidents. The majority of the arrest occurred when Applicant was a college student. It is
5
noted at the time of his April 2005 arrest Applicant’s BAC was 0.23%, which is very high.
Disqualifying conditions (DC) a (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other criminal incidents
of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent) and c ( habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) apply.
 
None of the Mitigating Conditions (MC) apply.  MC a (so much time has passed, or the
behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment) does not apply.  It has only been a year and a half since his last arrest, his conduct was
not infrequent, and the drinking did not occur under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely
to recur even though he no longer associates with his college friends. 
Applicant acknowledges he has had issues of alcohol abuse in the past.  However, MC b (the
individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)) does not apply because the record is silent as
to Applicant’s current  use. Applicant states he has learned to limit his alcohol consumption to social
situations and do not consume alcohol nearly to the extent that he did in the past. From that
statement it is impossible to conclude he has established “responsible use” of alcohol. 
Applicant has talked to his priest about his past arrests and alcohol incidents, but the record
fails to establish these talks are a counseling or treatment program.  Therefore MC c (the individual
is a current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress) and MC d (the individual has
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required
aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence
in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized
alcohol treatment program) do not apply.
Applicant has denied being cited with an alcohol violation in June 1999.  The record fails
to establish this event occurred.  I find for Applicant as to SOR 1.b.
Because of the six alcohol-related incidents, the last of which occurred less than two years
ago, and because none of the mitigating conditions apply, I find against Applicant as to Alcohol
Consumption. 
The Government has satisfied its initial burden of proof under guideline E, (Personal
Conduct).  Under Guideline E, the security eligibility of an applicant is placed into question when
that applicant is shown to have been involved in personal conduct which creates doubt about the
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Complete honesty and candor on the part of
applicants for access to classified information is essential to make an accurate and meaningful
security clearance determination.  Without all the relevant and material facts, a clearance decision
is susceptible to error, thus jeopardizing the nation’s security. The nature of Applicant’s actions, in
providing false information on his June 2005 SF 85 poses a serious potential risk to the nation’s
6
security precautions. DC a (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and
material facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities)
applies. 
On the June 2005 SF 85, Question 14, Illegal Drugs, asked a straight forward question: in
the last year, had the Applicant used or possessed illegal drugs, which included marijuana.  Even
though Applicant had last used in late April or early May 2005 he answered “no” to the question.
He says this was not an intentional falsification and he was not trying to mislead. Applicant
interpreted the question to ask if “he currently used drugs.”  He says it happened because he was an
irresponsible college kid, who blew threw the questionnaire without giving it the attention that it
deserved. Having used marijuana a month to six weeks prior to completion of the questionnaire, the
event should have been sufficiently fresh in his mind to disclose it. The wording is clear and
unambiguous.
In October 2005, four months after completing has SF 85, he completed an SF 86, but this
time indicated he had used marijuana from August 2001 to May 2005. Before completing this
questionnaire he had not been confronted about his drug usage.  MC a (the individual made prompt,
good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with
the facts) applies.  I find for Applicant as to the personal conduct security concerns. 
In reaching my conclusions I have also considered: the nature, extent, and seriousness of the
conduct; Applicant’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; the circumstances surrounding the
conduct; Applicant’s voluntary and knowledgeable participation; the motivation for the conduct; the
frequency and recency of the conduct; presence or absence of rehabilitation; potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and the probability that the circumstance or conduct will continue
or recur in the future. 
Although Applicant’s evidence of rehabilitation is insufficient at this time, this decision
should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of
reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award of a security clearance. Should Applicant
be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the future and he continues on his
present course with no future adverse alcohol related incidents, he may well demonstrate persuasive
evidence of security worthiness.  But that time has not yet arrived.  Because the Applicant meets the
disqualifying conditions and none of the mitigating conditions, the Alcohol Considerations security
concern is resolved against the Applicant. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings as required by Section 3, Paragraph 7, of Enclosure 1 of the Directive are
hereby rendered as follows:
Paragraph 1 Alcohol Consumption: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
7
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 Personal Conduct: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Claude R. Heiny 
Administrative Judge
