KEYWORD: Foreign Influence
DIGEST: Applicant is a 42 year-old naturalized United States citizen, born in the People’s Republic
of China (PRC).  Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of the PRC. The evidence establishes
that Applicant has close and continuing relationship with his sister, which makes him potentially
vulnerable to foreign influence. Mitigation has not been shown.  Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-25204.h1
DATE: 06/06/2007
DATE: June 6, 2007
In Re:
-----------------------
SSN: ---------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-25204
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MARTIN H. MOGUL
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 42 year-old naturalized United States citizen, born in the People’s Republic
2
of China (PRC).  Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of the PRC. The evidence establishes
that Applicant has close and continuing relationship with his sister, which makes him potentially
vulnerable to foreign influence. Mitigation has not been shown.  Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On February 16, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral
to an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on March 3, 2007. Applicant requested a
clearance decision based on a hearing record.
On March 28, 2007, the case was initially assigned to another Administrative Judge to
conduct a hearing and issue a written decision, but on April 19, 2007, the case was reassigned to this
Administrative Judge. A Notice of Hearing was issued to the parties on April 10, 2007, and the
hearing was held on May 10, 2007.
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered two documentary exhibits (Exhibits 1 and  2)
and no witnesses were called. Applicant offered three documentary exhibits (Exhibits A - C) and
offered his own testimony. The record was left open to allow Applicant to offer additional
documentation regarding the status of the PRC. Department Counsel had until May 31, 2007, to
respond to the documents offered by Applicant. Applicant offered eight documents in a timely
manner, and Department Counsel objected to documents 3 through 8. I have entered Applicant’s
cover letter and all of the documents included, which have been identified collectively as Exhibit D.
The transcript (Tr) was received on May 22, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
In the SOR, the Government alleges that a security risk may exist under Adjudicative
Guideline B of the Directive because Applicant has immediate family members who are not United
States citizens and  may be subject to duress. The SOR contains four allegations, 1.a., through 1.d.,
under Guideline B. Applicant admitted SOR allegations1.a. through 1.c., and denied 1.d.. Based on
testimonial evidence elicited at the hearing, SOR allegation 1.d. was amended without objection.
Allegation 1.d. now states, “You traveled to China on December 2003 and April 2007.” Applicant
admitted this allegation as amended. The admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including Applicant's
Answer to the SOR, the documents and the live testimony, and upon due consideration of that
3
evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 42 years old,  employed as a Systems Engineer by a defense contractor, and he
seeks a security clearance for that position.  He received a Bachelor of Science degree in civil
engineering from a university in the PRC in 1987, and a Master’s Degree in Computer Science from
a United States university in 2005. 
Applicant  was born in the PRC in 1965. He moved to the United States to get his advanced
college degree in 1991, and became a naturalized United States citizen in October 2004. 
Applicant’s wife is also PRC born. She married Applicant in the PRC and came with him
to the United States in 1991.She also became a naturalized United States citizen. Applicant and his
wife have an eight year old daughter, who is a natural born United States citizen.
Applicant's father and mother are citizens of the PRC, but they reside with Applicant in the
United States, after coming here in 2006.  They are both retired farmers. Neither his father nor
mother ever worked for or was associated with the PRC Government.
Applicant's sister is a citizen and resident of the PRC. She is also a farmer, and she has never
worked for or been associated with the Government of the PRC. Applicant generally speaks to his
sister approximately every two months, and he testified that he has a loving relationship with her.
He sends her between $500 and $700 a year. In April 2007, Applicant  went to the PRC to visit his
sister because she was ill. He spent almost a week with her, and the trip cost him approximately
$1,000. Since his sister became ill, Applicant has been calling her more frequently.
Applicant's father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of the PRC. They are
now retired, but she had worked a teacher in a business school and he worked for a manufacturer.
Neither he nor his wife have spoken to them in many years. He last saw them during a 1997 visit he
made  to the PRC.
Since Applicant moved to the United States in 1991, he has visited the PRC on three
occasions in 1997, 2003, and in April 2007.
Applicant testified that he has no assets in the PRC, and his net worth in the United States
includes his home and his vehicle
When he was questioned as to what he would do if a representative of the PRC threatened
his sister if he did not cooperate with the government,  he testified, “I‘d ignore them”(Tr at 86).  
Current Status of the PRC
Since Applicant's sister and in-laws are citizens and residents of the PRC, it is important to
consider the status of the PRC at this time.
The PRC, the most populous country in the world, is economically powerful, and is an
important trading partner of the United States. It is run by the Communist Party which controls all
aspects of the PRC government. It has strong military forces, and has its own foreign-policy.
4
Although there has been some cooperation, there has been much more conflict with the United States
in the past. The PRC has an extremely large army, a sophisticated defense establishment, and space
capability. The PRC has launched satellites, has ballistic missiles, has nuclear arms, and nuclear
bombs. Its diplomatic and military dispute with the Republic of China (Taiwan), foreshadows a
possible military conflict, which the United States opposes as a resolution of the conflict. The PRC
has an abysmal human rights record, which includes arbitrary killings; detention or incarceration
without notice in mental facilities; torture; arbitrary arrest, detention or exile; no right to a public,
fair trial; a politically controlled judiciary; lack of due process; restrictions on free speech, on
religious freedom, on freedom of travel, on freedom of assembly; and no rights of privacy - family,
home or correspondence. 
The PRC engages in espionage against the United States through an extensive network of
businesses, personnel, and specific programs designed to acquire advanced U.S. military technology.
One approach is to covertly conduct espionage by personnel from government ministries,
commissions, institutes, and military industries, independently of the PRC intelligence services. This
is believed to be the major method of PRC intelligence activity in the United States. It also tries to
identify ethnic Chinese in the United States who have access to sensitive information, and sometimes
is able to enlist their cooperation in illegal technology information transfers.
POLICIES
           Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to be considered in evaluating
an individual's security eligibility. The Administrative Judge must take into account the conditions
raising or mitigating security concerns in each area applicable to the facts and circumstances
presented. Each adjudicative decision must also assess the factors listed in Section F.3. and in
Enclosure (2) of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition for or
against clearance is not determinative, the specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance, as the guidelines reflect consideration
of those factors of seriousness, recency, motivation, etc. 
BURDEN OF PROOF
Initially, the Government must prove controverted facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons.
If the Government meets that burden, the burden of persuasion then shifts to the applicant to
establish his security suitability through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation sufficient
to demonstrate that, despite the existence of disqualifying conduct, it is nevertheless clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue the security clearance. Assessment of an
applicant's fitness for access to classified information requires evaluation of the whole person, and
consideration of such factors as the recency and frequency of the disqualifying conduct, the
likelihood of recurrence, and evidence of rehabilitation.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the U.S. Government that is predicated upon trust and confidence. Where facts proven by the
Government raise doubts about an applicant's judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness, the applicant
has a heavy burden of persuasion to demonstrate that he or she is nonetheless security worthy. As
5
noted by the United States Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531
(1988), "the clearly consistent standard indicates that security-clearance determinations should err,
if they must, on the side of denials."
CONCLUSIONS
I have reviewed the overall record and the totality of the evidence.  Based on the evidence
of record, the Government has established an initial reason to deny Applicant a security clearance
because of Guideline B (Foreign Influence). Applicant’s relatives are citizens of the PRC, which
could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise of classified
information because it makes Applicant potentially vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure.
The possession of such ties raises a security concern sufficient to require Applicant to present
evidence in rebuttal, extenuation, or mitigation sufficient to meet his burden of persuasion that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him. This
Applicant has not been able to do.
  In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) I find that DC 7 (a) applies, contact with
foreign family members, who are citizens and residents in a foreign country, if that contact creates
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, pressure or coercion. I do not find that Applicant’s parents,
who now reside in the United States with Applicant, to be a security risk, nor are Applicant’s in-
laws, with whom neither he nor his wife has any contact, a security concern. However,  Applicant’s
sister, who still lives in the PRC and with whom Applicant has a close and continuing relationship,
remains a legitimate security concern. Applicant has shown by his description of their loving
relationship, and by his conduct including:  regular contact with her, sending her yearly  presents of
$500 to $700, and his spending $1,000 to visit her when she fell ill, that he continues to have very
strong feelings for her. This when considered with the nature of the PRC, as described above,
constitutes an unacceptable  security risk.   I do not find that any Mitigating Condition applies.
 
        After considering all of the evidence of record on Guideline B, I conclude that the  evidence
substantially supporting the SOR outweighs the mitigating evidence.   Accordingly, at this time it
is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant  a security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Paragraph 1. Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.:Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
 Subparagraph 1.d.: For Applicant
6
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
