KEYWORD: Personal Conduct; Information Technology
DIGEST: Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. In December 2005, Applicant
hacked into a former employer’s data network and disabled the company’s phone system. Applicant
regretted his actions, informed the company, made restitution, and is receiving psychiatric treatment.
He has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his actions. Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-23182.h1
DATE: 06/14/2007 
DATE:  June 14, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN: ----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23182
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Leslie McAdoo, Esq.
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. In December 2005, Applicant
hacked into a former employer’s data network and disabled the company’s phone system. Applicant
2
regretted his actions, informed the company, made restitution, and is receiving psychiatric treatment.
He has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his actions. Clearance is denied.
Pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as1
amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program  (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).
Tr. at 85; GE 1.2
Tr. at 86-90; GE 1; AE C.3
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant. On January 30, 2007, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons  (SOR)1
detailing the basis for its decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
and Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems) of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) issued on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. The revised guidelines were provided to Applicant when the SOR
was issued. Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 21, 2007, and elected to have a
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 4, 2007. A notice of
hearing was issued on April 12, 2007, scheduling the hearing for May 17, 2007. The hearing was
conducted as scheduled to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government offered two exhibits that were
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and admitted without objections. Applicant testified
and offered 17 exhibits that were marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through Q, and admitted
without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 25, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following
findings of fact.
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is single with no children.
Applicant is a college graduate.  2
Applicant worked for his former employer from September 1998 to August 2005. He was
an IT Systems Engineer when he voluntarily left the company to work for his current employer. After
he was with his current employer for several months, Applicant started to regret leaving his former
company. Applicant began negotiating with his former company for him to return to work for them.
After some discussions, the talks stalled.  3
Before he left his former company, Applicant copied their electronic data, including
passwords for their systems. On about December 23, 2005, Applicant gained access to his former
employer’s data network via his home computer through a hole in their system’s firewall, using the
information and passwords he kept after he left the company. Applicant disabled an interface in their
system, which Applicant knew would cause disruption to their network. Applicant shut down the
company’s phone system so that they could not take incoming or make outgoing phone calls. The
Tr. at 88-91, 106-116, 120-121; AE H.4
Tr. at 91-94; AE H.5
Tr. at 94.6
Tr. at 100-101; GE 2; AE F.7
AE J at 4.8
Tr. at 25-82; AE I, J.9
4
company retained a consultant to correct the system, and it caused their employees to expend many
hours in their attempt to correct the problem.  4
Applicant regretted his actions and accessed the system again several days later in order to
correct the damage he caused the company, but the company had already remedied the situation. On
about January 4, 2006, Applicant contacted his former company and admitted the actions he took.
On May 10, 2006, Applicant acknowledged in writing to his former company what he did to their
system, and he paid the company $2,000 to reimburse them for their costs incurred in correcting the
problem.  5
Applicant testified that he hacked into his former company’s system because he thought the
company might contact him to help correct the system, and he could “show them that they actually
needed me.”6
Applicant discussed the electronic intrusion into his former company’s system when he was
interviewed pursuant to his background investigation on September 10, 2006.7
A forensic psychiatric examination of Applicant was conducted by a psychiatrist on April 12,
2007. The psychiatrist testified during the hearing. He has a background that includes national
security issues, and was accepted as an expert in forensic psychiatry. Applicant was diagnosed as
suffering from attention deficit disorder, about which Applicant was unaware. He was also found
to be “suffering from intermittent depression, anxiety, and sociophobia which are disorders grounded
in some latent problems of adulthood, and from traumas sustained by him in his adolescent high
school years.”  His problems are related to some significant self-esteem problems. Applicant has8
weight problems which affected his body image and his personal image of himself. He is also
psychologically immature, and much of his emotional psychological development is suspended at
the adolescent stage of development. The psychiatrist believes Applicant’s immaturity clearly
contributed to his acts against his former employer.9
The psychiatrist found and testified that Applicant’s problems are very treatable and that his
prognosis is good with treatment. He further found that it is unlikely Applicant will repeat such an
act, particularly if he accepts and obtains appropriate and recommended treatment for his problems.
Id.10
Tr. at 103-104; AE Q.11
Tr. at 122-123; AE K.12
AE B, D, E.13
AE L-P.14
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).15
Id. at 527.16
Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960). 17
5
He found no indications that Applicant would willfully and intentionally compromise the security
of the United States.10
Applicant is now receiving treatment from a clinical psychologist. The psychologist for the
most part agrees with the psychiatrist’s diagnosis, and that treatment for six to twelve months seems
reasonable. The psychologist also recommends a psychiatric evaluation for possible antidepressant
medication. Applicant was scheduled to meet a treating psychiatrist the day after the hearing.11
Applicant has informed his current employer about what he did to his former employer. His
supervisor wrote a letter on his behalf, acknowledging that Applicant informed her of his actions
against his former employer. She cited his trustworthiness, intelligence, honesty, diligence,
professionalism, dedication, security awareness, and respect for security rules and procedures. She
stated his judgment in this incident was unquestionably poor, but believes it was a single mistake,
and recommends him for a security clearance.  12
Applicant’s performance evaluations from both his current and former companies are
excellent.  Applicant submitted additional character letters from people who know him from both13
his current and former companies, as well as people who know him personally. All are aware of
Applicant’s actions. All were surprised by his actions and consider it a one-time event. They state
Applicant is honest, trustworthy, professional, forthright, loyal to this country, with a tremendous
amount of integrity, and a man of principle. They all recommend Applicant for a security clearance.14
POLICIES
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  As Commander in Chief, the President has15
“the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person
access to such information.”  The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to16
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  An applicant has the ultimate burden of17
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her
security clearance. The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).18
Id.; Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.19
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.20
6
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant18
should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such
sensitive information.  The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a19
determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not
met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a
clearance.  20
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and
mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline. Additionally, each security clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the adjudicative process factors listed in the
Directive and AG ¶ 2(a).
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which would mitigate security concerns, are set forth and discussed in the conclusions section below.
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards discussed above.
I reach the following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
Guideline M: Use of Information Technology Systems
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining to information
technology systems may raise security concerns about an individual’s reliability and  trustworthiness,
calling into question the willingness or ability to protect sensitive systems, networks, and
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer hardware, software,
firmware, and data used for the communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or
protection of information.
Based on all the evidence, Use of Information Technology Systems Disqualifying Condition
(UITS DC) 40(a) (illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or
component thereof), UITS DC 40(b) (illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation
or denial of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information technology
system), UITS DC 40(c) (use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access to
another system or to a compartmented area within the same system), and UITS DC 40(f)
(introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any
information technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures,
guidelines or regulations) all apply in this case. 
7
I have considered all the Use of Information Technology Systems Mitigating Conditions
(UITS MC), and I especially considered UITS MC 41(a) (so much time has elapsed since the
behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). Applicant’s
conduct was very serious and recent, and it casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good
judgment. Applicant’s psychiatrist believes his psychological issues contributed to his conduct.
Those psychological issues are only beginning to be addressed. I am unconvinced that this type of
conduct will not recur. Applicant has not established UITS MC 41(a).
Guideline E: Personal Conduct
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.
The potential Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) in this case is PC DC 16(e)
(personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may
affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing . . . ).
Applicant’s electronic intrusion into his former company’s system, and disabling of their
telephone service is conduct which could affect Applicant’s personal, professional, and community
standing. PC DC 16(e) is established.
I have considered all the Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC), and I especially
considered PC MC 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), PC MC 17(d) (the
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy,
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur), and PC MC
17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress). 
As discussed above under the mitigating condition applicable under Guideline M, I find
Applicant’s conduct to be very serious and recent. It casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness,
and good judgment. While he only disrupted the system once, and he is now receiving counseling
and treatment, I am not convinced that it is unlikely to recur. PC MC 17(c) and PC MC 17(d) are not
applicable.
Applicant informed his former company of his actions and made restitution. He also
informed friends, associates, and his current company, and they continue to support him. That has
reduced Applicant’s vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. PC MC 17(e) is
applicable.
Tr. at 55.21
8
Whole Person Analysis
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk. Available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in
reaching a determination. In evaluating Applicant’s case, I have considered the adjudicative process
factors listed in the Directive and AG ¶ 2(a). I have also considered every finding of fact and
conclusion discussed above. 
I considered the favorable character evidence, and the evidence presented from the forensic
psychiatrist and Applicant’s clinical psychologist. The psychiatrist testified he did not believe that
as Applicant goes through treatment and addresses the problem, that he is at risk of doing something
like this again. He based that on Applicant’s behavior pattern throughout his lifetime, and the fact
that he only did this once. He stated “the best predictor of behavior is previous behavior.”21
Applicant hacked into his former employer’s system and shut down their phone system. That is an
inexcusable action that reflected directly on Applicant’s judgment, honesty, reliability,
trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. Other than an actual security
violation, this is the type of action that causes the greatest concern, and is hopefully preventable
through the security screening process. I agree with the psychiatrist that previous behavior is the best
predictor of behavior. In this case, Applicant’s previous behavior of hacking into his former
company’s system is so serious that it would be imprudent to grant Applicant a security clearance.
To do so would risk Applicant committing similar behavior, with grave implications to national
security, because this time we would have given him access to classified information or systems. The
acceptance of such a risk would not be clearly consistent with the national interest. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the evidence
in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based
on his personal conduct. He has not mitigated the security concerns based on his use of information
technology systems. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2.  Guideline M: AGAINST APPLICANT
9
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance
is denied.
Edward W. Loughran
Administrative Judge
