 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04261 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) on May 2, 
2009. Applicant acknowledges he is an alcoholic. He ended his alcohol consumption on 
July 3, 2011. He has attended hundreds of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings. 
Applicant mitigated alcohol consumption concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 12, 2009, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(GE 1) On April 17, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) the President promulgated on December 29, 2005. 
 
The statement of reasons (SOR) alleged security concerns under Guideline G 
(alcohol consumption). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR further informed Applicant 
that DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2)  
 
On May 10, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On July 11, 2013, 
Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On July 
15, 2013, the case was assigned to me. On July 29, 2013, DOHA issued a hearing 
notice, setting the hearing for August 8, 2013. (HE 1A) On August 8, 2013, DOHA 
issued an amended hearing notice, setting the hearing for August 15, 2013. (HE 1B) On 
August 15, 2013, Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled, using video 
teleconference. Department Counsel offered eight exhibits, and Applicant offered four 
exhibits. (Tr. 19, 21; GE 1-8; AE A-D) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-8 
and AE A-D. (Tr. 19, 21) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notices, SOR, and 
Applicant’s response to the SOR. (HE 1-3) On August 21, 2013, I received the 
transcript. The record was open until August 28, 2013, to permit Applicant to submit 
additional evidence. (Tr. 33) On August 28, 2013, I received an additional exhibit, which 
was admitted without objection. (AE D)  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.e, and he denied the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f. He also provided some extenuating and mitigating information. 
(HE 3) He admitted that he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent, but clarified that he 
was in remission. He said he stopped consuming alcohol on July 3, 2011. His 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of 
the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old software engineer, who is an employee of a 
government contractor. (Tr. 6, 9) He has held his current position with his employer 
since 2000. (Tr. 9) In 1976, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 7)  In 1982, he was 
awarded a bachelor’s of science degree in electrical engineering. (Tr. 7) He was 
married in 1983 and divorced in 1992. (Tr. 8) In 1996, he married his spouse. (Tr. 8) His 
five children are 13, 32, 33, 34, and 34 (twins). (Tr. 8) He has never served in the 
military. (Tr. 9; GE 1)  
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Applicant has a history of excessive and habitual alcohol consumption for many 
years. In 2001 and 2012, Applicant was diagnosed under Axis 1 as alcohol dependent 
(DSM 303.90) by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program or equivalent. (Tr. 24; GE 7, 8; AE C; SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f) In 
2003-2004, he was alcohol-free for about 18 months. (SOR ¶ 1.b) About 2004 or 2005, 
Applicant became depressed because of the death of his mother, and he resumed his 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or 
locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific 
information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
alcohol consumption. (Tr. 24; SOR ¶ 1.c) In 2003, 2004, and 2011, Applicant 
successfully completed alcohol treatment and counseling programs. (GE 3)  
 
 On May 2, 2009, Applicant fell asleep while driving, and he was in a car accident. 
(Tr. 29, 32) His blood alcohol by breath analysis test indicated .14. (GE 7)  The police 
arrested him for DUI and failure to provide proof of automobile insurance. (Tr. 29; SOR 
¶ 1.d) He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to pay a fine, to complete community 
service, to attend an alcohol counseling program, and to comply with the terms of his 
probation for two years. Applicant did not have any problems at work due to his alcohol 
consumption. (Tr. 28) He continued to consume alcohol until July 3, 2011. (Tr. 24, 30-
31; SOR ¶ 1.e)  
 
 Applicant has been sober for more than two years. (Tr. 24) He has attended 
hundreds of AA meetings in the past two years. (Tr. 25) He also attends monthly 
meetings at a non-AA alcohol counseling center. (Tr. 26) He fully understands and 
accepts that his alcohol consumption was an addiction, whereas before he had not 
completely accepted that he is unable to control his alcohol consumption. (Tr. 29) His 
attendance at AA meetings reinforces his conviction that he cannot consume any 
alcohol because if he does, he will be unable to control his alcohol consumption. (Tr. 
29-30) He successfully completed his two-year, court-ordered probation.  
 
On May 3, 2013, the alcohol treatment center clarified that their diagnosis was 
alcohol dependence in early full remission. (AE C) The evaluation noted his complete 
abstinence from alcohol consumption, regular AA involvement, and monthly attendance 
at an alcohol-therapy-related group activity. (AE C) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s second level supervisor portrays him as professional, effective, 
diligent, customer-oriented, trustworthy, and responsible. (AE D) Applicant’s evaluations 
from 1997 to 2012 corroborate this positive assessment. (AE D) There are no 
allegations of security violations or evidence that he abused illegal drugs.    
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.  
   
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Adverse 
clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Nothing in this decision 
should be construed to suggest that I based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security or 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) - 22(g) 
provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(b), 22(d), and 22(g) do not apply. Applicant did not have any alcohol-
related incidents at work; a physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist did not 
diagnose him with alcohol dependence; and he did not violate any court orders.  
 
AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), 22(e), and 22(f) apply. In 2009, Applicant was convicted of 
DUI. He engaged in binge and habitual alcohol consumption.2 A licensed clinical social 
                                            
2Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted 
definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The 
definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, 
NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ 
winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf.  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program or equivalent 
diagnosed him as alcohol dependent. He had relapses in 2004 and 2011 after being 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. 
 
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) apply.  Applicant acknowledged his alcoholism, provided 
evidence of his actions to overcome his alcoholism through his attendance at hundreds 
of AA meetings and other therapy, and “established a pattern of abstinence.” He 
completely terminated his alcohol consumption on July 3, 2011, more than two years 
ago. This is a sufficient period of abstinence to establish his alcohol consumption is 
“unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Alcohol consumption security concerns are 
mitigated.     
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guideline G are incorporated into my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline G, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Some facts weigh against reinstatement of his access to classified information. In 
2001, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. In 2003, 2004, and 2011, Applicant 
successfully completed alcohol treatment or counseling programs; however, after the 
2004 and 2011 programs, he resumed his alcohol consumption and relapsed. Applicant 
was convicted of DUI in 2009. 
 
The evidence supporting reinstatement of his access to classified information is 
more persuasive. Applicant is a 55-year-old software engineer, who has worked for the 
same employer since 2000. His evaluations and supervisors describe him as reliable, 
trustworthy, professional, diligent, responsible, conscientious, mission-oriented, and 
honest. There are no allegations of security violations or evidence that he abused illegal 
drugs. I am confident that he has the ability to comply with security requirements. He is 
an intelligent person who knows what he must do to continue to maintain sobriety. He 
ended his alcohol consumption on July 3, 2011, and he has attended hundreds of AA 
meetings in order to reinforce his pattern of abstinence. He understands the importance 
of his sobriety and that a return to alcohol consumption will jeopardize his continued 
access to classified information.3 His sobriety for more than two years shows good 
judgment and has established his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. See AG ¶ 21. Alcohol consumption concerns are mitigated. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude reinstatement of 
Applicant’s access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security.   
                                            
3The Government can validate Applicant’s abstinence status at any time through investigation 
and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from 
subsequently revoking it, if warranted. Violation of a promise made in a security context to maintain 
sobriety also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may support future revocation of a 
security clearance.  An administrative judge does not have authority to grant a conditional clearance. 
ISCR Case No. 99-0901, 2000 WL 288429 at *3 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000). See also ISCR Case No. 04-
03907 at 2 (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or probationary security 
clearance” and citing ISCR Case No. 03-07418 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 13, 2004)). This footnote does not 
imply that this Applicant’s clearance is conditional. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to reinstate Applicant’s security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
