1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-09227
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on February 28, 2011. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on December 13, 2012, detailing security
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented on
September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
2
Applicant received the SOR on January 9, 2013, and he answered it on February
18, 2013. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was prepared to
proceed on May 2, 2013, and I received the case assignment on May 16, 2013. DOHA
issued a Notice of Hearing on July 5, 2013, and I convened the hearing as scheduled
on July 23, 2013. The Government offered exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1 through GE 7,
which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified.
He submitted one exhibit marked as AE A, which was received and admitted into
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 1,
2013. I held the record open until August 13, 2013, for Applicant to submit additional
matters. Applicant timely submitted AE B and AE C, which were received and admitted
without objection. The record closed on August 13, 2013.
Procedural Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the notice of the date, time and place of the hearing less than
15 days before the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right, under ¶ E3.1.8. of the
Directive, to receive the notice 15 days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively
waived this right under the Directive. (Tr. 12.)
Motions
At the hearing, Department Counsel requested a correction be made to ¶ 3.b. of
the SOR. Specifically, Department Counsel requested that the reference to Question
22a be changed to correctly state Question 22e because Question 22e was the
appropriate number. Applicant did not object. Department Counsel’s request to amend
the SOR was granted. SOR allegation 3.b. is corrected as requested. (Tr. 11)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.d
and 2.a-2.g of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He
denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 3.a-3.d of the SOR.  He also provided additional1
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
GE 1.2
Id.; Tr. 25.3
GE 2; Tr. 25-26.4
GE 2; GE 7; Tr. 41-42.5
GE 2; GE 7; Tr. 42-43.6
3
Applicant, who is 45 years old, works at an information technology help desk for
a DOD contractor. He began his current employment in November 2010. Following a
four-month period of unemployment from March 2009 until July 2009, Applicant and his
family moved from State A to State B in 2009.     2
Applicant graduated from high school. He earned a bachelor’s degree in
television production and later, an associate’s degree in telecommunications
management. Applicant continues to upgrade his technology training. Applicant and his
wife married in October 1994. They have one son, who is 15 years old.3
Alcohol
As a 16-year-old high school student, Applicant attended social events where he
occasionally consumed alcohol and smoked marijuana. He continued to consume
alcohol and smoke marijuana with friends on weekends in college. In his mid-twenties,
his alcohol consumption increased from occasional weekend drinking to consuming
three to four beers two to three nights a week. Within two years, his alcohol
consumption had increased to consuming a 12-pack of beer, one-half gallon of wine, or
10 to 15 shots of liquor almost every night of the week. He acknowledged drinking to
intoxication, being out-of-control, and impaired. He drank alcohol after work.  4
In April 1995, while driving home from work, Applicant hit a cement divider and
destroyed the tire on his car. The police arrived after receiving a telephone call about a
drunk driver on the road. Applicant failed the field sobriety tests conducted by the police
and blew a .10% blood alcohol level on the breathalyzer. The police arrested and
charged him with driving under the influence (DUI). In court, he pled guilty to DUI. The
court sentenced him to attend a one-day alcohol awareness program and fined him
$1,200.5
One year later, when Applicant was driving home after a party, the police
stopped, arrested, and charged him with DUI after he failed the field sobriety tests.
Applicant pled guilty to his second DUI charge. The court suspended his driver’s license
for six months, fined him $1,500, and directed that he attend a two-day alcohol
awareness class, obtain an alcohol evaluation by a counselor, and attend Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA) once a week for six months.  6
GE 2; Tr. 42-44, 84.7
GE 2; GE 6; Tr. 45, 69, 82-83.8
GE 2; GE 5; Tr. 45-46.9
4
By 1996, Applicant’s alcohol consumption created problems at home and at
work. For these reasons and in compliance with the court requirements, Applicant met
with an alcohol counselor, qualifications unknown. After meeting with the counselor and
on his own initiative, Applicant decided to seek treatment. He voluntarily committed
himself for inpatient treatment at an alcohol treatment center, where he was diagnosed
as alcohol dependent. He completed the one week inpatient treatment program. Upon
his release from treatment, he began attending AA meetings two or three times a week.
He continued with AA meetings for seven years. He remained sober during this time.
The treatment records for 1996 are not in evidence.7
Applicant resumed his alcohol consumption in 2003 for reasons not known to
him. He continued to drink regularly and to excess. He attempted to stop drinking on
several occasions, but did not maintain sobriety. On July 3, 2011, the police stopped,
arrested, and charged him with DUI. Applicant pled guilty to driving while impaired, a
misdemeanor, and the court dismissed the failure to stay in one lane misdemeanor
charge in December 2011. The court sentenced him to 180 days in jail, with 178 days
suspended; fined him $1,940, $600 suspended; and placed him on 12 months of
supervised probation conditioned upon no violations of the law, no use of alcohol or
drugs, obtaining an assessment from NEFA (No Excuse For Abuse), and submitting to
random drug testing.8
Following his DUI arrest in July 2011, Applicant decided he needed to stop
consuming alcohol. He sought counseling to get “on the right path and help me
understand why I started drinking again.” On July 19, 2011 and before any court
appearance for this DUI, Applicant voluntarily entered a medical treatment facility,
seeking treatment for his acute alcohol withdrawal symptoms. The night before his
admission, he drank three-fourths of a liter of rum, a normal amount of alcohol for him to
consume in one day. The treatment center records reflect a .23% blood alcohol level,
but a toxicity screen was negative for any drugs. Three days later the treatment center
released him with a strong recommendation for intensive outpatient rehabilitation
programs. The treatment center also placed him on 50 mg of Naltrexone, a drug to
control his alcohol cravings, 50 mg of Vistaril, an anxiety drug, and three medications for
a sinus infection.9
Applicant returned to AA on August 1, 2011. He initially attended meetings twice
a week, and he continues to attend meetings one to two times a week, which his wife
verified. In January 2012, Applicant obtained, from a clinical social worker, the
substance abuse evaluation required by the court for his 2011 DUI. He provided a social
and educational history to the counselor. He also provided a history of his alcohol use,
but he did not tell the counselor about his 1995 DUI arrest. He did tell the counselor
GE 4; AE C; Tr. 28-29, 45-47, 69, 75-81.10
AE A; Tr. 45-47, 77.11
Tr. 29-30, 45, 47, 80-86.12
GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 32-35.13
5
about the 1996 DUI arrest. The counselor found Applicant cooperative during the
interview and concluded that his memory was intact, his thought processes were
connected and organized, his mood was pleasant, and he exhibited no abnormal
behaviors. The counselor’s diagnostic impression included alcohol dependence by
history and report. Applicant participated in 16 weeks of substance abuse treatment
which focused on his individual issues, as well as education about alcohol and its
effects. His alcohol tests were clean, and he remained sober. Applicant achieved his
treatment goals and completed the requirements of the substance abuse program. The
program discharged Applicant in June 2012.10
On his own initiative, in February 2013, Applicant started weekly sessions with a
licensed social worker, who has diagnosed him with alcohol dependence and attention
deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Applicant currently takes Adderall for his ADHD
with reported better focus and concentration. The weekly sessions with the social
worker address issues related to his alcohol consumption. His social worker describes
him as committed to his recovery from alcohol addiction and indicates that he
participates in therapy and attends weekly AA meetings on his own initiative. He
continues to take Naltrexone, which is non-addictive, even though his doctor has said
he does not need to continue with this medication. He has not consumed alcohol since
July 2011.11
 Applicant credibly testified several times during the hearing that he is committed
to abstaining from alcohol consumption because he cannot drink alcohol. He
acknowledged that he is alcohol dependent and that with this diagnosis, he cannot drink
again. He also stated that whether he gets a security clearance or not, it is important for
him not to drink anymore.12
Marijuana
Applicant began using marijuana occasionally about the same time he started
consuming alcohol. He used it once every couple of weeks, initially; however, as his
alcohol intake increased in his mid-twenties, his marijuana use increased to two or three
times a week. After he married in 1994, he decreased his marijuana use to two or three
times a month. He last used marijuana in October 2010. In his answer to the drug
interrogatories sent to him, he stated that he has no intent to use illegal substances in
the future. He no longer associates with individuals who use marijuana. He spends his
time with his family and in church activities.13
The SOR alleges two drug-related offenses in January 2007 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d). The evidence of record14
indicates that Applicant was arrested only once in January 2007 for drugs or any other criminal charges. Tr.
37-39.
GE 2; GE 7; Tr. 35, 37-39, 82–83.15
Applicant’s SOR does not allege that Applicant deliberately omitted relevant information about his legal16
problems related to his alcohol and drug use and the recency of his drug use during his 2012 substance abuse
evaluation. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five
circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation,
mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative
Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis under Directive
Section 6.3.
Id. (Citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-00633 at 3 (App. Bd.
Oct. 24, 2003)). His hearing admissions about statements in January 2012 to the counselor are recent.
Because these admissions and statements relate to conduct alleged under Guideline E and Applicant has
notice of this conduct, these statements and admissions will be considered.
GE 4; Tr. 69-71, 74.17
6
In July 2003, the police stopped Applicant for a damaged muffler and non-
working taillight. The police officer observed marijuana seeds in Applicant’s car, and
during a search of Applicant’s car, he found a small pipe. The police officer arrested and
charged Applicant with possession of marijuana or hashish and possession of drug
paraphernalia. Because this was Applicant’s first drug offense, the court sent him to a
drug diversion program and fined him $675. After he completed this program, the court
dismissed both charges against him on October 21, 2003. The police arrested and
charged him a second time for possession of marijuana or hashish and possession of
drug paraphernalia on January 6, 2007.  The court dismissed the possession of drug14
paraphernalia charge and convicted him of possession of marijuana or hashish. The
court fined him $1,205 and sentenced him to 80 hours of community service.15
At his security clearance hearing, Applicant also acknowledged that he did not
provide an accurate history of his marijuana use to his substance abuse counselor in
January 2012. He told the counselor in 2012 that he last used marijuana seven or eight
years earlier when he actually last used marijuana in October 2010.  Applicant did not16
tell the counselor about his drug arrests in 2003 and 2007.17
Personal Conduct
Applicant completed and signed his e-QIP on February 28, 2011. Although he
answered “yes” to the questions concerning employment termination in Section 13c and
concerning any drug or alcohol charges in Section 22e, the SOR alleges that he
deliberately omitted relevant information from his answers. Specifically, Section 13c
asks:
GE 1; GE 2, p. 3; Tr. 47-49, 64-67.18
GE 1; GE 2.19
Tr. 36, 50-51, 53, 56.20
7
1.  Has any of the following happened to you in the last 7 years?
    1. Fired from a job
    2. Quit a job after being told you would be fired
    3. Left a job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of 
        misconduct
    4. Left a job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory 
        performance
    5. Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances
    6. Laid off from job by employer
In his answer, Applicant indicated that he had been laid off in September 2010 due to a
company take-over, when in fact, he had been fired for twice adding services and
charges to customer accounts without the customer’s consent, which was in violation of
company policy, in order to meet his quota and increase his income. Applicant
volunteered during his interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
investigator that he was actually terminated for adding charges to customers’ bills twice
without permission of the customer. At the hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he did
not list this information on his e-QIP because he felt guilty about his conduct which he
knew was wrong.18
Section 22 of the e-QIP asks an applicant about his or her police record.
Question 22e states “Have you EVER been charged with any offense(s) related to
alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered “yes” and listed his 2003 drug arrest. Applicant
did not list his 2007 drug arrest or his 1995 and 1996 DUIs. The OPM investigator
confronted him with his 2007 arrest information. Applicant said he did not list this arrest
because he got probation. When showed the question by the investigator, he had no
other explanation for his failure to list the arrest. When the OPM investigator asked him
about any other drug or alcohol arrests, he told the investigator about his two DUIs. The
OPM investigator indicated in the summary of his interview that this information was
provided voluntarily by Applicant.19
At his hearing, Applicant testified that he did not list the DUIs on his e-QIP
because he thought the two DUIs were civil charges in the state where he was arrested.
Concerning the 2007 drug arrest, Applicant said that he thought he listed this arrest, but
acknowledged he got the date wrong. He expressed a belief that he did not need to list
his 2003 drug arrest because the case had been dismissed.20
Section 23 of the e-QIP asks an applicant about illegal drug use in the last seven
years. Question 23a inquires about the use of illegal controlled substances, such as
marijuana or cocaine, and Question 23c inquires about the illegal possession, purchase,
GE 1; GE 2, p. 5-6; Tr. 63.21
Tr. 89.22
8
manufacture, production, trafficking, sale, shipping, receiving, or handling of illegal
drugs. Applicant answered “no” to both questions. He failed to list his use of marijuana
between 1984 and 2010. At the hearing, he acknowledged that his answers to these
questions were untrue. He told the OPM investigator that his marijuana use was
recreational and that he stopped using marijuana six or seven months before his
personal subject interview in March 2011.21
At the conclusion of the hearing, Applicant stated that he is on the “right track”.
He is not drinking any more, and he is being more honest.22
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
9
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); and
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
10
Applicant began using marijuana in 1984 and used it until 2010. To use
marijuana, he had to possess it and at times purchase it. Security concerns are raised
under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c).
The Drug Involvement guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 26(a) through ¶
26(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
Applicant used marijuana occasionally as a high school and college student. His
marijuana use increased as his alcohol use increased. However, after he married, he
reduced his marijuana use to two or three times a month, which he considered
recreational use. His last arrest for drug use and drug paraphernalia occurred in 2007,
more than six years ago. He last used marijuana in October 2010, nearly three years
ago. He no longer associates with individuals who use marijuana. Rather, he spends his
time with his family and at church. In his answer to the drug interrogatories, he indicated
an intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. Although he is currently in counseling to
address the reasons for his alcohol consumption, the counseling can also help him
understand why he used marijuana and how to avoid triggers to future abuse.  Applicant
has mitigated the security concerns about his drug involvement under AG ¶ 26(b)(1-4).
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 22 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
11
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program; and
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program.
After college, Applicant began to drink to excess. He acknowledges that he drank
to impairment and that his alcohol consumption was out of control. His drinking behavior
resulted in three DUI arrests, the last in July 2011. After his second DUI arrest in 1996,
Applicant sought medical treatment. He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 1996
by a counselor whose credentials are unknown. A clinical social worker affliated with a
recognized treatment program again diagnosed him as alcohol dependent in 2012 and
2013. Applicant completed inpatient treatment in 1996 and participated in AA programs
for seven years. However, he began drinking again. The Government has established
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), 22(e), and 22(f).
The Alcohol Consumption guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 23(a) through
¶ 23(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant acknowledged at the hearing that he is alcohol dependent. After his
last arrest, he decided that he needed to stop consuming alcohol. On his own initiative,
he sought treatment through an inpatient facility. Shortly after his release from inpatient
care, he returned to AA for additional help with his alcohol consumption. In January
2012, he enrolled in an intensive outpatient program, which he successfully completed
in June 2012. During this program, his alcohol and drug tests were negative, indicating
that he had been compliant with the program. He remained sober during this program
12
and continues to remain sober. In February 2013, on his own initiative, he started
outpatient counseling with a licensed social worker to determine the reasons for his
excessive alcohol consumption in the past. He no longer consumes alcohol. He
participated in AA for seven years in the past, then returned to consuming alcohol to
excess. To prevent another relapse and to fully understand his problem, he sought
individual counseling with a professional to address the reasons why he needed to
consume alcohol. He continues with AA as it provides him with the additional support he
needs to remain sober. He knows that he cannot drink alcohol, and he is committed to
staying away from alcohol. Applicant has taken extraordinary steps on his own to
address his alcohol addiction, which shows his commitment to his recovery. He is
progressing in his recovery. He has mitigated the security concerns about his alcohol
consumption under AG ¶¶ 23(b) and 23(d).
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group.
For AG ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. The
Government established that Applicant omitted material facts from his February 2011 e-
QIP when he failed to acknowledge his drug use and being fired from a job, and to list
his 1995 and 1996 DUIs and his 2007 drug arrest. This information is material to the
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313323
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
13
evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness and honesty. He denied that he intentionally
falsified the answers on his e-QIP. He denies an intent to deceive the Government.
When the allegation of falsification is controverted, the Government has the burden of
proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an
applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the
omission occurred.23
At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he did not indicate that he had been
fired from his job for misconduct because he was embarrassed about his wrongful
conduct. He acknowledged that his “no” answers about his drug use were not true.
Applicant explained that he thought the DUI arrests were civil and not criminal, that he
did not need to list his 2003 arrest because it had been dismissed, and that he thought
he had listed the 2007 arrest. Question 22e clearly asks if an applicant has EVER been
charged with any offense related to alcohol or drugs. It is difficult to accept Applicant’s
claim that he believed that the 1995 and 1996 DUIs were civil matters. Applicant knew
he had been arrested for the DUIs and twice for drug offenses. He provided incomplete
and inaccurate information about his drug arrests in 2007 and 2003. In concluding that
he intentionally falsified his E-QIP, I consider it relevant that he admitted providing
inaccurate information about his drug use and his alcohol and drug arrests during his
intake assessment in January 2012. Security concerns are established under AG ¶¶
16(a) and 16(e). 
The Personal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 17(a) through ¶
17(g), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
Applicant voluntarily provided the information about his 1995 and 1996 DUI
arrests and about his job termination during his March 2011 interview with the OPM
investigator. Applicant specifically told the investigator that he had been fired, not laid
off, from his job and explained the reasons. Applicant mitigated the security concerns
14
related to his conduct as alleged in SOR ¶ 3a under AG ¶ 17(a). Likewise, by promptly
informing the investigator about his DUIs, he mitigated the security concerns about his
failure to list his 1995 and 1996 DUIs as alleged in SOR ¶ 3.b. However, because I find
that he intentionally failed to list his drug arrest on his e-QIP, SOR ¶ 3.b is only partially
mitigated under AG ¶ 17(a). 
Applicant has raised significant security concerns by providing false and
inaccurate evidence about his  past alcohol and drug use to the Government. He was
embarrassed by his behavior, but it does not justify providing false information. He
admits his dishonesty and has set a goal to improve his ability to be forthright about his
past conduct. He is working with a counselor on his goal. However, the evidence also
shows that he was not completely candid about his substance abuse to an alcohol
counselor in January 2012. At this time, he has failed to provide sufficient information to
assure that he will always be honest and forthcoming. While he has taken positive
steps, I still have a concern about his current ability to be forthright about his alcohol
consumption and drug use. He has not fully mitigated all the security concerns about his
personal conduct under AG ¶  17.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
15
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
has a long history of alcohol abuse and marijuana use, which resulted in criminal arrests
and convictions. Applicant remained sober for seven years, then returned to excessive
alcohol consumption. Applicant has accepted that he is alcohol dependent and cannot
drink again. On his own initiative, he sought treatment for his alcohol problems, and
recently, he started counseling to understand the reasons that led to his alcohol
addiction. His efforts to prevent further problems related to alcohol are commendable.
He is focused on his recovery and his future well-being. His drug use is also in the past.
His pattern of dishonesty about his past alcohol and drug abuse is a separate
issue from whether he is at risk of relapsing into substance abuse. In reviewing all the
evidence in the record, I have a present concern about whether he can be counted on
to be fully forthright about conduct that could reflect adversely on his judgment or may
adversely affect his personal, professional, or community standing. He needs more time
to demonstrate the good judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability that must be
demanded of those persons with classified access.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement and alcohol
consumption under Guidelines H and G, but Applicant has not fully mitigated the
security concerns about his personal conduct under Guideline E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.g: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 3.b-3.d: Against Applicant
16
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
