1The Judge issued a formal finding favorable to Applicant on the single allegation brought under Guideline F.
That favorable finding is not at issue on appeal. 
KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline F
DIGEST: The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Applicant’s contention
that he has served the U.S. under high-risk circumstances lacked detail and was not corroborated. 
Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-06939.a1
DATE: 09/30/2013
DATE: September 30, 2013
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-06939
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 8, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).1  Applicant requested that the case be decided on the written record.  On August 2, 2013,
after the close of the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
2
Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.   
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision.
The Judge found the following: Applicant is 43 years old and was born in Afghanistan.  He
came to the U.S. in the mid-1990's and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in the mid-2000's.
Applicant is married to a woman who was born in Afghanistan, and is now a permanent resident in
the United States.  Applicant and his wife have three children.  Two are permanent residents of the
United States and one is a U.S. citizen.
Applicant’s mother, four brothers, three sisters and his father-in-law are citizens and
residents of Afghanistan.  Applicant has frequent contacts with all of his first line family.  Contact
with his brothers is frequent at once a month.  He contacts his sisters once every two months, and
his father-in-law once every five months.  Applicant has traveled to Afghanistan and during these
visits he sees family members.
In the mid-1990's, the Taliban rose to power in Afghanistan largely due to the anarchy and
warlordism that arose after the Soviet withdrawal.  U.S. forces and a coalition partnership forced the
Taliban out of power by November 2001.  Despite progress made since the Taliban was deposed,
Afghanistan still faces many daunting challenges.  Among these challenges are defeating terrorists
and insurgents, recovering from over three decades of civil strife, and rebuilding a shattered
physical, economic, and political infrastructure.  The Taliban, Al-Qa’ida, other insurgent groups,
and anti-Coalition organizations continue to operate in Afghanistan, resulting in numerous attacks
and deaths.  At this time, the risk of terrorist activities remains extremely high.  The country’s
human rights record remains poor and violence is rampant.  The U.S. State Department has declared
that the security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical as no part of
Afghanistan is immune from violence.
The Judge concluded: Applicant admits that his mother, sisters, brothers and father-in-law
are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.  Applicant has frequent contact with them.  Security
concerns are raised in connection with the potential that hostile forces might seek protected
information from Applicant by threatening harm to his family members in Afghanistan.  The risk
of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is
associated with a risk of terrorism.  Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate the
security concerns given his relationships and frequency of contact with his relatives in Afghanistan.
Under the facts of this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion is substantial.  The complicated state of affairs in Afghanistan places a significant
burden on Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign family members do not pose an unacceptable
2Applicant did not provide any matters in response to the Government’s File Of Relevant Material (FORM).
His only input in this case was his answer to the SOR, wherein he did not discuss his relationship with his family
members living in Afghanistan, nor did he offer any evidence regarding his frequency of contact with those relatives.
Items 8 and 9 of the Government’s FORM contain the only evidence of record concerning Applicant’s frequency of
contact with his foreign relatives.  The Judge’s findings are a reasonable interpretation of that evidence.
3
security risk.   Applicant has not presented detailed or sufficient information in this record to meet
his burden to mitigate the security concern.  
Applicant asserts that notwithstanding the Judge’s finding that he has had close contact with
his brothers, sisters and his mother who live in Afghanistan, he has had no contact with his brothers,
sisters, father-in-law or mother since 2009.  He states that he kept no contact with any foreign
nationals including his family members, because he didn’t want to jeopardize his security clearance.
These assertions of fact are not contained in the record below.  Therefore they constitute new
evidence, which the Board cannot consider.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  After a review of the evidence
and the Judge’s decision, the Board concludes that the Judge’s findings concerning the nature of
Applicant’s contacts with relatives living in Afghanistan are reasonably supported by the record
evidence.2   
Applicant states that he feels he deserves a security clearance to continue serving his country.
He states that he has been working with U.S. forces in Afghanistan for many years and traveled with
U.S. troops on various military missions.  The Board construes this portion of Applicant’s brief as
an assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report attempts at coercion or
exploitation.  The Board has recognized that in Guideline B cases where the applicant has
established by credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant had
made a significant contribution to the national security, such evidence is probative when evaluating
whether or not an applicant has mitigated more immediate disqualifying conduct or circumstances.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2008).  Here, however, Applicant’s
assertion on appeal constitutes new evidence, inasmuch as no representations concerning his service
are included in the record below. In any event, the statements lack detail concerning high-risk
circumstances and are not independent evidence of Applicant’s actions.  Applicant’s representations
do not establish error on the part of the Judge.   
   
The Board does not review a case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s
ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra,anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
