 
1 
 
 
• ``                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06383 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F.1 The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 28, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 14, 2013. The 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s name is spelled incorrectly in the SOR. It has been corrected in this decision.  
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 10, 
2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled August 14, 2013. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, and he offered exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record was held open until September 4, 2013, to allow Applicant 
to submit additional documents. He submitted AE B through E that were admitted into 
evidence without objection.2 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 22, 
2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations with explanations. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He is a high school graduate and has earned some 
college credits, but does not have a degree. He holds numerous certifications and 
licenses for the work he does with a federal contractor. He has worked for his present 
employer since 2010. He served in the Air Force from 2001 to 2006 and received a 
General Discharge under Honorable Conditions. He was married for eight months in 
2004. He has two daughters from a previous relationship, ages 12 and 5. He pays 
$2,000 a month in child support for his daughters and is current in his payments. He has 
held a security clearance since 2001 without incident.3 
 
 Applicant worked in Afghanistan for two and a half years, from late 2007 to 2009. 
Upon his return, he began working for his current employer and has worked at various 
overseas locations.4  
 
 In 2007, Applicant went to school after being discharged from the military. He 
credibly stated that he sought guidance with officials at the school about what classes 
were necessary for him to obtain certain certifications and licenses. A teacher asked 
him why he was in the class because he already knew the material. The teacher 
arranged for Applicant to take the licensing test with the appropriate federal agency. 
Applicant passed. Applicant then discussed the enrollment issue with the school 
officials. He told them they wrongfully advised him that he was required to take certain 
classes. He requested the school officials disenroll him. The documents reflecting his 
request are in a storage facility due to Applicant’s overseas employment. The school 
continued to charge him tuition for three semesters when he was not present. Applicant 
was unaware that the school continued to charge him tuition after he requested to be 
disenrolled. Applicant’s tuition was being paid through the GI Bill. He felt the school was 
fraudulently taking the loan funds. He disputed the debts with the credit bureaus. He 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email noting there were no objections to the exhibits. 
 
3 Tr. 36-44, 48. 
 
4 Tr. 42-43.  
 
3 
 
 
contacted the collection companies, but they would not remove the debts. Applicant 
stated he finally gave up and the student loan debts were paid through retention of his 
federal income tax refunds. The student loan debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($6,285), 1.e 
($3,805), and 1.f ($1,248) are paid.5  
 
 Applicant completed his security clearance application and background interview 
in 2011. He became unaware he had outstanding debts at this time. He admitted he had 
debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2004. He believes it was about $7,000. He attributed 
his financial issues at that time to problems with his wife. He met her, and three weeks 
later they married. He was 22 years old. When they married, she had a job. He provided 
money for her to make car payments while he was absent on military assignment, and 
instead she spent the money elsewhere. She accumulated credit card debts in his 
name. He could not catch up with his car payments, and the car was repossessed. The 
marriage failed shortly thereafter when he realized she had taken all of the money in his 
savings and checking accounts.6  
 
 When Applicant learned he had some delinquent debts after his background 
investigation, he contacted all of the creditors and had them validate the debts. He was 
cognizant of the ramifications these debts might have on his security clearance. 
Applicant credibly stated that the debts in SOR ¶ 1.c ($613-telephone service) and ¶ 1.l 
($741-telephone service) were fraudulently opened after his divorce, by his ex-wife in 
his name. He was unaware of them. He settled the debt in ¶ 1.c for $512 and provided a 
confirmation number, but was unable to get a receipt immediately. He paid the debt in ¶ 
1.l in full, and the account was closed. He was waiting for the creditor to send a receipt.7  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($318-medical) is no longer on his credit report, and 
Applicant was unable to contact the creditor due to lack of identifying information.8  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g was for a parking ticket Applicant was issued in 2005. He 
was towing a vehicle and its wheel fell off. He parked the vehicle and went for 
assistance. He did not see a ticket on the vehicle when he returned. He did not learn of 
the ticket until he was provided the information during his 2011 background 
investigation while overseas. He contacted the jurisdiction where the ticket was issued, 
and they advised him he had to appear in person. Due to his overseas deployment, he 
was permitted to send a certified check to pay the ticket. Applicant works primarily 
overseas and all of his documents are kept in storage. He provided documentation to 
show the creditor is having the account removed from his credit report.9  
                                                          
5 Tr. 18-26, 48-49. 
 
6 Tr. 35, 49, 50-52. 
 
7 AE B. 
 
8 AE B. 
 
9 AE E; Tr. 35, 72-74. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant stated he paid in full and provided a confirmation number for the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.h ($1,148-telephone service). He has contacted the creditor twice and 
requested they send him a receipt. He has not received it yet. Applicant stated the debt 
in ¶ 1.i ($251) was paid in full. He was not able to provide a confirmation number 
because the account was closed. Applicant contacted the creditor and is waiting for the 
receipt. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($318-other) was paid and a receipt was provided. 
Applicant stated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($100-cable), was paid by telephone, and he is 
waiting for the receipt. He provided a confirmation number.10 
 
Applicant’s current credit report does not list SOR ¶ 1.m ($246-bank). He has 
contacted the creditor and paid the debt. He is waiting to be issued a receipt.11  
  
 Applicant readily admitted he made some immature mistakes and “messed up” 
when he was younger. His father told him how proud he was that he was getting his life 
together. His father has helped him with his finances. He has also received financial 
counseling from a bank counselor. He gives his father $500 a month that is invested for 
him for his financial future. Applicant also puts 20% of his pay into a 401k retirement 
account and saves another 10%. He has approximately $62,000 in his 401k. He has 
approximately $5,000 in his savings account and $8,000 in checking. He does not have 
credit cards. He pays all of his bills on time through an automatic electronic withdrawal. 
He has only three recurring debts. They are for child support, telephone services, and a 
truck payment. His housing expenses are paid by his employer.12  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
10 AE B and C. 
 
11 AE B, D. Tr. 20-26-34, 52-55, 74; GE 2; AE A. 
 
12 Tr. 30-31, 47, 57-59, 63, 69-72, 75-76. 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had numerous delinquent debts from at least 2004 that he was unable 
or unwilling to pay. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant disputed that he owed money for debts on student loans when he 
disenrolled from school and the institution continued to charge him tuition for three 
semesters when he did not attend. I found Applicant’s testimony credible. He was 
provided incorrect information that caused him to take classes that he did not need. 
When he realized he was misinformed he attempted to correct the situation. Even after 
he disenrolled, the school continued to charge him tuition when he was not a student 
there. He disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e and 1.f, but eventually they were paid 
through the involuntary retention of his federal income tax refunds.  
 
 A couple debts in the SOR were attributed to Applicant’s ex-wife obtaining 
accounts without his knowledge. He was unaware that others were delinquent. 
Applicant has addressed all of the debts. I find the circumstances surrounding these 
 
7 
 
 
debts are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness or good judgment. AG¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
 The debts attributed to Applicant’s ex-wife without his knowledge were beyond 
his control. The student loan debts that he disputed were somewhat beyond his control. 
Applicant should have been more diligent in keeping track of his remaining debts, even 
though he was overseas. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. When Applicant became aware that he had 
delinquent debts, he contacted the creditors and resolved them. His federal income tax 
refunds were seized to pay his delinquent student loans. I do not consider this a 
negative issue as Applicant attempted to dispute and resolve what he believes were 
fraudulent claims by the school. I find Applicant acted responsibly regarding resolving 
his other debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant is in a stable financial position and his finances are under control. He 
has received financial counseling. He made good-faith efforts to resolve his delinquent 
debts. Applicant pays his monthly expenses, saves money, invests in his future, and 
takes care of his children. He does not live beyond his means. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He admitted he had problems earlier in his life and 
made some mistakes. He married young and his wife misused their finances, causing 
him to file bankruptcy. He was unaware of some small debts he had and has since paid 
them. Due to his overseas employment, his records are in storage and communicating 
with creditors is difficult. Applicant presented himself as a mature young man who 
understands the gravity of maintaining his finances. When he became aware there were 
potential issues, he resolved them. I found his testimony credible. He responsibly pays 
his child support. He saves his money and invests for his future. He is not living beyond 
his means. Applicant’s finances are not a security concern. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
