KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The record as a whole undermines Applicant’s claim on appeal that he had simply
forgotten about a judgment and delinquent debts when completing his PTQ.  The record supports
the Judge’s finding that Applicant’s omissions were deliberate.  The Judge also reasonably
explained why the record was not sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by
the SOR, principally the absence of corroboration and the ongoing nature of Applicant’s
financial problems.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-06549.a1
DATE: 09/18/2013
DATE: September 18, 2013
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 11-06549
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation.
On August 24, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
1SOR ¶ 2(a) alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the judgment.  SOR ¶ 2(b) alleged that
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose any debts that had been delinquent over 180 days.  
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On July 25, 2013, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Robert J. Tuider denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
he had deliberately omitted information from his public trust questionnaire (PTQ), whether the
Judge failed properly to consider the whole-person factors, and whether the Judge’s adverse decision
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has been employed by a Defense contractor since 2003.  He received an
associate’s degree from an on-line university.  He is married and has three adult sons.  Applicant
entered the U.S. military in 1978, retiring in 2001.  There is no further information in the File of
Relevant Material (FORM) about Applicant’s military service.  His PTQ indicates that he answered
“yes” when asked if his clearance or access authorization had ever been denied, suspended, revoked,
or whether he had ever been debarred from Government employment.  The PTQ does not state what
action was taken, although whatever it was occurred in 2005.  The record contains no further
information about Applicant’s security history.
The SOR alleges 23 debts, totaling $72,545. These include a judgment, utility bills,
consumer debts, and student loans.  Applicant admitted seven of these debts, although his
explanations for the remaining ones were not sufficient to mitigate them.  He provided no
documentation to support his claims of debt resolution or dispute, except for one settlement
agreement regarding a credit card.  Even then, however, he did not provide evidence of actual
payment.
Applicant has been receiving military retired pay since 2001 and has been steadily employed
since early 2003.  He states that his wife’s unemployment affected his debts, although he provided
no details of when her unemployment began or ended.  He also stated that none of his debts arose
from circumstances outside his control and avers that his current financial situation is manageable.
Applicant has not sought financial counseling or other professional assistance in resolving his debts.
The FORM contains no documentation that any of the SOR debts have been resolved.  
In addition to the Guideline F concerns, the SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately omitted
information from his PTQ.  He did not disclose a December 2009 judgment against him.  Neither
did he divulge his delinquent debts.1  Applicant admitted these two allegations and provided no
explanation for the omissions. 
The Judge’s Analysis
 The Judge concluded that Applicant’s many delinquent debts raised trustworthiness concerns
under Guideline F that Applicant failed to mitigate.  He noted that Applicant did not corroborate his
claims of debt repayment and that his debts continue to be listed on his credit reports.  Regarding
Guideline E, the Judge stated that Applicant had admitted the allegations of deliberate falsification
and that he had provided no explanation for the misconduct.  The Judge cited to evidence that
Applicant was aware of his financial problems at the time he completed the PTQ.  In the whole-
person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s 23 years of military service, his having raised three sons
to adulthood, his having held a job with a Defense contractor for 10 years, and his having held a
clearance while in the military.  However, he went on to say that Applicant’s financial problems and
his false answers evidence a pattern of behavior that the Judge found troubling and that raised
questions about Applicant’s ability and willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Discussion
Applicant denies that his omissions were deliberate.  He claims that they were due to
forgetfulness or inadvertence.  In analyzing the deliberate nature of an applicant’s omissions or false
statements, a Judge must consider the applicant’s answers in light of the record as a whole.  See, e.g.,
ADP Case No. 11-09060 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 16, 2013).  In this case, Applicant admitted these
allegations in his response to the SOR.  In addition, we note the clarity of the questions as well as
Applicant’s answers during his interview with the OPM investigator.  In this interview he discussed
in some detail the matters covered by the questions, never raising an issue of forgetfulness, etc.  The
record as a whole undermines Applicant’s claim on appeal on appeal that he had simply forgotten
about the judgment and his delinquent debts when completing his PTQ.  The record supports the
Judge’s finding.
Applicant cites to evidence that he had served in the military for many years and that he had
held a job with a contractor since 2003.  He also cites to his claim during his interview that some of
his son’s debts had been included in Applicant’s credit report.  The Judge discussed much of the
evidence that Applicant has cited.  He acknowledged Applicant’s attribution of some of his debts to
someone else.  However, the Judge reasonably explained why the record was not sufficient to
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by the SOR, principally the absence of corroboration and
the ongoing nature of Applicant’s financial problems.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption
that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 2
(App. Bd. May 21, 2013).  
Regarding the Judge’s whole-person analysis, we conclude that he complied with the
requirements of Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(a), in that he considered the totality of Applicant’s
conduct and circumstances in reaching his decision.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-02549 at 2 (App.
Bd. Jul. 3, 2007).       
Applicant’s appeal brief includes information not contained in the record concerning
perceived inefficiencies in the processing of his application.  We cannot consider new evidence on
appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  See ADP Case 11-11592 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 23, 2012).  As a general
matter, we have no jurisdiction to rule on OPM’s or DOHA’s pre-hearing interactions with an
applicant.  The record does not support a conclusion that the manner in which Applicant’s case was
processed prejudiced his ability to present evidence in mitigation.  To the extent that Applicant is
raising an issue of due process, we find no reason to conclude that he was denied the due process
afforded by the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-08063 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 19, 2013); ADP
Case No. 07–00966 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2009) (Absent circumstances that raise an issue on a
denial of due process, how the Government develops a case is not relevant on appeal).    
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record. 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
 Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
