 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13473 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 27, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
  
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a long history of financial indebtedness. She currently has 10 
delinquent debts that total approximately $45,771, and has failed to submit proof that 
any of them are satisfied. In addition, she falsified information on her Security Clearance 
Application. She has not mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 7, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 27, 2013, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, Financial Considerations; and E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
 
2 
 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated submission, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on July 10, 2013. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on August 1, 2013. She was 
afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. As of August 31, 2013, she had not responded. The 
case was assigned to me on September 17, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked as 
a contractor since 2000. She was married in September 1994, but divorced in June 
2001. She resides with a cohabitant. She failed to identify any children on her e-QIP, 
although in her response to Interrogatories, she refers to an adult daughter. (Item 4; 
Item 5.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 10 delinquent debts totaling $45,771, all of which were 
substantiated by the credit reports in the record. Applicant admitted all of her debts as 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.a, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $215. Applicant explained that she incurred this debt as a 
result of helping her daughter pay for schooling. She promised to pay this debt in her 
Answer, but failed to present any evidence she acted upon this promise. Credit Reports 
reflect this debt has been delinquent since September 2011. (Answer; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.b, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $1,472. Applicant explained that she incurred this debt as a 
result of helping her daughter pay for a cell phone. She promised to pay this debt in her 
Answer, but failed to present any evidence she acted upon this promise. Credit Reports 
reflect this debt has been delinquent since January 2011. (Answer; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.c, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $3,527. Applicant explained that she incurred this debt as a 
result of helping her daughter pay for her apartment. She promised to pay this debt in 
her Answer, but failed to present any evidence she acted upon this promise. Credit 
Reports reflect this debt has been delinquent since January 2012. (Answer; Item 5; Item 
6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.d, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $950. Applicant explained that she incurred this debt as a 
result her daughter’s failure to make a rent payment on an apartment that Applicant was 
 
3 
 
helping her lease. She promised to pay this debt in her Answer, but failed to present 
any evidence she acted upon this promise. Credit Reports reflect this debt has been 
delinquent since December 2011. (Answer; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.e, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $32,560. Applicant explained that she incurred this debt as 
an authorized user on her significant other’s account. She indicated that her significant 
other had filed “something thru the courts,” but failed to provide any further information 
regarding this debt. Credit Reports reflect this debt has been delinquent since 
December 2009. (Answer; Item 5; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.f, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $254. This debt was for a gas bill. Applicant promised to pay 
this debt in her Answer, but failed to present any evidence she acted upon this promise. 
Credit Reports reflect this debt has been delinquent since July 2011. (Answer; Item 5; 
Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.g, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $1,168. This debt was for a credit card. Applicant promised 
to pay this debt in her Answer, but failed to present any evidence she acted upon this 
promise. Credit Reports reflect this debt has been delinquent since October 2008. 
(Answer; Item 5; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.h, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $144. This debt was for an electricity bill. Applicant promised 
to pay this debt in her Answer, but failed to present any evidence she acted upon this 
promise. Credit Reports reflect this debt has been delinquent since June 2011. (Answer; 
Item 5; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.i, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $5,378. This debt was for a delinquency after Applicant’s 
vehicle was repossessed. Applicant promised to follow up on this debt in her Answer, 
but failed to present any evidence she acted upon this promise. Credit Reports reflect 
this debt has been delinquent since October 2008. (Answer; Item 5; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.j, on an account placed for 
collection in the amount of $103. Applicant claimed that this debt was paid off in her 
Answer, but failed to present any evidence supporting her statement. Credit Reports 
reflect this debt has been delinquent since January 2006. (Answer; Item 5; Item 7.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On July 7, 2011, Applicant completed her e-QIP. On that Application, she was 
asked: “Section 22. Police Record e. Have you EVER been charged with any offense(s) 
related to alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered this question, “No.” However, the 
record shows that in October 2003, Applicant was charged with Driving Under the 
 
4 
 
Influence (DUI). She admitted that she was charged with this offense in her Answers to 
the Interrogatories. (Item 4; Item 5.) In her Answer, she indicated: 
 
I did not deliberately not want to give this information to you, I was told this 
was off my record, Really did not understand the 7 year. When asked 
during questioning I said I had a DUI but was never arrested. (Answer) 
 
 Applicant was also asked: “Section 18: Relatives. Give the full name and other 
requested information, if applicable, for each of your relatives.” She failed to fully 
disclose relatives, such as her daughter. In her report of investigation, which she 
adopted as her statement on December 18, 2012, indicated that “it became too much 
for her to list all other relatives,” so she did not include them. (Item 5 at 10.) 
 
 Further, in “Section 26: Financial Record e. Have you had a judgment entered 
against you? f. Have you defaulted on any type of loan? g. Have you had bills turned 
over to a collection agency? h. Have you had any account or credit card suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? m. Have you been over 180 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)? n. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any 
debt(s)?” Applicant answered all of the financial questions, “No.” Clearly, the answers to 
these questions should have been, “Yes,” as she has numerous delinquent accounts, 
as set out above under Financial Considerations.  (Item 1; Item 6; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines. (AG.) In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has accumulated a number of delinquent debts and is unable or 
unwilling to pay her obligations. Her financial problems have been ongoing since 2006, 
without resolution. To date, Applicant has been unable to satisfy any of her past-due 
accounts. The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c). 
 
 
6 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are current and on-going, as evidenced by the credit reports. 
She has not presented evidence that she has taken any actions on her outstanding 
debt. Her failure to address her debts fails to show good judgment. She has not 
addressed her debts in a responsible manner. She has not received counseling for her 
financial problems and she does not appear to have her financial delinquencies under 
control. Finally, Applicant has not presented evidence that she contested her 
outstanding debts. None of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to list her debts, her relatives, and her DUI charge on her 2011 
SCA. She clearly knew she had debts that had not been resolved, relatives that were 
not identified, and an alcohol related arrest. Yet, she willfully chose not to include them 
on the SCA. This behavior indicates questionable judgment and untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to 
correct her falsification or concealment. She provided no information that indicates she 
was ill-advised in completing her SF 86. Falsifying information is a serious offense and 
Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. 
Further, she fails to take responsibility for her actions. She has not provided information 
in this record to show that she has met her burden of proof for her personal conduct. 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but warrant additional comment. Applicant 
is 56 years old. She is clearly aware of the need to be financially responsible. She 
accumulated substantial debts and has not shown that she has a plan to resolve her 
financial situation. An applicant is not required to be debt-free, or establish that she paid 
every debt. But she must demonstrate that she has established a plan to resolve her 
debts and that she is taking action to implement that plan. Here, Applicant has not 
established such a plan, and remains indebted for $45,771. In addition, she has not 
been forthright with the Government on her e-QIP.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations or Personal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
