 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12553 
                                                                      )                         
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. Her eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
                                              Statement of the Case 
 
On July 5, 2011, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 5, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. 
The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, which she signed and dated 
on May 13, 2013. She requested that, in lieu of a hearing, her case be determined on 
the record by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 16, 
2013. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 8. On July 29, 
2013, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit 
any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant 
received the file on August 7, 2013. Her response was due on September 6, 2013. 
Applicant did not submit any information in response to the FORM within the required 
period, and she did not request an extension of time to file information. On September 
16, 2013, the case was assigned to me for a decision. 
 
                                                     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 16 allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.p.), and three allegations of 
disqualifying conduct under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 
2.c.). In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 15 of the Guideline F allegations. 
She denied the Guideline F allegation at SOR ¶ 1.e. She admitted the three Guideline G 
allegations. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 2.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government. 
In addition to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, the record evidence includes Applicant’s 
2011 e-QIP; her response to DOHA interrogatories;1 an identification record from the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), dated August 6, 2011; and Applicant’s credit 
reports of August 6, 2011, September 27, 2012, and June 10, 2013. The credit reports 
establish the debts alleged on the SOR. (See Items 3 through 8.) 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old, never married, and has no children. Since January 
2011, she has been employed by the government contractor sponsoring her for a 
security clearance. She seeks a clearance for the first time. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant began to consume alcohol when she was about 16 years old. From 
2000 until at least November 2012, Applicant consumed alcohol at times to intoxication. 
In 2003, she was arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI). She was 
represented by counsel. She pled guilty to Open Container, was fined, and her driver’s 
license was suspended for six months. This behavior is alleged at SOR ¶¶ 2.b. and 2.c. 
(Item 4.) 
                                            
1
Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on August 18, 2011. On December 5, 2012, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant 
signed a notarized statement in which she agreed that the investigator’s summary accurately reflected the 
information she provided in her interview. Additionally, she reported that during her interview she 
discussed her childhood, her relationship with her mother, her past issues with alcohol, and volunteer and 
sports activities she took up after attending counseling to learn how to make better decisions. She did not 
change or modify any facts as reported in the investigator’s summary.  (Item 4.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In December 2004, Applicant stopped drinking alcohol when she became 
involved in a relationship with a man who had a young child. For about five years, 
Applicant did not drink alcohol. In about 2009, when the relationship began to come to 
an end, Applicant began going out again with her friends to bars and clubs. She told the 
authorized investigator that she went out every weekend, drank seven to eight beers, 
and became intoxicated. (Item 4.) 
 
 In September 2010, Applicant realized she was drinking too much, and she 
resolved to stop consuming alcohol again for a brief period. In December 2010, after 
resuming the use of alcohol, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Driving While 
Intoxicated - First Offense; (2) Operate Motor Vehicle with 0.08 of 1%; and (3) Refusal. 
She pled guilty to Driving While Ability Impaired by Alcohol. She was fined and her 
driver’s license was suspended for 90 days. (Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant does not believe she has an alcohol problem. She continues to drink 
alcohol on occasion, and she intends to drink alcohol in the future. She reports drinking 
three to four glasses of wine at a wedding or six to seven beers when at a friend’s 
house. She does not think she should drink alcohol when she is upset or feeling 
stressed. She states she will not drink and drive in the future. Applicant has not had 
treatment or supportive counseling due to her use of alcohol. She stated that she 
increased her sports and physical activities in order to reduce the stress that caused her 
to drink alcohol. (Item 4.)   
 
 From about August 2003 until December 2009, Applicant was enrolled in higher 
education, first at a community college and later at a state university. She did not, 
however, earn a degree. She financed her higher education with student loans. In 
response to DOHA interrogatories, she identified at least $48,000 in student loan debt. 
Applicant’s credit bureau report of June 10, 2013, shows that Applicant is responsible 
for $24,533 in student loan debt in collection status and $1,007 in student loan 
payments that are 180 days or more past due. Additionally, the credit report shows 
student loans valued at $12,500 in deferred status. (Item 3; Item 4; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial delinquency. When she completed her e-QIP 
in July 2011, she identified the following delinquent debts: two debts in collection status; 
a default on an automobile loan and a subsequent repossession; one debt 180 days 
delinquent; and one debt 90 days past due. (Item 3.) 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator in August 2011, 
she discussed the debts she had listed on her e-QIP, expressed her intention to contact 
two medical creditors to arrange payment, and stated she would seek counsel from a 
financial planner. She denied knowledge of any other debts. The investigator then 
brought to her attention 12 additional debts either in collection or past due status. 
Applicant stated she was unaware of the 12 debts and would obtain a copy of her credit 
report, contact her creditors, and arrange payment. (Item 4.)   
 
 
4 
 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is responsible for four delinquent student loans in 
collection status. The debts are identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.f. ($3,765); 1.g. ($8,778); 1.h. 
($3,054); and 1.i. ($4,147). The SOR also alleges at ¶ 1.o. that Applicant is responsible 
for a $1,261 delinquent debt to an educational institution. (Item 1.) 
 
 Additionally, the SOR alleges that Applicant is 180 days past due on two 
education accounts, one for $575 (SOR ¶ 1.j.) and one for $432 (SOR ¶ 1.k.). The SOR 
also alleges that Applicant is 120 days past due on three other education accounts, 
identified as SOR ¶¶ 1.m. ($674); 1.n. ($985); and 1.p. ($572). (Item 1.) 
 
 Applicant admitted all of her educational debts and acknowledged that they have 
not been satisfied. In her current job, Applicant earns $11 an hour in regular pay and 
$16.50 an hour in overtime pay. In 2012, her annual gross salary was approximately 
$25,000. Her monthly take-home pay is approximately $1,210. Applicant provided 
documentation demonstrating that she authorized a deduction of 15 percent of her after-
tax income to be allocated to paying her student loans. She provided pay slips showing 
that in the first eleven months of 2012, she made payments of over $3,100 on her 
student loan debts. The record does not specify which student loan debts are subject to 
Applicant’s monthly payments.  (Item 3; Item 4.)  
 
 Applicant owes medical debts which occurred when she became ill and sought 
medical assistance. At the time of her illness, she did not have medical insurance. 
These debts are alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c. Applicant acknowledged that 
these medical debts were hers and had not been paid. Her credit bureau reports show 
these debts as delinquent since 2010. Applicant explained that, after paying her monthly 
living expenses and student loan repayments, she lacks sufficient income to make any 
payments on her medical debts. (Item 2; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant owes a creditor $164 on a debt in 
collection status. Applicant’s credit bureau report of June 2013 shows that the debt has 
been delinquent since January 2010. Applicant acknowledged the debt and claimed she 
lacks the financial resources to pay the debt. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant is at least 150 days past due in paying a 
utility bill of $591. Applicant denied the debt and asserted she had paid it in November 
2012. She provided documentation showing that her current utility bill with the same 
creditor was in good status, and that she had made two payments in October 2012 to 
resolve the delinquency. The debt is listed as unsatisfied on Applicant’s credit bureau 
report of June 2013. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 6.)  
 
 In February 2011, Applicant’s automobile was repossessed when she failed to 
make required payments. The debt has been charged off. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.l. that 
Applicant owes the automobile creditor $4,039. Applicant admitted the debt and 
acknowledged that it had not been satisfied. She stated that she lacked sufficient 
discretionary income to pay the debt. Applicant failed to provide a current personal 
financial statement or documentation supporting financial counseling. (Item 2; Item 4.) 
 
5 
 
 
                     Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
6 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
The record reflects that Applicant is responsible for 15 long-standing unresolved 
debts dating to at least 2010. She denied the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e., but she failed 
to provide documentation to corroborate her assertion that the debt had been satisfied. 
This evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
 
7 
 
 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20(d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20(e)). 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquency, and her delinquency continues to 
the present time. She is responsible for debts dating back several years. While she 
incurred considerable education debt and did not complete her studies by receiving a 
degree, the record does not reflect that she has experienced reversals beyond her 
control. She has been steadily employed by her current employer for almost three 
years. Because she did not provide a personal financial statement listing her sources of 
income and her monthly expenses, it is not possible to determine whether she has the 
financial resources to pay or settle her old debts. The take-home pay from her current 
employment as a government contractor, as listed on two pay slips provided for the 
record, suggests that she likely has little discretionary income after paying her living 
expenses.   
 
Applicant merits credit for authorizing the payment of 15% of her after-tax income 
to reduce some of her student loan debt. However, the record does not specify which of 
her education debts are affected by the payments and which, if any, remain 
unaddressed. Moreover, Applicant’s non-educational debts remain unaddressed. She 
has yet to establish a track record of timely and consistent payment of those 
delinquencies. Applicant’s unwillingness to address these debts raises concerns about 
her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. I conclude that while AG ¶ 20(d) applies in 
part to the facts of Applicant’s case, AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(e) do not apply in 
mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
Applicant began to drink alcohol in 2000, when she was a high school student, 
and she admitted she consumed alcohol to excess and to the point of intoxication from 
2000 to at least November 2012. In 2003, she was arrested and charged with DUI, and 
she pled guilty to Open Container. Her driver’s license was suspended for six months. 
 
Applicant stated that she did not consume alcohol when involved in a 
relationship with a man who had a young child. When the relationship ended, however, 
she returned to consuming alcohol, often to intoxication. In September 2010, she 
 
8 
 
 
resolved to stop using alcohol, but resumed shortly thereafter and was arrested in 
December 2010 and charged with Driving While Impaired by Alcohol, a charge to which 
she pled guilty.  
 
Despite her alcohol-related arrests, Applicant continues to use alcohol. She 
reports that her consumption includes drinking three to four glasses of wine at a 
wedding or six to seven beers when at a friend’s house. She intends to continue using 
alcohol in the future. She asserts that she will not operate a motor vehicle after drinking 
alcohol. She has not been diagnosed as alcohol dependent or as an alcohol abuser.  
 
I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions. I 
conclude that the record evidence in this case raises Guideline G disqualifying 
conditions at ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c).  AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related incidents away 
from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, 
disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(c) reads: “habitual or 
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether 
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23 (d) if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.”  
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with alcohol violations in December 2003 
and December 2010. Applicant’s second alcohol-related incident is recent, and it 
occurred after many years of excessive consumption of alcohol. Applicant continues to 
use alcohol and intends to do so in the future. Her current use includes four glasses of 
wine at a wedding or six to seven beers when at a friend’s house. She has not been 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, and she has stated that her 
alcohol use in the future will be responsible. However, she has failed in her resolve to 
avoid consuming alcohol to excess. Insufficient time has passed for Applicant to 
 
9 
 
 
demonstrate that her use of alcohol does not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude that none of the Guideline G mitigating 
conditions applies in Applicant’s case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a history of 
unresolved debt. The record does not include information about her sources of income,   
her living expenses, and how much discretionary income she has to pay or otherwise 
resolve her delinquent debts. Her alcohol-related arrests occurred in 2003 and 2010. 
She denies she has an alcohol problem. She continues to use alcohol, and intends to 
do so in the future. She acknowledges that her current use can include three or four 
glasses of wine at a wedding and six or seven beers at a friend’s house. Applicant failed 
to show that she possesses the reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness of a person 
who can be trusted with classified and sensitive information. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines F and G. 
 
                                                  Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.d.:                Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e.:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f. - 1.p.:             Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.c.:                 Against Applicant 
 
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
