 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12992 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
personal conduct, criminal conduct, and financial considerations. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 27, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 18, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines E (personal conduct), J (criminal conduct), and F (financial 
considerations). This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
2 
 
or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. On May 1, 2013, Applicant 
answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of 
a hearing. On June 27, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents identified as Items 1 through 11.  
 
On June 27, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
forwarded to Applicant a copy of the FORM with instructions to submit any additional 
information and objections within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant received the FORM on 
July 5, 2013, and did not submit any objections or additional matters within the allotted 
period. The case was assigned to me on August 25, 2013.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since March 2007. He graduated from high school in 2001 and has 
been attending community college since 2009. He married in May 2005 and divorced in 
June 2010. He has one child who is five years old. He has not held a security clearance 
in the past.1 
 
 Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant falsified his responses to 
questions in two e-QIP sections (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) and that he was terminated from 
a job after testing positive for marijuana in December 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.c). Under 
Guideline J, the SOR alleged that Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated 
(DWI) and other traffic offenses in May 2011 and was found guilty of the DWI offense 
(SOR ¶ 2.a). Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant had 18 delinquent 
debts totaling $24,218 (SOR ¶¶ 3.a through 3.r) and that he failed to file his 2009, 2010, 
and 2011 tax returns as required (SOR ¶ 3.s). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
denied all of the Guideline E allegations and, in doing so, denied using marijuana, but 
admitted that he was terminated from a job in December 2006 after testing positive for 
marijuana. He admitted the sole Guideline J allegation and 16 of the 19 Guideline F 
allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.2 
  
 From September 2001 to December 2006, Applicant worked as a nuclear 
technician. In his e-QIP, he gave inconsistent explanations for why he left that job. In 
Section 13A.3, he stated, “I worked here until I found something else.” In Section 13C.1, 
however, he indicated that he was fired from that job and stated, “They said I tested 
positive for marijuana – but I didn’t smoke. I don’t know how they came to that 
conclusion, but I was fired after that.” In responding to a Section 13C.3 -- which asked if 
he received a written warning or been officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined 
for violating a company rule or policy -- he stated, “I was told that I tested positive for 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
2 Items 1 and 4. In the FORM, Department Counsel amended the sole Guideline J allegation by 
deleting and/or rearranging language in the original allegation. This amendment is not a substantive 
change from the original allegation.  
 
3 
 
Marijuana. I didn’t smoke Marijuana, still don’t know exactly how that happened.” In the 
e-QIP, he also listed that he was unemployed from December 2006 to March 2007.3 
 
On May 28, 2011, Applicant was arrested for DWI 1st offense and driving under 
revocation/suspension. Both of those alleged offenses were misdemeanors. During his 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview on August 10, 2011, he stated that 
he was driving to a friend’s house when the police pulled him over for swerving on the 
road. He stated that he consumed one beer before driving. The police officer 
administered him an alcohol breath test, told him that he failed the test, arrested him, 
and transported him to the local jail. His arraignment was originally scheduled for June 
1, 2011, but was apparently continued. Another hearing date was set for June 16, 2011, 
but also was continued. At some point, he hired an attorney to represent him in that 
criminal proceeding. On October 6, 2011, he was found guilty of the DWI charge and 
the driving under revocation/suspension charge was dismissed. He was sentenced to 
30 days in jail, 24 months of unsupervised probation, 12 months of restricted driving 
privileges, $250 fine, and mandatory attendance in an alcohol and substance abuse 
program (ASAP). A letter dated December 7, 2012, reflects that he successfully 
completed ASAP.4 
 
In his e-QIP dated June 27, 2011, he responded “no” to the following questions: 
 
Section 22: Police Record 
 
 a. [In the last 7 years,] [h]ave you been issued a summons, citation, 
or ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against you; are you 
on trial or awaiting a trial on criminal charges; or are you currently awaiting 
sentencing for a criminal offense? 
 
 b. [In the last 7 years,] [h]ave you been arrested by any police 
officer, sheriff, marshal, or any other type of law enforcement officer? 
 
 e. Have you EVER been charged with any offense(s) related to 
alcohol and drugs? 
 
Section 24: Use of Alcohol 
 
a. In the last 7 years, has your use of alcohol had a negative impact 
on your work performance, your professional or personal relationships, 
your finances, or resulted in intervention by law enforcement/public safety 
personnel? 
 
b. In the last 7 years, have you been ordered, advised, or asked to 
seek counseling or treatment as a result of your use of alcohol? 
                                                          
3 Items 5 and 6.  
4 Items 6 and 9.  
 
4 
 
c. In the last 7 years, have you received counseling or treatment as 
a result of your use of alcohol? 5 
 
 In the OPM interview, Applicant was confronted about the DWI charge and 
reportedly indicated that he misunderstood the question and thought he did not have to 
list it because he had not been formally charged in court. In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant denied the falsification allegation involving his responses to the questions in 
Sections 24a, 24b, and 24c by stating, “I deny, at the time I first filled out the packet I 
had not been to court and ordered to take any class including ASAP.” In his Answer, he 
denied the falsification allegation involving his responses to the questions in Sections 
22a, 22b, and 22e by stating, “I deny, misunderstood that part that said have I ever 
been arrested and awaiting trial. But again at the time I had not been tried for anything, 
not been to court and found guilty.”6   
  
In the OPM interview, Applicant attributed his financial problems to his divorce 
and child support payments of $940 per month. He has $240 deducted from his weekly 
paycheck for the child support payments. He stated that he lives paycheck-to-paycheck, 
but is able to pay his monthly living expenses. He indicated that he has not sought 
financial counseling or debt consolidation services.7 
 
 Applicant did not provide any proof of payments toward the delinquent debts. In 
responding to financial interrogatories on December 18, 2012, he was asked about the 
status of the delinquent debts and stated, “Have not taken care of any of those matters, 
but I plan to as soon as I can gather some money.” He submitted a personal financial 
statement (PFS) that reflected his total net monthly income was $1,836 and his total 
monthly expenses were $1,865, which left him a negative net monthly remainder of $29. 
The PFS does not list any payments toward the delinquent debts.8 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.n, and 
1.q. He indicated that he either had no knowledge of those debts or did not know how 
the creditors came up with the alleged amount. Documents in the FORM, however, 
provide substantial evidence of the denied debts.9  
 
Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.o, but indicated they were 
duplicates. Both of those debts are from the same creditor and are for similar amounts. 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is a judgment, while the one in SOR ¶ 1.o is a charged-off 
                                                          
5 Item 5. 
6 Items 4, 5, and 6. 
7 Items 4 and 6. 
8 Item 6. 
9 Items  4, 7, 8, and 10. 
 
5 
 
account. The evidence supports Applicant’s contention that these allegations are for the 
same debt.10  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he failed to file his 2009, 2010, 
and 2011 tax returns as required and stated that he was going to take care of this 
matter. In responding to interrogatories, he indicated that he was going to set up a 
payment plan with the Internal Revenue Service for his $700 tax liability (SOR ¶ 1.r). He 
provided no documentation showing that he filed the late tax returns or set up the 
payment plan for the delinquent taxes.11 
 
Applicant did not provide any letters of reference, work evaluations, awards or 
commendations, or other character evidence.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
10 Items 4 and 11. 
11 Items 4 and 6. 
12 Items 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
 
6 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant falsified his e-QIP by responding “no” to 
questions that asked him if he had been ordered, advised, or asked to seek counseling 
 
7 
 
or treatment as a result of his use of alcohol (Section 24b) and if he had received 
counseling or treatment as a result of his use of alcohol (Section 24c). At the time he 
completed the e-QIP, he had not been convicted of DWI and had not been ordered to 
attend ASAP classes. No evidence was presented to show that his responses to the 
questions in Sections 24b and 24c were false. I find in his favor regarding the portions 
of SOR ¶ 1.a that pertain to the questions in Sections 24b and 24c. 
 
 On May 28, 2011, Applicant was arrested for DWI and driving under revocation/ 
suspension. He was transported to the local jail and processed for those suspected 
offenses. He had court appearances set for June 1, 2011, and June 16, 2011, that were 
continued. About four weeks after his DWI arrest, he submitted his e-QIP and 
responded “no” to questions that asked if he was awaiting trial on criminal charges 
(Section 22a), if he had been arrested by a law enforcement officer in the last seven 
years (Section 22b), if he had ever been charged with an alcohol-related offense 
(Section 22e), and if his use of alcohol resulted in an intervention by law enforcement 
personnel (Section 24a). In his OPM interview, he indicated that he thought he did not 
have to list this arrest because he had not been formally charged in court. In his Answer 
to the SOR, he contended that he misunderstood the part of the questions that asked if 
he had been arrested or was awaiting trial. His explanations for responding “no” to 
these questions are not believable. Having just gone through the stressful events of his 
arrest and preliminary processing in the criminal justice system, he knew and 
understood that he had been arrested for and was pending trial on an alcohol-related 
offense when he submitted his e-QIP. I find that he intentionally provided false 
responses to the questions in Sections 22a, 22b, 22e, and 24a. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.   
 
 In December 2006, Applicant was terminated from a job after his employer 
determined that he tested positive for marijuana use.  AG ¶ 16(c) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advise of 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security clearance process. Upon being 
made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process was recent and raises serious security concerns. He failed to 
establish that any of the above mitigating conditions applied to the substantiated 
portions of the Guideline E allegations.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;   
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of DWI in October 2011. His sentence included 24 
months of unsupervised probation, which will apparently end in October 2013. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under AG ¶ 
32 and following are pertinent: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
9 
 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant claimed that he consumed one beer before his DWI arrest in 2011. 
Based on his subsequent conviction for DWI, his claim of consuming only one beer on 
that occasion is questionable. Although he successfully completed ASAP, his driving 
privileges were restricted until October 2012. Given that he still remains on probation, I 
find that sufficient time has not passed to conclude that his criminal conduct will not 
recur. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) partially apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
  
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for an extended period. He failed to file his 2009, 2010, and 2011 tax returns as 
required by law. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
10 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing, significant, and cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. From the evidence presented, I 
am unable to determine that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his current financial problems to his divorce and child 
support payments. His divorce was a condition beyond his control. To merit full credit 
under AG ¶ 20(b), an applicant not only must encounter conditions beyond his or her 
control, but also must act responsibly under the circumstances. In this case, Applicant 
presented no proof of payments toward the remaining debts alleged in the SOR. He 
failed to provide a realistic plan for resolving those debts. His PFS reflects a negative 
net monthly remainder. He failed to establish that he filed his tax returns for 2009, 2010, 
and 2011. Based on the record evidence, I am unable to find that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstance or that his financial problems are under control or are being 
resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.o are duplicates. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.o. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
11 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E, J, and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Minimal whole-person evidence has been presented in this case. Applicant 
provided no letters of reference and no work performance evaluations. For the reasons 
discussed above, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. In conclusion, Applicant 
failed to mitigate the personal conduct, criminal conduct, and financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.n:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.o:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 3.p – 3.s:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
