KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant was properly advised of his right to submit a response to the File of
Relevant Material.  Applicant was not denied the due process afforded by the Directive. 
Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 11-12885.a1
DATE: 09/17/2013
DATE: September 17, 2013
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-12885
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 22, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Because Applicant did not request
a hearing the case was processed on the written record, in accordance with Directive ¶ E3.1.7.  On
June 27, 2013, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor since 2009.  He served in the Navy from 1982
until 1985, when he was administratively discharged.  Applicant is divorced with two grown
offspring.  
Applicant has several delinquent debts, including three state tax liens and an account from
an automobile repossession.  Applicant advised that many of his debts had been satisfied or were
subject to repayment agreements, but he provided no corroboration.  He denied responsibility for
some of the debts alleged in the SOR, but he provided no evidence that he had ever disputed them.
Moreover, in an interview, Applicant attributed three of these challenged debts to a dating service,
a telecommunication provider, and utilities bills.  The Judge found that Applicant had “provided
scant information” that would explain his financial circumstances.  Decision at 2.  Applicant’s
personal financial statement shows a monthly net remainder of about $1,137.  Applicant provided
no response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM).  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s finances raised security concerns under Guideline F.
In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, he noted the absence of corroboration for Applicant’s
claims of repayment.  He also stated that Applicant had provided no evidence that his problems had
resulted from causes outside his control and cited to evidence that Applicant had pursued Chapter
7 bankruptcy in 2003.  He concluded that Applicant’s financial problems were ongoing and
unresolved and that Applicant had failed to demonstrate responsible action in regard to his debts.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge commented on Applicant’s military discharge, his family
circumstances, and the paucity of evidence showing the reason for Applicant’s financial problems
and/or his efforts to resolve or dispute them.  The Judge concluded that, in light of this paucity of
evidence, Applicant had failed to meet his burden of persuasion as to mitigation.
Discussion
Applicant cites to references in the Decision to his failure to respond to the FORM.  He states
that he did not have time to reply, because the FORM was sent to his employer’s corporate office
in the U.S. and from there to Applicant’s home in Europe, where he was performing his duties.  He
argues that the paucity of evidence in his case was due to the “short turnaround” time he had in
which to prepare his response.
As stated above, Applicant did not request a hearing.  Accordingly, his case was processed
by means of the written record.  DOHA mailed Applicant a copy of the FORM on April 18, 2013.
An accompanying letter advised Applicant that he had 30 days from receipt to submit objections or
3
additional information for the Judge’s consideration.  This advice complied with Directive ¶ E3.1.7.
The letter advised Applicant that if he did not respond, his case would be assigned to the Judge for
a decision based solely on the FORM.  DOHA also provided Applicant a copy of the Directive.
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on May 6, 2013.  Applicant neither responded to the
FORM nor requested an extension of time in which to do so.  Under the circumstances, there is no
reason to believe that Applicant was denied his full thirty days in which to respond or that he was
not properly advised of his rights.  There is no basis in the record to conclude that Applicant was
denied the due process afforded by the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-03743 at 2 (App. Bd.
Jun. 24, 2011).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields               
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
