 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12539 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations, and J, criminal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 3, 2103, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 9, 2013. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 27, 2013. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
and three witnesses testified. Applicant offered exhibits (AE) A though F, that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until September 10, 
2013, to provide Applicant the opportunity to present additional exhibits, which he did. 
They are marked AE G through Q. They were admitted into evidence without objection.1 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 5, 2013.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw the allegations under Guideline J and ¶ 
2.c of Guideline F.2 The motion was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations except ¶ 1.d, which he denied. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He served as an active-duty Marine from 1992 to 1996, 
and was in the inactive reserve from 1996 to 1998. He was honorably discharged. He 
was married from 1993 to 2003. He has two children from the marriage. Applicant’s 17-
year-old son lives with him. His 12-year-old daughter lives with her maternal 
grandparents. He also has a 16-year-old son from a previous relationship. He pays child 
support for this child. His child support payments are current.3 He remarried in 2007 and 
divorced in 2013. He has held a security clearance for 17 years.4 
 
Applicant and his second wife purchased a home in 2007. She worked when they 
first married, and with their combined incomes, they were able to afford the house. After 
purchasing the house her income became unreliable. Applicant assisted his second wife 
both financially and by participating in developing new avenues of home-based 
businesses to earn income. The businesses were unsuccessful, and they continued to 
have difficulty affording the house. Unbeknownst to Applicant, his wife was keeping a 
separate account hidden from him. When he found out, he realized she was using 
money from their joint account for the business, but when money came in, she was 
depositing it in her separate hidden account. Applicant estimated he spent about 
$20,000 on his second wife’s failed businesses.5  
 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s email. 
 
2 Tr. 36-37. 
 
3 AE H. 
 
4 Tr. 57-60. 
 
5 Tr. 47-49, 79-80, 83-90; AE N. 
 
3 
 
 
When Applicant began experiencing financial problems and difficulty paying his 
mortgage payments, he contacted the mortgage company and attempted to modify his 
loan. The mortgage company would not modify the loan until he was in arrears on his 
payments. He consulted an attorney who advised him to stop making payments on the 
loan, which he did sometime in 2009. He was also advised that there would likely be a 
long delay before the loan modification was negotiated because there were many others 
seeking to do the same. He was unsuccessful in getting his loan modified.  
 
Applicant and his second wife separated in 2011. She remained in the family 
home during the separation. Applicant had to maintain a separate residence, which 
caused an additional strain on his finances. He contacted the mortgage company and 
attempted a short sale of the property, but was unsuccessful. He has maintained 
contact with the mortgage company and has not abandoned this debt. He is trying to 
find out if it is possible to attempt another short sale or find another way to resolve the 
debt. The home has been foreclosed. The debt is currently $126,215 past due. 
Applicant is attempting to resolve this debt.6  
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.a ($260), 2.b ($145) and 2.f ($656) are medical debts. 
The debts are for care for his children. Applicant stated he was unaware of the debts 
because they were likely incurred when the children were with their mother. He became 
aware of the debts when he received the SOR. He provided proof that the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 2.a and 2.f were paid in full. He stated he negotiated a settlement for the remaining 
debt and it was paid.7  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 2.d ($10,105) is a vehicle loan that was past due. Applicant 
purchased the car three years ago for his wife, and the monthly payment was $346. He 
believed the family finances were solvent at the time. He got behind on the payments 
during his separation. Applicant contacted the creditor and advised him of his financial 
situation. He continued to make monthly payments, but they were not always the full 
amount. When the payment was going to be less than the full amount he would contact 
the creditor, and the creditor agreed to accept the lesser amount. He provided a copy of 
the agreement he executed with the creditor.8 He is presently current on his payments. 
He owes $6,775 on the balance of the debt. He was advised to wait to sell the car until 
his divorce was final so there would not be any property division issues. His divorce was 
finalized this month. The car is now on the market for sale.9  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($5,237) is a credit card debt. It is approximately ten years 
old and left over from Applicant’s first marriage. He did not use the card after his 
divorce. He has contacted the creditor and has an agreement to settle the debt with 
                                                          
6 Tr. 46, 49-55, 61, 96-97; AE N, O. 
 
7 Tr. 32-36; AE I, J. 
 
8 AE F. 
 
9 Tr. 37-46; AE M. 
 
 
4 
 
 
three monthly payments of $785. He has made the first payment and provided 
supporting documentation.10 
 
Applicant was working two separate jobs until 2011. The two employers joined 
contracts, and he was permitted to work only one of the jobs. Hence, he lost a 
significant amount of income when the companies merged. He also works cleaning up 
construction sites to earn extra money. He has reduced his expenses by no longer 
having cable services, and he maintains a minimal cell phone contract.  
 
Applicant gave his father a short-term loan for a business venture in 2012. 
Applicant took a loan from his 401k to help his father. His father helped him in the past 
when he was in need, and Applicant felt obligated to reciprocate. He was hopeful at the 
time that his father would reimburse him quickly, but that did not happen. After the 
hearing, Applicant memorialized a loan repayment agreement with his father. The 
amount of the loan was $38,000. The agreement calls for Applicant’s father to begin 
making monthly payments of $950 from September 2013 to October 2014. Interest of 
3.5% will be paid on the unpaid principal. There is a balloon payment in October 2014 
for the remaining balance of the loan. Applicant is confident that his father is capable of 
repaying the loan.11 
 
Applicant took a loan from his 401k retirement account to help set up a new 
residence, for some legal expenses, and for the loan to his father. He is repaying the 
401k loan. He is waiting for the distribution of a health care reimbursement account that 
was maintained by his union. The union voted to terminate the account and disburse the 
funds. Applicant estimates he will receive approximately $21,000 after taxes when the 
disbursement is made. He anticipated the disbursement sometime in October 2013. 
Applicant intends on using this money to repay his 401k account and resolve any 
remaining outstanding debts. He provided documentation that substantiates the 
distribution should be forthcoming.12 
 
Applicant stated that, since his divorce, he has been paying his bills consistently 
and he is acutely aware of where his money is being spent. He and his son will share a 
vehicle. He is attempting to sell both the vehicle that was his ex-wife’s and a second 
vehicle he has. He is current on the car payments of both vehicles. Applicant believes 
he can maturely handle his finances in the future.13  
 
Applicant’s supervisor testified on his behalf. He has known Applicant since 1996 
when he hired him after he was discharged from the Marine Corps. He considers 
Applicant reliable, trustworthy and loyal. He gives of his time for charitable endeavors. 
                                                          
10 Tr. 55, 55-57; AE G, K. 
 
11 Tr. 65-69, 91-9; AE L. 
 
12 Tr. 49, 69-72; AE F, P. 
 
13 Tr. 94-96; AE M, P, Q. 
 
 
5 
 
 
He was promoted in 2009 and is responsible for overseeing four crews. During 
Applicant’s entire term of employment, he has always been the consummate 
professional and has performed admirably.14  
 
Applicant provided numerous letters of appreciation and achievement reflecting 
on his performance while he was on active duty in the military. He was also awarded a 
Navy-Marine Corps Achievement Medal. He provided numerous letters of appreciation 
and achievement reflecting his performance for the past 17 years working with his 
employer. He provided a voluminous number of character letters and emails from 
supervisors, coworkers, and friends. They uniformly describe him as loyal, devoted, 
trustworthy, a team player, professional, honorable, generous, courteous, honest, 
knowledgeable, of good moral character, a person of integrity, and dependable.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
                                                          
14 Tr. 19. 
 
15 AE C. 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had seven delinquent debts, including a foreclosed mortgage that he 
was unable or unwilling to pay. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because Applicant is still resolving his foreclosed 
mortgage. Applicant began having financial problems when his wife was not contributing 
to the family finances and during their separation and eventual divorce. Applicant was 
trying to maintain two households and pay other expenses. He lost his second job. 
These were conditions beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), 
Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. He has paid some of 
the smaller debts on the SOR. He is negotiating a settlement on another SOR debt. He 
admits he made mistakes in how he handled his finances. His foreclosed mortgage is 
not yet resolved, but he is actively working to resolve the debt. He is now making strides 
in getting his finances under control. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 Applicant is addressing the debts that have not been paid. He is beginning to get 
back on track financially after his divorce and the loss of his second job. He has 
trimmed his budget and is making mature financial decisions. He is anticipating a lump-
sum payout for his medical reimbursement account that should alleviate some of the 
financial strain. There is clear evidence that his financial problems are being resolved 
and are under control. I considered the advice he sought from an attorney on resolving 
the foreclosure as receiving some financial counseling. I find AG ¶ 20(c) applies. I find 
AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He served honorably in the Marine Corps for four 
years. He takes care of his children and participates in charitable endeavors. He is well 
respected by his supervisors, coworkers and friends. Applicant’s financial problems are 
attributed to his divorce and some poor financial decision making. He is still resolving 
some of his financial issues, including a foreclosure, but it appears he is on the right 
track. He has not abandoned his debts and is actively attempting resolution. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   WITHDRAWN 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   2.c:    Withdrawn 
 Subparagraphs 2.d-2.g:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
