1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-13712
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 19, 2013
________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 28, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 27, 2013, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on May 28, 2013. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 29,
2013, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 13, 2013. The Government
offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified
on his own behalf, called one additional witness, and submitted Exhibits A and B, which
were also admitted  without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr)
on June 24, 2013. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until June 28,
2013, to submit additional documents. Additional documents were submitted, identified
2
as Exhibits C through F, and entered into evidence without objection. Based upon a
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant and his witness,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and Applicant’s testimony, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 52 years old. He is married, and he has one daughter. Applicant
received a Bachelor of Science degree in Finance in 1983. Applicant is employed by a
defense contractor, but he is not currently working due to lack of contract work. He is
seeking a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense
sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 10 allegations (1.a. through 1.j.) regarding overdue debts and
failure to file Federal and state taxes, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations
will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,553 for a
judgement entered against him by City A in May 2008.  At the hearing, Applicant denied
this allegation. He testified that this debt is paid, and that he checked with City A and
they confirmed that he did not owe a debt. (Tr at 33-38.) Exhibit C confirms that this
debt was paid on June 19, 2009. I find that this debt has been resolved.
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,133 for a lien from
State A. Applicant testified that this debt is paid. He stated that his wages were
garnished in 2011 and 2012, and it appears that the amount garnished was the amount
of this debt. (Tr at 38-39.) Exhibits 3 and 6 show that some liens have been released.
However, they do not show that a lien in the amount of this lien has been released.
Therefore, I do not find that this debt has been resolved.
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,000 for a lien from
State A. Applicant testified that this debt is being paid by his wife in the amount of $35 a
month, but he did not know how much was paid or the amount that is still owed. (Tr at
39-42.) Exhibit 6 shows that this lien was released on February 2013. I find that this
debt has been resolved.
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,150 for a lien from
State A. Applicant testified that this debt was paid. (Tr at 42-43.) However, Exhibit 3
shows this lien has not been satisfied. I find that this debt has not been resolved.
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $80.96 for a check
issued by Applicant with insufficient funds. (Tr at 43-46.)  Applicant testified that he
3
thought this debt was paid. However, Exhibit 6 shows that this debt is still owed. I find
that this debt has not been resolved.
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $136,000 for a
defaulted mortgage account. Applicant testified that this debt was for his primary
residence that he purchased in September 1993, and went into foreclosure in August
2011. Applicant contends that he does not owe anything on this defaulted loan. (Tr at
46-48.) Exhibit E shows that there was a trustee sale of this foreclosed property.
Applicant wrote on Exhibit E that there was no deficiency judgement issued against him
for the property. Exhibit 6 does not show any amount owing on this debt. I find that this
debt has been resolved. 
Applicant explained that he used this residence as a means to purchase six
rental properties. When the economic slowdown occurred, they had many vacancies
and they did not have sufficient funds to renovate the properties to obtain new tenants.
At this point, Applicant does not own any properties. He rents his primary residence. (Tr
at 48-50.) 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,293,000 for a
defaulted mortgage account. Applicant testified that this loan was actually for $129,300,
and that an error had been made showing the amount stated on the SOR. Applicant
also stated that this debt was for another residence, and the debt had been satisfied
when the property was sold. (Tr at 50-54.) Exhibit B is a letter from the creditor of this
debt showing that the debt was paid on June 23, 2009. Exhibit F establishes that the
loan was for $129,500. I find that this debt has been resolved. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $78 for a medical
collection account. Applicant denied this debt because he could not ascertain the origin
of the debt. He indicated that since the debt is so small he would just pay it, but no post
hearing documents were introduced to show the debt had been paid. I find that this debt
has not been resolved. 
1.i. The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file State A tax returns for tax years
2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011. Applicant confirmed that he had not filed State A tax
returns for the years alleged. In addition, he had not filed State A tax returns for tax
years 2003 and 2004.  Finally, Applicant confirmed that he had not filed a State A tax
return for tax year 2012. While he indicated that he had filed a State A tax return for tax
year 2009, no post hearing documents were offered to prove that Applicant had filed a
State A tax return for tax year 2009. (Tr at 57-59.)
1.j. The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file Federal tax returns for tax years
2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009. Applicant confirmed that he had not filed Federal tax
returns for the years alleged. In addition, he believed that he did not file Federal tax
returns for tax years 2003 and 2004. Applicant also confirmed that he had not filed a
Federal tax return for tax year 2012.  (Tr at 59-60.)
4
Applicant produced no evidence that he had filed Federal or State A tax returns
for the tax years discussed in 1.i. and 1.J., above.  I find that Applicant has not filed
State A tax returns for tax years 2003, 2004, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012.  I also
find that Applicant has not filed Federal tax returns for tax years 2003, 2004, 2005,
2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2012.
Applicant explained that he and his wife failed to file Federal and State A tax
returns because  they had a lot of real estate and needed to verify expenses, revenues,
and write-offs. He also testified that when he contacted tax accountants or tax
attorneys, they estimated that it would cost him between $2,500 and $3,500 as an initial
payment to start working on the taxes, and it could cost him between $4,000 and $5,000
per each tax year return. Applicant claimed that he contacted the IRS and was told to
file the returns as soon as possible, which is what he stated he plans to do. (Tr at 60-
62.) 
Applicant explained that his financial problems occurred as a result of the down
turn in the economy, when it became difficult to find tenants for his rental properties.
Also, his wife became unemployed for a period of time. Finally, Applicant had a
telecommunication business which he started in 1996 and closed in 2008. (Tr at 71-74.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
5
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant has accumulated significant delinquent debt. Also, AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to
file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns as required” is applicable in this
case as Applicant has failed to file both Federal and state tax returns for many years,
including the most recent tax year of 2012.  
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
6
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted
above, Applicant testified that his financial problems resulted from several factors
beyond his control, including a downturn in the economy that resulted in his losing
tenants for his rental properties, all of which he eventually lost, periods of
unemployment of his wife, and the failure of his business. 
While many of the debts listed on the SOR have been satisfied, I do not find that
Applicant has attempted to act responsibly since most of these debts were resolved
either through liens or foreclosures. Also, Applicant’s willful failure to file Federal and
state tax returns for many years, and as recently as for tax year 2012, is a most
egregious example of irresponsible conduct. Therefore, I do not consider this mitigating
condition applicable. 
Similarly, I cannot find that AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable, because, as discussed
above, Applicant’s debts have been resolved by means of liens and foreclosures, and
Applicant has failed to file Federal and state tax returns for many years. I also can not
find that any other mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case.  I
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the financial concerns of the Government.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and the mitigating conditions do not
apply, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.b.,1.d., 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs1.a., 1.c., 1.f., 1.g.: For Applicant
Subparagraphs1.h.- 1.j.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
