 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-12406 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his history of 
financial irresponsibility and deliberate falsification of his recent security clearance 
application (SCA). Despite holding a clearance for 10 years, Applicant’s financial 
situation and deliberate falsification of his SCA raises doubts about his continued 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). On March 20, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR, 
waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on the written record. 
 
 On June 28, 2013, Department Counsel issued a file of relevant material (FORM) 
and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains the Government’s proposed findings of 
fact, argument, and twelve documentary exhibits. Applicant was informed he had thirty 
(30) days within which to file any objections and his response. Applicant did not submit 
 
2 
 
 
any objections or a response. Accordingly, Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 12 are 
admitted into evidence. On August 27, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 36, is an engineer for a defense contractor. He earned his bachelor’s 
degree in 2000, and shortly thereafter began working as a defense contractor. He was 
first granted a security clearance in 2003. (Gx. 4) 
 
 Applicant’s financial trouble dates back to 2001, when he moved in with his 
former girlfriend. They began overspending and relying on credit cards to pay for their 
purchases. In 2005, Applicant submitted a SCA (2005 SCA) to work on a Special 
Access Program (SAP). He was subsequently interviewed by a Government agent 
(SAP background interview). The agent asked Applicant about a number of delinquent 
accounts appearing on his credit report. Applicant informed the agent that he was not 
currently paying on his past-due debts, but had in the past consolidated his debts and 
paid them for a year. He promised to make arrangements to contact his overdue 
creditors and pay his debts. (Gx. 5 – 6) 
 
During the SAP background interview, Applicant discussed with the agent the 
five debts for over $8,000 alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.l – 1.p. Applicant claimed that he had 
failed to list these five debts and other negative accounts on his 2005 SCA because he 
did not thoroughly read the financial history questions. He was subsequently granted 
access to Sensitive Compartmented Information. Applicant admits in his Answer that he 
has still not addressed the five debt listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.l – 1.p. (Gx. 2, 5 – 6)  
 
In January 2008, Applicant’s former girlfriend gave birth to his older child. Three 
months later, Applicant’s fiancée gave birth to his younger child. Applicant claims that 
his financial situation worsened as a result of the increased cost for his older child’s 
medical bills, court-ordered child support, and legal fees. Applicant now has custody of 
both his children, lives with his fiancée, has moved into a less expensive apartment, and 
is receiving child support from his older child’s mother. (Gx. 7 – 8)  
 
 In November 2010, Applicant’s wages were garnished to satisfy his student loan 
debt, which he defaulted on in 2007. His employer questioned him about the debt and 
submitted an incident report to the Government through the Joint Personnel 
Adjudication System (JPAS). (Gx. 12) 
 
In May 2011, Applicant submitted his recent SCA (2011 SCA). In response to 
questions regarding his financial history, Applicant disclosed his student loan debt but 
no other delinquent debts. He did not list the five delinquent debts totaling over $8,000 
that he discussed during his SAP background interview. He also did not list a judgment 
and numerous collection accounts reflected on his credit report, Gx. 10.1 He was 
                                                          
1 Applicant was required to disclose any debts that resulted in a judgment, were in collection or 
charged off, and any other accounts seriously past due (over 180 days delinquent in the past 7 years or 
currently 90 days delinquent). (Gx. 4) 
 
3 
 
 
subsequently interviewed and confronted with the negative accounts reflected on his 
credit report. Applicant claimed that he was unaware of the negative accounts beyond 
the student loan debt that he listed on his SCA. (Gx. 4, 7)  
 
In December 2012, in response to a financial interrogatory, Applicant submitted a 
personal financial statement (PFS) to DoD adjudicators. The PFS reflects that Applicant 
had over $650 per month in disposable income. Applicant claimed in his interrogatory 
response that he was going to address his past-due debts with the assistance of a debt 
resolution program. (Gx. 8)  
 
Applicant submitted proof that he satisfied his student loan through wage 
garnishment and recently settled the outstanding balance. (Gx. 2, 12) In his Answer, 
Applicant states that by satisfying his student loans, he has “an additional $800 a month 
income.” He further states that “I am in the process of contacting and reaching 
settlements with all admitted debts.” (Gx. 2) He did not submit evidence of any further 
debt repayment or financial counseling. He admits 15 of the 16 SOR debts totaling over 
$25,000. The only SOR debt that he denies owing is the student loan debt.2 (Gx. 2) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
                                                          
2 Applicant disputes the judgment for $2,134 alleged in ¶ 1.a, but presented no documentation to 
substantiate his dispute. 
 
4 
 
 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.4 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s long history of not paying his financial 
obligations and accumulation of over $25,000 in delinquent debt raises this concern. 
This evidence also establishes the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
                                                          
3 See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises 
regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
maintenance of a security clearance.”) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)).  
 
4 See generally Kaplan v. Conyers, et al., 2013 U.S. App. LEXIS 17278 at ** 23-24, 40-51 (Fed. 
Cir. Aug. 20, 2013) (federal courts will generally defer to the predictive judgments made by responsible 
officials charged with determining the eligibility of an applicant for a security clearance).  
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant may mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one 
or more of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating 
conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 Applicant has satisfied one of the SOR debts, namely his student loan debt. He 
receives some credit under AG ¶ 20(d) for settling and paying this debt. However, the 
mitigating value of such debt resolution is undercut by the fact that Applicant defaulted 
on the debt in 2007 and only started to repay it after his pay was garnished. 
Furthermore, despite promising seven years ago, during the SAP background interview, 
to address his delinquent accounts, five delinquent debts for over $8,000 that were 
discussed at that interview remain unresolved. Applicant then accumulated an 
additional $16,000 in delinquent debt, and his delinquent debts now total over $25,000. 
Applicant presented no evidence that, despite $650 in monthly disposable income, he 
has attempted to address these debts. He also provided no evidence of having received 
financial counseling. He blames his current financial situation on purported matters 
beyond his control. Yet, the record evidence reflects that Applicant’s financial situation 
is a direct result of his voluntary assumption of financial obligations that were apparently 
beyond his financial means. Therefore, the favorable evidence of student loan 
repayment does not mitigate the concerns raised by Applicant’s long history of financial 
irresponsibility. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16, and only the following warrants discussion: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA and continues throughout the security 
clearance process. An applicant should disclose any potential derogatory information. 
However, the omission of material, adverse information standing alone is not enough to 
establish that an applicant intentionally falsified. An omission is not deliberate if the 
person genuinely forgot the information requested, inadvertently overlooked or 
misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the information did not need to be 
reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.5 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his responses to the relevant questions on his 
2011 SCA regarding his adverse financial history. Applicant’s claim that he was 
unaware of his delinquent accounts, other than his student loan debt, is not credible. He 
had been made aware of five delinquent debts during his SAP background interview 
and, as of the close of the record, the same five debts remained unresolved. Yet, 
Applicant did not list these five delinquent debts on his 2011 SCA.  
 
 Furthermore, a credit report accessed just two weeks after Applicant submitted 
his SCA reflects numerous delinquent accounts, many in collection status or seriously 
past due. It is unreasonable that Applicant was genuinely unaware of these delinquent 
accounts when he filled out his 2011 SCA. He had previously been questioned about 
his omission of delinquent debts on a previous SCA and had been under financial 
distress since 2001. Under such circumstances, Applicant’s claim that, at the time he 
                                                          
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
7 
 
 
filled out his 2011 SCA, he was unaware that he had several reportable delinquent 
debts, other than his student loan debt, is simply not credible.6  
 
 As for Applicant’s disclosure of the student loan debt, such disclosure does not 
mitigate his deliberate falsification. Applicant knew when he submitted his 2011 SCA 
that the Government was already aware of his delinquent student loan. Also, in 
disclosing the student loan debt, Applicant attempted to place the adverse information in 
the light most favorable to maintain his clearance.  
 
 Accordingly, I find that AG ¶ 16(a) applies. After carefully reviewing all the 
mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 17 and taking into account Applicant’s continued denial of 
responsibility, I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).7 I specifically considered Applicant’s work as a defense 
contractor for the past 12 years and that he has held a security clearance since 2003. I 
also took into account the maturity he exhibited in voluntarily seeking and being 
awarded custody of his older child. However, he has a long track record of financial 
irresponsibility and falsified his recent SCA. Both of these matters raise significant 
doubts about his continued eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):            AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:          For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:               Against Applicant 
                                                          
6 The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.b that Applicant deliberately falsified his 2005 SCA by failing to disclose 
his delinquent student loan and the five debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.l – 1.p. I find that Applicant’s explanation 
for said omission credible and reasonable. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 2.b is decided in Applicant’s favor.   
 
7 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
