 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11–12385
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s drug use is not recent and not likely to recur. The security concerns
raised by his use of illegal drugs are mitigated. His request for a security clearance is
granted.
Statement of the Case
On April 13, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background investigation,
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued Applicant interrogatories  intended to1
clarify or augment information obtained by investigators. Based on Applicant’s
responses to interrogatories and the results of his background investigation, DOD
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six documents (Items 1 - 6) proffered in4
support of the Government’s case.
 Ecstasy is chemically known as methylenedioxymethanphetamine. It has been illegal since 1988, and it is5
on the list of controlled dangerous substances. See www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/schedules.
2
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information.2
On February 14, 2013, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed at Guideline H (Drug
Involvement).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without3
a hearing. On June 25, 2013, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material
(FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on July 1, 2013, and was4
notified that he had 30 days to file a response to the FORM. The record closed after
Applicant failed to submit any additional information within the time allowed. The case
was assigned to me on September 3, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged (FORM, Item 1) that Applicant used
ecstasy,  once in February 2008, and weekly between December 2008 and May 20095
(SOR 1.a); and that he used ectsasy after he had been granted a security clearance in
February 2007 (SOR 1.b). Applicant admitted these allegations, but claimed that he has
not used any illegal drugs since 2009. (FORM, Item 4) In addition to the facts
established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 30 years old and works as a financial analyst for a large defense
contractor. In 2005, after earning a bachelor’s degree, he worked for a large retail
company before being hired by his current employer in July 2006. From May 2008 until
December 2008, Applicant worked for a smaller company doing the same work until he
returned to his current employer in December 2008. In February 2007, Applicant
received a DOD Secret clearance. In May 2009, he received a Top Secret clearance;
however, in December 2009, his request for access to Sensitive Compartmented
Information (SCI) was denied and his DOD clearance was revoked. That adverse action
was taken because of his illegal drug use. (FORM, Items 5 and 6)
When Applicant submitted his eQIP in April 2011, he disclosed the information
presented in the SOR. The information about his drug use was discussed in a June
2009 subject interview during a previous background investigation, as well as in a July
2011 subject interview during his most recent background investigation. According to
the June 2009 interview, Applicant listed that his ecstasy use took place between
February and April 2008. However, the same summary of interview also stated that his
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
3
last use of ecstasy occurred in May 2009 (“three weeks ago from the date of this
interview”). Applicant explained in his April 2011 eQIP and July 2011 interview that he
used ecstasy once in February 2008 just to try it. He also stated that he used the drug
between 10 and 12 times between December 2008 and May 2009, and that his drug
use stemmed from his grief over the death of a cousin to whom he was very close.
(FORM, Items 4 - 6).
Applicant has stated in his response to interrogatories and in his Answer, both of
which were submitted with notarized signatures, his intent not to use any illegal drugs in
the future. The record does not reflect any illegal drug use or other misconduct by
Applicant since May 2009. He has been in a committed relationship since 2010, and he
has developed new interests, such as travel, with his girlfriend with whom he cohabits.
Applicant has been continuously employed since April 2005, and has been promoted by
his current employer multiple times. He avers that he has a renewed commitment to his
career and to living a mature, drug-free lifestyle, and that he understands use of ecstasy
was a mistake. (FORM, Items 4 and 6)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
 Directive, E3.1.14.8
 Directive, E3.1.15.9
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).11
4
reliable information on which DOHA based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it8
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  9
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
the applicant to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to10
such information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust
and confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
nation’s interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information in favor of the Government.11
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant illegally used ecstasy, a controlled substance, once in February 2008,
and between 10 and 12 times from December 2008 until May 2009. His drug use
occurred while he held a DOD security clearance he first received in February 2007.
This information raises a security concern articulated at AG ¶ 24, as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
5
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition)) and 25(g) (any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance). 
Applicant used illegal drugs after he was first granted a security clearance. The
summary of a subject interview from a previous investigation in 2009 shows that he
disclosed that drug use when applying for a Top Secret clearance and eligibility for SCI
access. That application was denied because of his drug use. He also disclosed his use
of ecstasy when he again applied for a security clearance in 2011. He has not used
drugs or engaged in any other misconduct in more than four years. Applicant’s
responses to DOD interrogatories and to the SOR constitute notarized statements of his
intent to abstain from future drug use and an understanding that he will lose his
clearance if he repeats his past misconduct. Applicant is in a committed relationship that
began in 2010, and he has developed new, more mature personal interests conducive
to a sober, responsible lifestyle.
All of the foregoing supports application of the following AG ¶ 26 mitigating
conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
      (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;
      (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
      (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
On balance, I conclude the record shows that Applicant’s drug use will not recur.
He has mitigated the security concerns raised by the Government’s information.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 30 years old, has
been promoted multiple times by his employer, and lives a stable and mature lifestyle
with his long-time girlfriend. His involvement with illegal drugs occurred over a relatively
brief period of time more than four years ago. Applicant’s improved personal and
professional circumstances make it unlikely his drug use will recur. His intent to abstain
from future drug use is supported by an understanding, born of the 2009 revocation of
his earlier clearance, that he will again lose his clearance should he relapse. A fair and
commonsense assessment of this record shows the Government’s security concerns
are mitigated.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.                                                                              
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
