 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12437 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 24, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 20, 2013, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 23, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 9, 2013. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 29, 2013. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and did not offer any exhibits. The record was held open until September 12, 
2013, to provide Applicant an opportunity to present exhibits, which he did. They are 
marked AE A through K. They were admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 10, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.g. He denied the 
remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He is a high school graduate. He is twice divorced and 
remarried to his first wife. He has five grown children. He has worked for his current 
employer, a federal contractor, since 2010. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulties when he was laid off from his job in 
October 2008, and his wife was laid off from her job six weeks later. His wife was 
unemployed for three to four months. Applicant was unemployed until December 2009. 
He was hired as a temporary employee by a federal contractor. He worked in that 
capacity until approximately October 2010. He changed employers in November 2010. 
He was diagnosed with serious health issues in late 2010, and on January 4, 2011, he 
had surgery. Applicant’s health issues were emotionally consuming. His unemployment, 
his wife’s unemployment, and his health issues impacted his finances. During this 
period of time, he and his wife prioritized which bills to pay. They paid their mortgage 
and other household bills, but other bills they delayed paying because they did not have 
the money. When they were both unemployed they had no income, but he received 
unemployment benefits. Applicant’s annual gross salary before he was laid off was 
approximately $44,000. It is now approximately $52,000.2  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($727) was for a credit card. Applicant stated that the 
creditor agreed to settle the debt for $541. He provided proof that he made three 
payments of $187 in December 2012, January 2013, and February 2013 to satisfy the 
debt.3 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,965) is a medical debt that Applicant disputes. 
Applicant had surgery, and his primary medical insurer paid $62,921 of the $64,887 bill. 
His secondary insurer was to pay the remainder. Applicant has been in communication 
with the secondary insurer to resolve the debt. The secondary insurer is disputing its 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 19-28, 53-57; GE 1. 
 
3Tr. 28-31, 58-62; GE 3; AE D, F, G, J, K. 
 
 
3 
 
 
obligation to pay because it claims the primary insurer paid more than it would have on 
the original claim. Applicant has a legitimate dispute.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($443) is for cable television service. The creditor claimed 
Applicant did not return the cable box. Applicant stated he returned the cable box in the 
prepaid box provided to him. The cable box is useless to Applicant with his current 
service. He got tired of disputing the debt and settled it.5 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($731) is for a credit card. Applicant stated he settled the 
debt for $458 in December 2012. He provided proof of the payment.6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,820) is for a credit card. Applicant began a plan to 
repay the debt in 2011 with monthly payments of $50. He stated he continues to make 
the payments. He provided some proof of payments.7 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($374) is a store account debt. Applicant stated he settled 
the debt with the creditor for $205 in December 2013. He provided proof of the 
payment.8 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,765) is for delinquent homeowner association fees. 
Applicant stopped paying this expense when he became unemployed. He has had a 
repayment plan since November 2011 and has been making payments of $100 
monthly. He provided documents to show he has made timely monthly payments 
totaling $2,500 on the payment plan.9 
 
 Applicant has been selected as employee-of-the-quarter twice in the past year. 
He is always on time for work and stays late when needed. He has never received a 
complaint about his work.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
4 Tr. 31-36; GE 3. 
 
5 Tr. 36-40; GE 3; AE D, E.  
 
6 Tr. 40-41; AE D, H. 
 
7 Tr. 41-46; GE 3 at page 9-10. 
 
8 Tr. 45-46; AE D. 
 
9 Tr. 46-53; GE 3 at pages 14, 21, GE 4; AE C. 
 
10 Tr. 63-64. 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had seven delinquent debts, totaling approximately $7,800, that he was 
unable or unwilling to pay. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because Applicant’s debts are recent, and he is still 
resolving some of them. Applicant attributed his history of financial problems to a long 
period of unemployment for himself, three to four months of unemployment for his wife, 
and his serious medical issues. These things were beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant made efforts to make payments on some of his bills after he 
went back to work. He also established payment plans. He did this before he received 
the SOR. Applicant acted responsibly when he went back to being employed full time. 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant is paying his bills and has settled or is addressing his remaining debts. 
His wife is working. It appears his financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
applies. Applicant initiated payments on some of his debts before he received the SOR. 
He settled some of the debts and has payment plans for others. AG ¶ 20(d) applies 
because he initiated good-faith efforts to repay his delinquent debts. Applicant disputes 
the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. He has a primary and a secondary insurer. The 
secondary insurer is supposed to pay what the primary does not. It refuses to do so 
because it determined it would not have paid the amount the primary paid. Applicant is 
attempting to resolve this debt and indicated the reason he pays for a secondary insurer 
is to pay what the primary does not. Applicant has a legitimate dispute and is attempting 
to resolve it. AG ¶ 20(e) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
7 
 
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He had a long period of unemployment. His wife was 
unemployed for three to four months during his period of unemployment. He also had 
serious medical issues. These factors impacted his finances. He and his wife prioritized 
what bills to pay. Prior to receiving the SOR, Applicant negotiated settlements on some 
of his debts, and he is resolving others through payment plans. He has a legitimate 
dispute with his secondary insurer on a large medical debt. Applicant has acted 
responsibly in resolving his financial problems. I found Applicant credible and believe he 
will follow through and continue to pay all of his delinquent debt. Applicant’s finances 
are not a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
