1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-12615
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 9, 2013
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on May 12, 2011. (Government Exhibit 1.) On March 25, 2013, the Department
of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) concerning Applicant. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 22, 2013, and requested a
decision without a hearing before an administrative judge. (Answer.) Department
Counsel subsequently requested that the case be converted to a hearing, pursuant to
Paragraph E3.1.7, Additional Procedural Guidance, Enclosure 3 of the Directive.
(Transcript (Tr.) 9.) 
2
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 13, 2013. This case was
assigned to me on June 25, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 28, 2013. I convened the hearing as
scheduled on July 24, 2013.Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 1
through 10, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf,
called one additional witness, and submitted Applicant Exhibits A through E, which were
also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing on August
6, 2013. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 38 and married. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks
to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has engaged in conduct that involves questionable judgment,
lack of candor, dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.
Applicant admitted all of the allegations under this paragraph, except for 1.c. Those
admissions are findings of fact.
Applicant has been married five times to four different women. He married his
first wife twice (Wife 1-2). (Government Exhibit 1 at Item 17; Tr. 68-72.)
Applicant has filed for bankruptcy twice. The first occasion happened in 2001,
during his marriage to Wife 1-2. (SOR 1.g.) According to Applicant, this bankruptcy
occurred because he was a young Marine with a family and too many debts.
(Government Exhibit 2 at 5; Tr. 65-66.)
Applicant served for over fifteen years in the Marine Corps, first as an enlisted
Marine and later as an officer. He deployed twice in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom,
first in 2003 and later from August 2006 through March 2007. (Government Exhibit 2 at
138.) He married Wife 3, who was also a member of the United States military, on April
7, 2007. (Government Exhibit 1 at Item 17.)
Three months later, on July 9, 2007, Applicant was involved in a physical
altercation with his wife. What exactly happened that night is subject to some dispute.
According to Applicant, after returning from Iraq and marrying Wife 3 he discovered
compromising pictures of her with another man on their computer. He testified:
And upon the discovery of these photos, I questioned her about these.
And, of course, presenting these to her, she was struck in a moment of
shock, silence, awestruck, if you will, because of the fact that something,
I’m assuming, that she didn’t want to be, was discovered. And because of
See Tr. 39-42.1
See Government Exhibit 10.2
3
that, I found myself getting into a very heated fight that started out as a
verbal confrontation. However, that verbal confrontation escalated to a
physical assault. I struck her with a slap to her face and pushed her to
the floor, for which the local authorities were called. (Tr. 39.) (Emphasis
supplied.)1
That incident resulted in a three-prong legal process for Applicant. They
consisted of a state criminal court component, a divorce civil court component, and a
military justice component. The progress of each of these proceedings had an effect on
the others.  In addition, since he had different private counsel for each civil case, there
was also a financial aspect to this situation. (Applicant Exhibit A; Tr. 44-45.)
First, he was charged in state criminal court with Inflicting Corporal Injury on
Spouse. (SOR 1.f.) In accordance with a plea agreement he plead guilty and was
sentenced to 36 months of probation, ten days in jail and to participate in a domestic
violence program. (Government Exhibit 2 at 45-46, 106-109, and Exhibit 4; Tr. 48.)
Applicant submitted a progress report from the domestic violence program. (Applicant
Exhibit B.) He did not have a certificate of completion of the program, but there is no
evidence showing that he did not complete the program.
Second, Wife 3 filed for divorce from Applicant. They were divorced in January
2008. As part of the divorce settlement he had to pay his wife’s legal bills. (Government
Exhibit 2 at 82-105, 115-121; Tr. 46-49.)
Third, Applicant also entered the military justice system. (SOR 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e.)
He was charged with several crimes, among which was Assault, under Article 128 of the
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). The specific charge is as follows:
In that [Applicant], U.S. Marine Corps, on active duty, did at or near [home
of record], on or about 9 July 2007, unlawfully strike [Wife 3] by punching
her in the face, chest, and back with a closed fist. (Government Exhibit
2 at 147.) (Emphasis supplied.)2
The Applicant’s case was eventually referred to a general court-martial.
(Government Exhibit 2 at 149.) On May 12, 2008, Applicant entered into a pre-trial
agreement, wherein he agreed to “enter a voluntary plea of GUILTY [to the charge of
assault set forth above], provided the convening authority agrees to withdraw these
charges against me from the pending general court-martial and refers proceedings to
Non-Judicial Punishment within a reasonable period of time.” (Government Exhibit 2 at
146-148.)
Applicant subsequently received Commanding General’s Non-Judicial
Punishment, under Article 15 of the UCMJ (Article 15). The punishment consisted of a
See Government Exhibit 2 at 159-163.3
See Tr. 79-80, 104-105.4
4
punitive letter of reprimand. Applicant plead guilty to the charge of assault, set forth
above, which consisted of Applicant hitting his wife in the face, chest, and back with a
closed fist. (Government Exhibit 2 at 142-143.)
Subsequent to the imposition of non-judicial punishment by his commanding
general, Applicant was subject to a board of inquiry to determine whether he should be
administratively separated for cause from the Marine Corps. He submitted a signed
“Voluntary Waiver of a Board of Inquiry.” In that letter he states, “The basis for this
waiver is my recent non-judicial punishment in which I was found guilty of Article 128. I
admit to committing the misconduct and per my pre-trial agreement have agreed to
waive a Board of Inquiry.” (Government Exhibit 2 at 158.) (Emphasis supplied.)  3
The board of inquiry resulted in Applicant being separated from the Marine Corps
on October 20, 2008, with a discharge “Under Other Than Honorable Conditions,” with
the “Narrative Reason for Separation: Misconduct (Serious Offense).” (Government
Exhibit 2 at 138-139.)
Applicant testified extensively concerning his conduct that night with his wife, as
well as the situation surrounding his pre-trial agreement, Article 15 and separation. He
repeatedly stated during the hearing that he did not hit his wife with a closed fist, as
described in the charge, but slapped her as part of a mutual affray. In essence, he
testified that he agreed to plead guilty to a charge that he did not believe was factually
true in order to allow the deal to go through. This denial must be considered against the
fact that at least three times in writing, and once in person before his commanding
general, he had  agreed that the narrative version of the charge of assault, which
consisted of his striking Wife 3 in the face, chest and back with a closed fist, accurately
set forth his conduct on that night. (Government Exhibit 2 at 11-12; Tr. 44-48, 85-94, 98-
103.)  
Almost immediately after his discharge from the Marine Corps Applicant began
work with a defense contractor (Company One). In order to take the job he had to move
across the country from State A to State B, leaving his children with Wife 1-2 in State A.
(SOR 1.b.) He testified:
So, after a month, they issued a travel card to me. Initially, I knew - - from
having a travel card with the Military - - that the purpose of these travel
cards are to offset expenses that would be incurred by the employee, prior
to travel claims being reconciled after the travel. So, realizing that I did not
have enough money or credit on my own behalf, I made a choice to
purchase an airline ticket to be with my children for Christmas. (Tr. 50.)4
See Tr. 81-82, 105-109.5
See Government Exhibit 2 at 23-24, 41-42.6
5
In January or February 2009 Applicant was called in by his supervisor and
counseled “that the company had a policy that you can’t use it [company credit card] for
personal use.” (Tr. 51.) Applicant further stated in his testimony:
I knew, as I was sitting there with [supervisor], as he was counseling me
for using the credit card to buy that plane ticket, I knew, even then as I
was sitting there, that I was in the hole and needed to use the card again
for a cash advance in order to cover what was going on during that
particular time. . . . But I knew that, if I was going to use that card again - -
which I did use it a second time - - that it had to be within a relative
amount of time close to when I was counseled, or it would look worse than
what it really was. (Tr. 52-53.)5
Applicant’s additional use of Company One’s travel card was discovered, and he
was terminated for cause in June 2009, after only nine months on the job. (Government
Exhibit 3; Tr. 54-55.) 
Because of his punitive discharge, transfer across the country, household
expenses, and the effects of being discharged for cause from Company One, Applicant
found himself in financial straits. In February 2010 he filed for bankruptcy protection
under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. He was discharged in bankruptcy in May
2010. (SOR 1.a.) (Government Exhibit 2 at 26; Tr. 55.) As part of the bankruptcy filing,
Applicant took the required credit counseling course. (Applicant Exhibit C.) Applicant’s
current financial situation appears to be healthy. (Government Exhibits 5, 7, 8, and 9;
Applicant Exhibits D and E.)  Applicant was unemployed for nine months, then began6
work for another defense contractor (Company Two) in March 2010. 
Finally, it was alleged that Applicant had received at least 12 motor vehicle
violations between 2004 and March 2013. He admitted this allegation. He testified that
these incidents occurred because he was careless and negligent about paying
attention. The records indicate he has paid all of his fines. (Government Exhibit 2 at 28-
37; Tr. 82-84.)
Mitigation
Applicant stated that he knows he was emotionally unhealthy from about mid-
2007, when the incident happened with Wife 3, through mid-2009, when he was
discharged from Company One. Applicant further states that he is a changed man, that
he has recommitted himself to his church and has moved forward with a clean slate. (Tr.
54-55, 106.)
The Facility Security Officer at Company Two testified on Applicant’s behalf. She
stated that she believes him to be a leader, a man of integrity and trustworthiness. In
6
addition, she testified that Applicant had not engaged in any security violations and was
up to date with company security requirements. The witness also stated that Applicant
did not show her the SOR, but did explain its contents. She stated that he talked about
the domestic violence incident, his discharge from the Marine Corps, his bankruptcy and
his traffic violations. There was no testimony indicating that Applicant had discussed his
discharge from Company One for misusing a company credit card with her. (Tr. 111-
116.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own common
sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in
making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
7
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct)
The security concerns relating to Personal Conduct are set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.
Applicant’s conduct as set forth under Findings of Fact, above, raises security
concerns under the following disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 16: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected
information;
8
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace;
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rules violations;
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer’s time or resources; and
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s
personal, professional, or community standing. . . .
First of all, based on the record, I find that Applicant’s 2001 and 2010
bankruptcies, and history of motor vehicle violations, have no current security
significance. Accordingly, SOR 1.a, 1.g and 1.h are found for him.
Moving on to the allegations set forth in SOR 1.b through 1.f. It is true, as
Applicant states, that his serious misconduct occurred several years ago. Accordingly,
AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment,” may apply.
In addition, AG ¶ 17 (d) says it can be mitigating where, “the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur.” Applicant states that he has changed his ways and will not engage in such
misconduct again.
The ultimate question in this case is this: if Applicant were faced with a situation
where he had to choose between what he believed was in his best interest, and what
was in the national interest, which would he choose? Based on the record as it exists, I
cannot answer that question with any certainty. Accordingly, I must deny Applicant’s
application for a security clearance.
There are several lingering concerns in this case, based on my consideration of
the entire record, including Applicant’s extensive testimony. First, Applicant has stated
that he has changed his way and has moved on to a successful career with Company
Two. However, his only support for this finding was the testimony of his Facility Security
Officer, which primarily concerned her personal opinion of him, along with the fact that
he apparently followed all security requirements. It did not address his current
employment and how Applicant is viewed by co-workers. The weight of her testimony is
severely damaged by the fact that it appears to be based on incomplete knowledge of
the allegations in the SOR. Applicant also chose not submit any statements from his
supervisors or other co-workers, or any documentation concerning his current job. 
9
Second, Applicant was less than persuasive when discussing the situation
regarding his misuse of Company One’s travel credit card. While he acknowledged that
he should not have engaged in the conduct, I am not convinced that he no longer has
the mind-frame, which to him justified this seriously unethical conduct because he felt
that his “survival” required it. (Tr. 106.)
Third, Applicant’s credibility is seriously undermined by the situation regarding
the true facts surrounding his assault on his wife. There was extensive testimony on this
point, including vigorous cross-examination by Department Counsel. Slapping a woman
in the face and pushing her down on the ground is a far step from punching her in the
face, chest and back with a closed fist. Applicant did one or the other, and based on the
evidence, the latter is more likely. He lied to me, or he lied to his commanding general,
there is no in between.
Once again, I have carefully considered the time since Applicant engaged in this
serious misconduct. However, there simply is insufficient evidence that Applicant
currently shows consistent good judgment or is reliable. It is his burden to show that he
is eligible for security clearance. He has not met it.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guideline E, above, applies here as well. Based on the state of the record, I cannot find
that there have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I
also cannot find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); or that there is no likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
10
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal
conduct. Accordingly, the evidence supports denying his request for a security
clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
