 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-15090 
                                                                      )     
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On May 18, 2011, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 21, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated March 26, 2013, and 
requested that his case be determined on the written record by an administrative judge 
from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The Government compiled 
its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 18, 2013. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 7. By letter dated June 18, 2013, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on 
June 25, 2013. His response was due on July 25, 2013. Applicant did not submit any 
information within the required time period. On August 27, 2013, the case was assigned 
to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). The Guideline F allegations are 
cross-alleged as a security concern under Guideline E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶ 2.a.) 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the four Guideline F allegations and the 
Guideline E allegation, although he denied the summary security concern identified for 
each of the guidelines. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact. (Item 1; 
Item 2.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant. The record evidence includes Applicant’s May 
18, 2011 e-QIP; official investigation and agency records; Applicant’s responses to 
DOHA interrogatories;1 Applicant’s credit report of May 24, 2011; and currency 
transaction reports by casinos. (See Items 4 through 7.) 
 
 Applicant is 72 years old. In 1958, after graduating from high school, he enlisted 
in the U.S. military, where he served for 29 years. In 1987, he was honorably 
discharged. He was then employed by a government contractor from 1987 to 2002. He 
has worked as a coordinator for his current employer, a government contractor, since 
2002. He was first awarded a security clearance in 2001. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant has been married and divorced three times. Two children, now adults, 
were born to his first marriage. He does not pay child support or alimony. (Item 4; Item 
5.) 
 
 Applicant reports the following sources of monthly net income: military retirement, 
$2,700; Social Security, $1,700; and employment with government contractor, $2,200. 
He reports the following monthly expenses: mortgage, including late penalties, and 
utilities, $2,200; groceries and food, $300; transportation (car payments, gas, and 
                                            
1
 Applicant was interviewed under oath by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on July 13, 2011. In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant reviewed the 
investigator’s report and corrected a reference to the name of his third wife. Then, on February 12, 2013, 
Applicant signed a statement that the investigator’s report accurately reflected his interview. (Item 5.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
repairs), $350; insurance (including, auto, medical, and life), $150; payment of current 
and delinquent debts, $600; and luxury expenses, entertainment, etc., $2,000 to $3,000. 
(Item 5.)  
 
 When Applicant was interviewed in July 2011, he told the investigator that he had 
experienced financial problems because of a gambling habit he acquired during his 
military service. After retiring from military service in 1987, Applicant moved to an area 
that permitted legalized gambling, and he acquired work as a government contractor. 
He estimated that from 1987 to 2002, he gambled as much as one-third of his military 
retirement pay and employment pay every week at casinos. (Item 5.) 
 
 From 2002 onward, Applicant reported that his gambling increased. He estimated 
that he currently gambles at least one-third to one-half of his income from his military 
retirement, Social Security, and employment income two or three times a week at 
gambling casinos. Applicant told the investigator that there was an “adverse 
relationship” between his ability to meet his financial obligations and his need to 
gamble, and he did not know if he would incur financial delinquencies in the future. 
(Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant recounted that he had adequate income to meet his monthly mortgage 
payment of $2,500, live comfortably, and meet his financial obligations. However, he 
desired more disposable income for gambling. Feeling that he had nothing to lose, he 
intentionally did not pay his mortgage for several months in order to pressure his 
mortgage lender to modify his loan and reduce his payments. The mortgage lender 
responded to Applicant’s pressure by granting him a loan modification and reducing his 
monthly mortgage payment to $1,400. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant also acknowledged that in the past, he used his credit card and cash 
card to withdraw cash advances for gambling. These accounts have been closed by the 
lenders, and they reflect delinquent debts. (Item 5; Item 6.)   
 
   Applicant identified his need to gamble as “relentless.” He believes he is 
addicted to gambling, and he becomes euphoric at the possibility of winning a high 
amount of money quickly. He was not able to identify an event that might lead him to 
give up gambling. He has not had treatment or counseling for his gambling addiction. 
(Item 5; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he had never discussed his gambling addiction in depth in 
previous security clearance investigations. He explained that he did not believe 
information on his gambling was relevant, and he felt the investigators did not need to 
know about it. (Item 5.) 
 
                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
 
4 
 
 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The facts of this case raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19(i), which reads: 
“compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful attempt to stop 
gambling, ‘chasing losses’ (i.e. increasing the bets or returning another day in an effort 
to get even), concealment of gambling losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or to 
pay gambling debts, family conflict or other problems caused by gambling.”   
 
Applicant acknowledged a gambling addiction and described how it had 
intensified over time. He reported that he currently gambles at least one-third to one-half 
of his income from his military retirement, Social Security, and employment income two 
or three times a week at casinos.  He drew cash from his credit card and bank card 
accounts to finance his gambling, causing the creditors to close the accounts.  When he 
wanted to have more of his income for gambling, he deliberately failed to pay his 
monthly mortgage in order to force his lender into modifying and reducing the amount of 
his monthly payment. When his lender acceded to his demand, he used his increased 
discretionary income for gambling.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s behavior. Two Guideline F mitigating conditions could 
apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s gambling addiction. The behavior 
might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” (AG ¶ 20(a)).  Additionally, 
Applicant’s behavior might be mitigated if he were able to show that he “has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c). 
 
6 
 
 
  Applicant’s addictive gambling began in about 1987, and it continues to this 
day. He has not sought counseling for his addictive behavior, and he acknowledges that 
it could lead to financial delinquencies. Applicant’s unresolved addictive behavior 
continues to raise concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not apply in mitigation in 
Applicant’s case.2 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegation in the SOR raises a security concern under AG ¶ 
16(e), which reads: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities, which, if known, may affect one’s personal, professional, or 
community standing.” 
 
Applicant admitted a gambling addiction which became stronger over time, 
causing him to gamble ever greater amounts of money. He organized his life to support 
his addiction. He withdrew cash advances from his credit card and bank accounts to 
finance his gambling, actions which resulted in his creditors closing those accounts. He 
deliberately failed to pay his home mortgage, even though he could afford to do so, in 
order to force his lender to modify his home mortgage and lower his monthly payment. 
He then used his increase in discretionary income to finance his gambling activities. 
This personal conduct made Applicant vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, and 
duress.  
 
 Several Guideline E mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c) if “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  AG ¶ 17(d) 
might apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to occur.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if “the 
                                            
2 AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(d), 20(e), and 20(f) do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
7 
 
 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” 
 
 Applicant admits a long-standing gambling addition which began in about 1987 
and continues to this day. He has acknowledged his addiction, but he has not sought 
treatment or counseling to alleviate the stressors that cause his behavior. Moreover, he 
has not taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) do not apply in 
mitigation in this case.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 72 
years. He has organized his life around his gambling addiction. He has not sought 
treatment or counseling, even as he has acknowledged that his addiction has grown 
stronger and more demanding over time. He did not discuss his gambling behavior in 
previous security investigations because he did not believe that his addiction was 
relevant.  
 
Applicant states that his gambling addiction has increased over time. His future 
financial stability is uncertain. Additionally, Applicant’s unaddressed gambling addiction 
makes him vulnerable to exploitation and manipulation, raising security concerns about 
his trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guidelines F and E. 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.d.:                Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a.:                                  Against Applicant 
 
                                                         Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
