 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12507 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 11, 2013, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 23, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 9, 2013. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled August 27, 2013. The Government offered exhibits 
 
2 
 
 
(GE) 1 through 6, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, and he offered exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted into evidence. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 5, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.a and admitted the allegation in ¶ 1.b. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He served in the Army from 1985 to 1989, and was 
honorably discharged. He earned a bachelor’s and a master’s degree. Applicant has 
held a security clearance without incident since 1985. He has been employed by the 
same company for 21 years.1  
 
Applicant was married from 1983 to 2000, and has three grown children from the 
marriage. He remarried in 2002. He and his wife planned on adopting a child or two in 
the United States and knew it would be a lengthy process. In 2008, his wife traveled to a 
foreign country on a church mission trip. While there she was approached by a woman 
asking her to adopt her three children. Applicant’s wife contacted her husband and they 
discussed adopting all three children and agreed to do so. They knew the process could 
potentially take years to complete and it would be expensive. They worked with an 
orphanage and paid a little at a time. Applicant traveled to the foreign country three 
times and his wife traveled about eight times over two years. They anticipated the 
process would be completed sometime in 2011. The process was very long and 
complicated. In 2010, the foreign country had a natural disaster. Due to the enormous 
devastation and loss of life, the adoption process was expedited. Although they had 
planned for the children, the sudden expediency of the situation was unexpected. 
Applicant and his wife were given ten days’ notice before the children traveled to their 
new home to live with them. Applicant and his wife incurred additional expenses with 
the children, such as medical costs, that they had not anticipated having at that time. 
Their adopted children are ages 16, 13 and 5 years old.2 
 
 Applicant purchased a principal residence in 2004. In 2005, he took out a line of 
credit on the home so he could repair and refurbish it. His plan was to eventually sell it 
for a profit. He and his wife lived in the home while he completed the repairs. In 2010, 
after he and his wife learned they were going to adopt their children earlier than 
anticipated, they realized this house could not accommodate the size of their new 
family. When Applicant purchased the house, he obtained a mortgage with a low 
adjustable interest rate for seven years. His plan was to sell the house before the 
                                                          
1 GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 25-27, 48-49, 58. 
 
 
3 
 
 
interest rate increased. He attempted to sell the house in 2010, but due to the declining 
real estate market, the house had depreciated, and he was unable to sell it.3  
 
Applicant contacted a realty specialist and a real estate attorney for guidance. He 
was advised that the lender for the first mortgage would not allow a short sale of the 
property if the payments on the mortgage were current. Applicant was current on the 
payments through August 2010. He was advised by his attorney to stop making 
payments and put the house on the market, which he did. He found a buyer and notified 
the mortgage company. In February 2011, the mortgage company agreed to release the 
first mortgage and closed the account for less than the full amount of the mortgage. The 
debt has been released and SOR ¶ 1.a has been resolved.4  
 
 The line of credit debt is reflected in SOR ¶ 1.b. In 2011, Applicant attempted to 
negotiate a settlement with the creditor of this debt. Applicant acknowledged that he still 
owes approximately $75,000 on the debt. He paid $4,800 in 2011 toward the debt when 
he was completing the sale of the house.5 He again attempted to negotiate a settlement 
with the creditor, but has been advised by his attorney to not accept a settlement unless 
the creditor puts it in writing. The creditor gave Applicant a lump-sum offer and an offer 
to pay $50 a month. Applicant’s attorney told him not to accept an offer until there is an 
agreed-upon settlement amount. Applicant did not accept the lump-sum offer. He is 
negotiating with the creditor, but has had difficulty communicating with a live person 
instead of an automatic voice message. He has left messages multiple times asking for 
a person to contact him and provide a settlement offer in writing. Applicant has sufficient 
funds to settle the debt, but his attorney advised him not to pay anything until he has the 
settlement in writing. He continues to leave messages with the creditor advising that he 
is willing to pay and resolve the debt, but needs to speak to someone in person. He 
continues to follow the advice of his attorney, who has told him it could take up to three 
years to resolve.6  
 
Applicant and his wife purchased another house to accommodate their larger 
family. They were able to do so with money he withdrew from his IRA and money 
loaned to them by his wife’s father. They have repaid the loan. He and his wife have no 
other delinquent debts. They incurred about $40,000 in expenses for the adoptions. 
They received some tax deductions for the adoptions. They live within their means. 
They save for retirement. Applicant kept his employer informed of his finances during 
the entire time he was resolving his loan issues.7  
 
 
                                                          
3 Re. 23-25, 27. 
 
4 Tr. 28-30; GE 3 at page 11; AE A, B. 
 
5 GE 3 at page 8. 
 
6 Tr. 30-39, 45-47, 59-62. 
 
7 Tr. 39-44, 49-58, 64; GE 6. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had two delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. I find 
there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant had two delinquent debts associated with mortgages on his home. He 
resolved one debt through a short sale and acknowledges he owes the other debt. He 
has been actively attempting to resolve the debt and has been following the advice of 
his real estate attorney. His financial issues arose when the adoption process for 
Applicant’s children was expedited due to a natural disaster. Applicant needed a bigger 
house to accommodate his new family and he had extra expenses he did not anticipate 
at that time. These were factors that were beyond his control. For the full application of 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
sold his house at a short sale and resolved the first mortgage on it. He acknowledges 
he owes the second loan on the house and has been following the advice of his 
attorney to negotiate a settlement. I find under the circumstances he is acting 
responsibly, and AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant is in a stable financial position, and his finances are under control. He 
sought advice from a real estate attorney when he ran into problems and continues to 
follow his attorney’s guidance. He has attempted to negotiate a settlement with the 
creditor for his second mortgage, but has had difficulty communicating with the 
company. He acknowledges he owes the debt and wants to resolve it, but is following 
the advice of his attorney. The creditor has not provided a settlement amount in writing 
to Applicant to memorialize an offer. Considering that Applicant has had difficulty getting 
a live person to talk to instead of voice mail, it is reasonable and prudent for him to wait 
until he has an offer in writing. I find AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He experienced financial issues with his house when 
the adoption process for his children was expedited and he incurred additional 
expenses. Applicant has responsibly addressed his debts and is pursuing a resolution 
of the remaining debt. His finances are not a security concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
 
7 
 
 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
