 
1 
 
 
                                                            
           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14118 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Diane Schuster, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under the guideline for 
misuse of technology information system. His eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline M (Misuse of 
Technology Information Systems). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a June 14, 2013, response to the SOR, Applicant denied the sole allegation 
raised and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned 
to me on July 25, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on July 26, 2013, setting the hearing for August 13, 2013. The hearing 
 
2 
 
 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (Exs) 1-4. Applicant 
objected to two of the documents, arguing that the documents contained hearsay. The 
Government correctly noted that hearsay is admissible in an administrative proceeding. 
The Government also noted the reliability of the documents due to their creation in the 
regular course of business. I accepted the documents with assurances they would be 
reviewed and afforded appropriate weight after examination. (Transcript (Tr.) at 15-18) 
Applicant gave testimony, introduced three witnesses, and offered one document, which 
was accepted into the record as Ex. A without objection. The transcript was received on 
August 21, 2013. Also on August 21, 2013, the Government forwarded one additional 
document from the Applicant, which was accepted without objection as Ex. B. The 
record was then closed.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old senior enterprise management architect. He has 
worked for his present employer for approximately three-and-a-half years. Applicant has 
earned a bachelor’s degree in business administration with a concentration in 
information technology. He is single and has no children.  
 
 From about 2000 to 2010, Applicant worked in the area of information technology 
for a company. The information technology department consisted of Applicant, who was 
the head of the division, and one other individual, the Tier 1 Support Engineer. (Tr. 99) 
For many years Applicant reported to the president. At some point prior to mid-January 
2010, there was a restructuring that led him to report to a vice president of the 
company. (Tr. 45) Until at least November 2009, Applicant regularly provided 
administrative password information and updates to this vice president. (Tr. 48)  
 
Applicant was terminated from his position as Director of Information Technology 
on January 22, 2010. The basis for his dismissal was a poor managerial decision he 
made based on inaccurate data he had been provided. (Tr. 42-43) Applicant believed 
this was an excuse owing to an increasing difference in business viewpoints. (Tr. 81) As 
is customary, he was escorted out of the building that afternoon. The only information 
solicited by his employer for transitional purposes were the passwords to the systems, 
which he previously had provided multiple times and in multiple formats (Tr. 27, 48) 
Applicant believed this request of information to help the company transition to his 
eventual successor was deficient. (Tr. 27) In retrospect, as their former information 
technology director, he finds their lack of protection glaringly deficient.  
 
Applicant further notes that the company failed to follow its usual protocols in 
changing his passwords and other access terms or devices upon his departure. (Tr. 82) 
There was no attempt to block his access to the company’s computer and Internet 
system. There is no evidence that upon his departure or soon thereafter, that a 
replacement or temporary replacement was in position within the information technology 
office to actively preclude Applicant from accessing its systems.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 That weekend, Applicant left for a previously planned vacation abroad. He 
enjoyed the weeklong vacation, then returned home on Monday, February 1, 2010. (Tr. 
37). Applicant received several calls from three former colleagues, two senior consulting 
engineers and the Tier 1 Support Engineer who worked under Applicant before 
Applicant’s dismissal. (Tr. 62, 64, 75, 88-89) With Applicant dismissed, the Tier 1 
Support Engineer comprised the entire information technology division. (Tr. 99) The  
three former colleagues requested help from Applicant for gaining access to their 
company’s systems. Apparently, some passwords were not working. He assumed they 
were soliciting help with company passwords in order to further the company’s 
business. He knew their work necessitated access through various passports and 
firewalls. (Tr. 54-57, 88-89) These employees were accustomed to going to Applicant 
for such help and continued to do so despite his termination. (Tr. 40)  
 
Feeling his one month severance package constructively retained his loyalty, if 
not his services, for one-month post-termination, he offered answers to their questions. 
(Tr. 33, 40) He felt that their solicitation of help from him authorized him to provide 
assistance. (Tr. 61-62, 88-90) He credibly stated, “I believe(d) the moment a 
representative from (the company) contacted me for aid they were authorizing me to 
help them.” (Tr. 74) Calls regarding the passwords continued despite his initial attempt 
to help.  
 
On the morning of Tuesday, February 2, 2010, Applicant wondered whether the 
company had changed administrator passwords after his departure, an appropriate 
measure the company would regularly have taken. To test the system and see if the 
passwords had changed, he remotely accessed the business’ computer system on his 
personal laptop from home, using a variety of passwords and by-passing safeguards in 
a virtual computer application to which he had access while working for the company. 
(Tr. 90) He was not explicitly asked to do so by the engineers or IT professionals, but he 
thought it might reveal a problem. (Tr. 61-62) He did not access any information while 
he was in the system. (Tr. 67, 69) All he did was “authenticate that (he was) logged in. 
And then (he) shut it back off.” (Tr. 66-67)  
 
In accessing the system, Applicant found that it was working as before his 
termination. (Tr. 70-72). This suggested to Applicant that the company had neglected to 
implement “an adequate transition plan in order to make sure (his) response, (his) role 
was covered and (his) responsibilities were addressed by the internal staff there.” (Tr. 
89) Regardless, the engineers continued to have difficulty using the passwords. (Tr. 60-
61) He saw no reason to tell these individuals that he had double checked the system 
from home. He now laments this failure. (Tr. 61, 67) Accessing the system required 
considerably more than simply applying passwords. (Tr. 65-66) Still curious as to what 
the problem was, he accessed the system a second time to see if he could identify their 
problem. (Tr. 70-72) With no problems to note with the system itself, he opined that the 
engineers and his former Tier 1 Support Engineer lacked the technological competency 
to “understand the architecture of the system.” (Tr. 64; see also Tr. 88-89)  
 
 
4 
 
 
On Thursday, February 4, 2010, the Vice President of Service Delivery 
messaged Applicant via a social media computer service. This particular vice president 
was the “number two” officer at the company. (Tr. 78) This was a different vice president 
from the executive to whom he formerly reported. This vice president wrote: “This is a 
confidential matter, but you really need to call me as soon as possible,” followed by the 
executive’s first name and a telephone number. (Ex. A at 1) 
 
Applicant promptly called his former employer’s Vice President, as requested. 
They discussed the password situation. Applicant gave his former superior pertinent 
passwords and other access credential information. (Tr. 78) Later that day, the Vice 
President sent another message: “Evidently, we tried that (password) with no luck. Tried 
again just a few minutes ago. If you can think of ANYTHING, please let me know.” 
(emphasis in the original, Ex. A at 2)    
 
 Before Applicant saw the Vice President’s second missive, he received a 
February 4, 2010, letter by expedited delivery from a law firm. (Ex. 4) It was delivered 
on, at the earliest, Friday, February 5, 2010, possibly as late as Saturday, February 6, 
2010. (Tr. 97) The letter instructed Applicant to direct any communications toward his 
former employer to the attorney who wrote the letter:  
 
                  It has come to our client’s attention that you have attempted to access 
(the company’s) computer systems remotely and without authorization 
on more than one occasion. Moreover, you have additionally 
manipulated, destroyed, or stolen files contained on those systems 
without permission. Your actions are illegal and you must cease and 
desist from such conduct immediately. (Ex. 4) 
 
The letter continued by noting, “(s)pecifically, (the company) has evidence that 
on several occasions, including as recently as February 3, 2010, you gained or 
attempted to gain access to (the company’s) secure computer systems (remotely).” (Ex. 
4) The letter never clarifies whether Applicant was successful in gaining access or 
whether it only had evidence of an attempt to access their system. If the company did 
obtain the evidence it alleged, it would suggest that at least one or more of the 
passwords he provided was correct. (Tr. 63-64)  
 
The letter states that the company “has evidence that (Applicant) deleted at least 
one file from a server desktop and caused other damage to (the company’s) computer 
systems.” (Ex. 4) Attached to the letter is a printout showing Applicant’s laptop had 
successfully accessed the company’s system on Tuesday, February 2, 2010, at 8:29 
a.m., which is consistent with his testimony. No other evidence was demonstrated. The 
alleged “manipulated, destroyed, or stolen files” were not identified. (See, e.g., Tr. 93-
94)   
 
Eventually, Applicant met with the business’ legal representative. The situation 
was discussed. An allegedly lost or deleted file was never identified, nor was there any 
evidence showing or suggesting Applicant had “touched, damaged, or altered any kind 
 
5 
 
 
of any file.” (Tr. 86-87) Then defamation of Applicant’s character was discussed. (Tr.85) 
Ultimately, the matters were dropped. (Tr. 85) 
 
The Executive Vice President and partner of the company during Applicant’s 
tenure stated that he found Applicant to be thorough, highly skilled, and ethical. (Tr. 
104-105) He has no concerns regarding Applicant’s ability to protect classified material. 
(Tr. 105) A former colleague at the company serving as a senior consultant described 
Applicant as having an excellent work ethic, noting, “(Applicant) would constantly go 
past what was required of him to contribute back to (the company). Even when he was 
heavily involved in projects, he still would make time to contribute back to the 
organization he worked for.” (Ex. B)  The former service delivery manager at the 
company up to 2009 takes credit for the company finding and hiring Applicant. He finds 
Applicant to be highly ethical and dependable, noting that he would trust him with 
classified information. (Tr. 110-112) He does not believe Applicant harbors any 
animosity toward the company. (Tr. 112) He has a “very hard time believing” the 
allegations against Applicant. (Tr. 112-113) The Chief Technology Officer during 
Applicant’s tenure at the company stated that he spoke with Applicant directly about the 
facts at issue. Like Applicant, he has moved on to new work. He fully believes 
Applicant’s explanation -- that the allegations must be based on a misunderstanding 
since there is no evidence that the company’s system was actually damaged. (Tr. 119-
120) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “(a)ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and derived 
from the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:   
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security 
concerns about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into 
question the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, 
networks, and information. Information Technology Systems include all 
related computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered the following as potentially relevant: 
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology 
system or component thereof; 
 
(b) illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or 
denial of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an 
information technology system; 
 
 
7 
 
 
  (c) use of any information technology to gain unauthorized access to 
another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
 
  (e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
 
  (f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, 
software, or media to or from any information technology system 
without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines 
or regulations. 
 
After being dismissed, Applicant accessed his former employer’s information 
system on two occasions. He did so without explicit managerial authorization to do so. 
Consequently, I find that AG ¶¶ 40(a) and (c) apply with regard to his accessing the 
company’s information system.  
 
Applicant’s former employer alleged in vague terms that Applicant had 
maliciously removed, damaged, or otherwise manipulated the company’s information 
system. Applicant denies this allegation. He credibly testified that he simply accessed 
the information system, then exited it, in order to see if the passwords worked or if any 
alterations had been made that would be impeding his former colleagues’ access to the 
system. He similarly testified that when he met with the company’s counsel, the only 
evidence provided by his former company suggesting wrongdoing was his remote 
access of the company’s information system on one occasion. Vague allusions to other 
wrongdoing were undefined and unsubstantiated. The company dropped the matter 
once Applicant asserted that their allegations could constitute defamation. Lacking 
evidence from investigators or the company rebutting Applicant’s argument, I find that 
the Applicant did not act in bad faith when he accessed the company’s information 
system. I further note the absence of evidence showing he did more than enter the 
system without explicit authorization. I find none of the above disqualifying conditions 
apply to allegations asserting Applicant performed malignant actions while in the 
company’s system. 
 
I also have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41. I 
considered AG ¶ 41(a) relevant: 
 
so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 
    Applicant’s actions to help his former colleagues occurred in February 2010, over 
three-and-a-half years ago. Since that time he has been gainfully employed in a similar 
capacity and working with similarly protected systems. He maintains a reputation among 
former colleagues as being highly ethical, loyal, and skilled. The cease and desist letter 
 
8 
 
 
regarding his accessing his former company’s information system is the only evidence 
suggesting inappropriate behavior during Applicant’s career. However, it is notable that 
Applicant only got involved with his former colleagues because it was apparent his 
former assistant was not prepared to handle the transition after Applicant’s termination, 
and because he believed his one-month, post-termination salary payments obligated 
him to assist the company to some degree during that period.  
 
Applicant’s demonstration of loyalty to his former employer is consistent with 
assessments made by his former colleagues. He now understands that he could have 
insulated himself from criticism or attack had he first sought and received managerial 
authorization to help his former colleagues. However, it is understandable how he might 
have felt he was authorized to access the system if it furthered his attempts to address 
unsolicited requests for help from his former assistant, senior staff, and later, a vice 
president. Regardless, since then, he has continued to impress colleagues with his 
reliability, ethics, and talent; he handles his responsibilities professionally and without 
incident. There is nothing to suggest that Applicant intentionally sought to harm the 
company’s information system, or that his version of the facts is incorrect. In light of 
these considerations, I find it unlikely that a similar scenario will ever recur and again 
raise security concerns. AG ¶ 41(a) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my comments under the three above-referenced guidelines in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some 
warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old senior enterprise management architect who has 
worked for his present employer for about three-and-a-half years. He has earned a 
bachelor’s degree and is single. The incidents giving rise to the allegations occurred in 
early 2010, nearly a decade after Applicant first started working for the former employer. 
By the time, Applicant was in his late 30s and he had established a reputation for 
loyalty, ethics, and skill.  
 
Shortly after being terminated from his job as director of information technology 
in January 2010, Applicant was solicited by three former colleagues, including his 
former support engineer, who apparently had been left alone in the information 
technology division after Applicant’s dismissal. They needed to check their passwords 
because the passwords they had were not working. When Applicant’s initial aid did not 
 
9 
 
 
help, he accessed and immediately withdrew from his former company’s information 
system remotely in order to help his former colleagues. Any concerns he may have had 
regarding helping these people without explicit authorization seemed allayed when his 
assistance was solicited by a company vice president.  
 
Although a letter from the company’s counsel waged unspecified allegations 
against Applicant concerning the theft, removal, or other mischief related to the system, 
it only provided evidence showing that Applicant had once accessed its system after his 
termination. Applicant credibly testified that when he met with the company’s 
representative, no evidence of wrongdoing was provided or described. Rather, the 
company’s representative apparently backed off when Applicant mentioned the potential 
for a defamation suit against the company. To date, nothing more has come from the 
company’s allegation. 
 
Since that time, Applicant has continued in his chosen career without further 
incident. Applicant now understands what he believed to be helping former colleagues 
was technically an unauthorized entry into his former employer’s information system. 
For this mistake, Applicant is thoroughly contrite. There is no documentary evidence 
showing he purposefully or negligently damaged the information system, nor that he 
removed any files. While his entry into the system may have been initially unauthorized, 
he did not do it maliciously. He did it out of a sense of loyalty, to the company and his 
former colleagues. There is no direct evidence of actual harm.  I am confident that he 
will not again attempt to access secure systems without explicit authorization. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concern arising under the use 
of information technologies systems guideline (Guideline M). Clearance is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
