 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13730 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists eight delinquent or charged-off 
debts, totaling $78,484. She did not provide any documentation showing attempts to 
establish payment plans or to resolve her delinquent debts. She did not make any 
payments to address any of her SOR debts. She failed to make sufficient progress 
resolving her financial problems. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 5, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 3) On May 22, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On June 6, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived her 
right to a hearing. (Item 2) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated June 17, 2013, was provided to her on August 5, 2013. She was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation.1 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
September 26, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, she admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-
1.h; however, she wrote the amount owed in SOR ¶ 1.g may be less than the amount 
indicated in SOR ¶ 1.g ($68,859). (Item 2) Her admissions are accepted as findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old custodial lead worker, who has worked for the same 
employer since March 2011.3 She married in 1983, and she has an adult son living with 
her. From May 1994 to February 2010, she worked as a property manager for an 
apartment complex. She was unemployed from February 2010 to March 2011. There is 
no evidence of arrests or convictions. There is no evidence of use of illegal drugs or 
alcohol abuse.  
 
Financial considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists eight delinquent or charged-off debts, totaling $78,484, as 
follows: ¶ 1.a is a medical debt for $232; ¶ 1.b is a clothing store debt for $859; ¶ 1.c is 
a clothing store debt for $1,660; ¶ 1.d is a bank debt for $1,571; ¶ 1.e is a bank debt for 
$7,409; ¶ 1.f is a collection debt for $1,620; ¶ 1.g is a bank debt for $64,859 resulting 
from a trailer that was repossessed in 2007; and ¶ 1.h is a collection debt for $274. Her 
credit reports indicate several debts became delinquent from 2007 to 2009.  
 
                                            
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated July 30, 2013, and Applicant’s receipt is dated August 5, 
2013. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after her receipt to submit 
information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s August 4, 2011 SF 86 is the basis for the facts in this 
paragraph. (Item 5) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s SF 86, credit reports, July 26, 2011 Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), and SOR response, consistently describe her 
financial problems and delinquent debts. In late 2009, Applicant’s husband’s 
employment hours were reduced, and they were unable to make payments on some of 
their debts. (OPM PSI, Item 4) As additional causes of her financial plight, Applicant 
cited her unemployment, inability to obtain full-time employment, and “bad household 
budgeting of the family income and spending on items not really needed such as 
camera, TVs, etc.” (OPM PSI at 4, Item 4 at 4)    
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement shows her monthly gross salary is 
$2,940; her family’s monthly gross salary is $4,172; and her family’s monthly net 
remainder is $489. (Item 4)   
 
The FORM repeatedly emphasized that Applicant had an opportunity to describe 
or explain what she had done to resolve her delinquent debts and suggested that she 
provide supporting documentation from her creditors. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. There is no documentary evidence of any payments to SOR creditors, 
correspondence to or from creditors, or debt disputes. There is no evidence of progress 
resolving her SOR debts. 
 
The July 30, 2013 DOHA letter conveying the FORM to Applicant invited her to 
“submit any material you wish the Administrative Judge to consider or to make any 
objections you may have as to the information in the file.” Applicant did not provide any 
response to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, OPM 
PSI, and SOR response. The record establishes Applicant has eight delinquent or 
charged-off debts, totaling $78,484; however, one debt may be of a lower amount. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained the Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving her delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions. Applicant’s unemployment, lack of full-time 
employment, and the reduction in her husband’s income are all financial conditions 
largely beyond Applicant’s control; however, she did act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Her largest debt, which resulted from the repossession of her trailer in 
2007, occurred prior to her unemployment. Her personal financial statement shows a 
monthly family remainder of $489 per month, and she had sufficient financial resources 
to have at least settled and paid her smaller debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($232) and 1.h ($274)).  
 
Applicant deserves substantial positive credit for honestly admitting responsibility 
for her delinquent debts. She receives additional credit for candidly citing her bad 
household budgeting of the family income and unnecessary spending as one of several 
causes of her financial problems.  
 
Applicant did not describe any payments to any SOR creditors in the last two 
years. She did not provide any documentation, such as a checking account statement, 
photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that she paid or made any 
payments to any SOR creditors. There is no evidence of financial counseling, 
correspondence to or from creditors, or debt disputes. There is no documented 
evidence of progress resolving her SOR debts. She did not provide documentation 
proving that she maintained contact with her SOR creditors, and she did not provide any 
documentation showing her attempts to negotiate payment plans with her SOR 
                                                                                                                                            
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
creditors.5 There is insufficient evidence that her financial problems are being resolved 
and are under control.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant’s 
finances were adversely affected when her husband’s income declined, she became 
unemployed, and she was unable to obtain full-time employment. These were 
circumstances beyond her control. She has been employed by the same defense 
contractor since 2011, and previously she had stable employment from May 1994 to 
February 2010 as a property manager. There is no evidence of criminal conduct or 
abuse of alcohol or drugs. She supports her company and the Department of Defense. 
There is no evidence of disloyalty or that she would intentionally violate national 
security.   
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a long history of financial problems. She failed to 
mitigate all eight of her delinquent or charged-off debts, totaling $78,484. She could 
have made greater progress resolving and documenting resolution of her delinquent 
SOR debts. She could have settled and paid the two debts that are less than $300 
                                            
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
each. She did not provide documentary proof that she made any payments to any of her 
SOR creditors. Her failure to establish her financial responsibility shows lack of 
judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 15. Documented financial 
progress is necessary to fully mitigate security concerns. 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to 
classified information at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
