 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12657 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 1, 2013, the Department of Defense issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was undated. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On June 26, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
 
2 
 
 
it was received on July 10, 2013. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not provide 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on September 3, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f and admitted the remaining 
allegations with explanations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in February 2012. He 
has been employed by a federal contractor since June 2011. He served in the Army 
from 1990 to 2010 and was honorably discharged upon his retirement. He was 
deployed to Iraq for four months in 2003, for 12 months from January 2005 to January 
2006, and for 15 months from July 2007 to October 2008. Applicant has been married 
since 2005. He has two children ages eight and four.1 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on June 21, 2011. In response to Section 22.a, which required Applicant to 
disclose if he had been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal, or any other type 
of law enforcement officer in the last seven years, he stated “no.” In his Answer to the 
SOR he stated: “I ADMIT. No excuses, I should have read the question thoroughly.”2 
 
In response to Section 22.b, which required Applicant to disclose if he had ever 
been charged with any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs, he responded “no.” 
Applicant was arrested on May 8, 2009, for speeding and driving under the influence of 
alcohol. He was charged on January 1, 2000, for drunk and disorderly conduct. He was 
charged on June 13, 1998, for drunk driving. He was charged on July 4, 1997, for public 
intoxication.3 Applicant did not disclose any of this information. In his Answer to the 
SOR he stated: 
 
I ADMIT-however the question asked from 7 to 10 years back. Again on 
April 14, 1992, I do not have any knowledge of the charge of wrongful 
possession/use of marijuana. I DO NOT USE DRUGS. The other 
occurrences are not in the range of the 7 to 10 year timeline with the 
exception of the charge dated May 8, 2009.4 
 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 6. 
 
2 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
3 SOR ¶ 1.b.5 alleges on April 14, 1992, Applicant was arrested for wrongful possession/use of 
marijuana. Applicant has consistently denied that he was arrested for or used illegal drugs. There is no 
evidence in the record to support this allegation.  
 
4 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
3 
 
 
 In response to Section 24.c, which required Applicant to disclose if in the past 
seven years he had received counseling or treatment as a result of his use of alcohol, 
he answered “no.” Applicant sought alcohol treatment from the Army in 2009. In his 
Answer to the SOR he stated: “I ADMIT. The counseling I received from the United 
States Army was assumed as having internal help within the organization and was not 
recognized as help from a civilian company or agency. Once my military career ended, I 
assumed all documents were voided.” 
 
 In response to Section 25.a, which required Applicant to disclose if he had ever 
had his background investigated and/or a security clearance granted. Applicant 
answered “no.” Applicant was granted a Secret security clearance by the Army 
Personnel Security Clearance Facility in September 1994. In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated: “I ADMIT. I had filled out 2 questionnaires in the year 2011[,] and I did 
not mean to falsify any material.”5 
 
 In response to Section 25.b, which required Applicant to disclose if he had ever 
had a clearance or access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked; or if he had 
been debarred from government employment, Applicant answered “no.” Applicant failed 
to disclose that his security clearance was revoked in approximately May 2001. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant stated: “I had filled out 2 questionnaires in the year 
2011 and I did not mean to falsify any material.6 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator on August 9, 2011. He 
told the investigator that he had never been arrested for any offense involving alcohol or 
drugs, and he had not been arrested in the past seven years by any type of law 
enforcement official. Applicant was confronted by the investigator with information that 
he had been arrested at least three other times. Applicant then admitted he was 
arrested in May 2009. He stated that he believed at first the charge was reckless 
driving, but after he took two breathalyzers he may have been arrested for driving under 
the influence of alcohol. He did not disclose the May 2009 charge because he was not 
convicted of driving under the influence, but was instead convicted of reckless driving. 
He thought he disclosed the reckless driving offense on the e-QIP. Applicant denied any 
other alcohol or drug-related charges in his background. Applicant failed to disclose the 
June 2000 drunk and disorderly charge; the June 1998 drunk driving charge; and the 
July 1997 public intoxication charge. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated: 
 
 I DENY. I did not falsify these material facts because the DoD investigator 
asked of arrest[s] being made seven years back. I told him about the 
charge dated May 8, 2009, but the other charges were out of the seven 
year timeline.7  
                                                          
5 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
6 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
7 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 During Applicant’s August 2011 interview with a government investigator he 
stated he had never had a security clearance suspended or revoked. Applicant’s 
security clearance was revoked in 2001.8 
 
 Applicant sought alcohol treatment through the Army in 2009. During his August 
2011 interview with a government investigator he stated he had never been involved in 
any form of alcohol counseling or treatment. In his Answer to the SOR, he stated: “I 
ADMIT. Again I thought the counseling was internal help provided to Soldiers in the 
organization and not considered help from a civilian organization.” 
 
 Applicant deliberately and intentionally failed to disclose specific and relevant 
material on his e-QIP and during his background investigation with a government 
investigator.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
8 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
I considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 that could raise a security 
concern and conclude the following has been raised: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his May 2009 alcohol-related arrest and 
his other alcohol-related charges. He deliberately failed to disclose he sought 
counseling for his alcohol use. He deliberately failed to disclose that at one time he had 
a security clearance and it was later revoked. Applicant deliberately falsified material 
facts to a government investigator when he denied he had any other alcohol-related 
 
6 
 
 
arrests and denied he ever had a security clearance revoked. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 Applicant intentionally failed to disclose material facts on his e-QIP. His 
explanations that he did not believe some of the offenses fell within the seven to ten-
year timeframe are not supported by the plain reading of the question, which required 
he disclose all alcohol or drug-related offenses and there is no timeframe. His May 2009 
offense fell within the timeframe and he did not disclose it. His explanation that he did 
not have to disclose his alcohol counseling because it was provided by the Army and 
not a civilian agency is not credible. The question did not differentiate the source of the 
counseling. Applicant deliberately provided false statements to a government 
investigator during his background interview. Applicant had a duty to answer all of the 
questions on his e-QIP and during his interview truthfully. He deliberately failed to do so. 
His explanations were not credible. The concealment of this information is a cause of 
concern. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. There is no evidence in 
the record to support that Applicant was arrested in 1992 for wrongful possession/use of 
marijuana.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He completed his e-QIP in June 2011. He served in the 
Army from 1990 to 2010 and retired honorably. He deployed three times to Iraq. 
Applicant was untruthful throughout the security investigation process. He failed to 
disclose relevant information on his e-QIP and later to a government investigator. His 
dishonesty is a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  Against Applicant  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
