 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10813 
                                                            )                                                                                                                                   
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations.  Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                 Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on 
March 25, 2011. On January 10, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on 
May 9, 2013. A Notice of Hearing, setting Applicant’s hearing for July 1, 2013, was 
 
2 
 
 
issued June 11, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled1 to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant.2 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced seven exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 7 and entered in the record without objection.3 Applicant called 
one witness, testified, and introduced 25 exhibits, which were marked as Ex. A through 
Ex. Y and entered in the record without objection.   
 
DOHA received the transcript of the July 1, 2013 hearing on July 9, 2013. This 
transcript is identified as Tr. 1. DOHA received the transcript of the July 8, 2013 hearing 
on July 16, 2013. This transcript is identified as Tr. 2. DOHA received the transcript of 
the July 17, 2013 hearing on July 25, 2013. This transcript is identified as Tr. 3. 
 
                                                       Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant admitted the two allegations and offered additional 
information.  (SOR; Answer to SOR, dated July 2, 2013.)  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and employed by a government contractor as a senior 
financial analyst. She is married and the mother of three grown children. She seeks a 
security clearance for the first time. (Ex.2.)  
 
 Applicant’s husband is a retired U.S. military officer. After his retirement, he 
worked as a government contractor and earned about $285,000 annually. He was 
diagnosed with a terminal illness and laid off from his employment in February 2012, 
when there was a reduction of force. He is currently unemployed. (Answer to SOR, 
dated July 2, 2013; Ex. D; Tr. 2, 88; Tr. 3, 47.)  
                                            
1 Procedural matters arose that required Applicant’s hearing to be continued and rescheduled twice. On 
July 1, 2013, the hearing was convened, continued, and rescheduled for July 8, 2013. On July 8, 2013, 
the hearing was convened. It was continued, rescheduled, and convened again on July 17, 2013.  
 
2 The record also contains an SOR dated December 11, 2012, which alleges the same matters as the 
SOR dated January 10, 2013. Applicant replied to the December 11, 2012 SOR by letter, dated 
December 27, 2012, and addressed to a specialist at the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility. When 
it became clear at her July 1, 2013 hearing that she had not replied to the SOR of January 10, 2013, and 
that her answer of December 27, 2012, had been entered in the record as a response to the SOR of 
January 10, 2013, I continued the hearing for one week to give Applicant an opportunity to respond to the 
more recent SOR. On July 8, 2013, Applicant’s answer to the SOR of January 10, 2013, was received 
and entered in the record. The SOR dated December 11, 2012 is entered in the record as Ex. 1. 
 
3 Applicant asserted during the cross examination of her witness on July 8, 2013, that she had not been 
served copies of the Government’s proposed exhibits during the discovery process. Accordingly, she was 
provided with a set of the Government’s exhibits, and her signed receipt upon acceptance of the exhibits 
is entered in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. I also continued the hearing for one week, until July 17, 
2013, so that Applicant could review the Government’s exhibits.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In May 2011, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management. She told the investigator that in October 2001, she 
and her husband purchased a home for approximately $600,000. They financed the 
property with two mortgage loans. Their monthly mortgage payments were $5,600. (Ex. 
4.)  
  
 The home they purchased in 2001 was not their first experience as homeowners. 
Applicant and her husband had previously owned a home, which they sold for $100,000 
over the asking price two days after putting it on the market. (Tr. 2, 82-83.) 
  
 In 2006, Applicant and her husband found a new home they wished to purchase. 
Applicant’s husband testified that he and Applicant “were kind of talked into purchasing 
a new home” by a neighbor and friend. They could not afford to pay mortgages on two 
properties, and so they made the purchase of the second property contingent on the 
sale of their first property. They put their house on the market, but it did not sell. After 
some time, they decided to remove the contingency. They then purchased and took 
possession of the second property even though they had not sold their existing home. 
When they closed on the second property, they made three mortgage payments in 
advance of their due dates on the first home, with the expectation that the home would 
sell within the three-month period. (Ex. 4; Tr. 2, 46-70.) 
 
 When the three-month period had run, their first home had still not sold. 
However, Applicant and her husband made no further payments on the two mortgages 
securing that home. They sought legal advice. They contacted the creditors who held 
the mortgages on their first home and suggested that any delinquency owed after the 
sale of the first home be rolled over into their mortgages on the second home. The 
lenders did not contact Applicant and her husband regarding delinquencies owed on the 
first home. The mortgages on the first home remained unpaid, and the property was 
sold at foreclosure in 2007. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant is responsible for a 
delinquency of $25,818 on the first mortgage. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant 
is responsible for a delinquency of $15,586 on the second mortgage. Both delinquent 
debts are listed on Applicant’s credit report of May 17, 2011. (Ex. 6; Ex. 7; Tr. 2, 70-82.) 
 
    Applicant and her husband attempted to contact the companies holding the 
mortgages on their first home for three or four months after they purchased their second 
home. They did not search land records or inquire whether the house had been sold. In 
about 2010, when his security clearance was being investigated, Applicant’s husband 
again made verbal inquiry about the mortgages and any debt they might owe. In her 
security interview in May 2011, Applicant stated that she would contact the creditor 
identified at SOR ¶ 1.a. and make payment arrangements if she owed the debt. 
Applicant acknowledged that she did not follow up and write to the mortgage creditor to 
inquire about the status of the debt. Despite setbacks arising from her husband’s health 
and unemployment, Applicant and her husband stated that they are financially stable. 
They stated that if the mortgage creditors contacted them, they would work with them to 
resolve the debts. On July 9, 2013, after researching land records pertaining to their first 
home, Applicant and her husband wrote to the creditors holding their delinquent 
 
4 
 
 
mortgages and requested information. (Ex. 4; Ex. R; Ex. S; Ex. T; Ex. U; Ex. V; Ex W; 
Tr. 2, 77-99.)  
 
 In September 2012, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant submitted a 
personal financial statement. At her hearing, she provided additional information. She 
reported that her net monthly income from her salary as a government contractor was 
$4,884. In addition, her husband receives $4,314 in military retirement pay each 
month.4 Applicant’s husband also does some intermittent work which brings in some 
income. Applicant’s total net monthly income, not including intermittent income, was 
$8,548. (Ex. 3; Tr. 3, 47-48. ) 
 
 Applicant reported the following monthly expenses: primary mortgage on current 
home, $3,900; secondary mortgage on current home, $898; groceries, $127; clothing, 
$50; utilities, $585; car expenses, $1,2675; tractor expenses, $510; life and other 
insurance, $399; and miscellaneous, $200. Applicant’s reported monthly expenses total 
$7,936. Applicant’s net monthly remainder is $612. (Ex. 3; Tr. 3, 46-58.) 
  
 Additionally, in September 2012, Applicant listed the following financial assets: 
real estate, $745,000; Applicant’s bank savings, $1,200; joint savings, $2,424; and eight 
vehicles, $202,175. Applicant’s husband testified that he had sold two motorcycles and 
a bike trailer for $8,000, thus reducing the value of their vehicle assets.  In her interview 
with the authorized investigator, Applicant stated that she had not had financial credit 
counseling. (Ex. 2; Ex. 3; Tr. 3, 61-62.) 
 
                                                Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
                                            
4 Applicant’s husband testified that $650 of his monthly retirement pay went into another account and was 
not used for joint living expenses. (Tr. 3, 64.) 
 
5
This amount includes an $862 monthly payment on Applicant’s 2010 Toyota hybrid. (Tr. 3, 53.)  
 
5 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. 
 
 In 2006, Applicant and her husband owned a home and decided to purchase 
another home. Their initial offer on the purchase of the second home was contingent 
upon the sale of their existing home. However, when their existing home did not sell 
timely, they removed the contingency and purchased the second home anyway. At the 
closing on their second home, Applicant and her husband made three additional 
mortgage payments on the first home, with the expectation that the home would sell in 
three months and they would have fulfilled their mortgage obligations. Their first home 
did not sell in three months. Thereafter, Applicant and her husband made no more 
mortgage payments on their first home. Their mortgages became delinquent, and their 
first home was sold at foreclosure in 2007. Neither delinquent debt alleged in the SOR 
has been satisfied. This record evidence is sufficient to raise the potentially disqualifying 
conditions found at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies arose in 2006 when she elected to purchase 
one property before selling another, thereby becoming responsible for mortgage debts 
on both properties. When she lacked sufficient resources to pay mortgages on both 
properties, she contacted the company holding the mortgages on her first property. The 
company advised that it would keep her informed, but Applicant did not press the 
company for information. After making three advance payments on the mortgages on 
her first property when she closed on the second property, Applicant made no further 
payments. The first property was foreclosed upon and was sold in 2007. The delinquent 
mortgage debts remain unsatisfied and current. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply in mitigation. 
 
Applicant and her husband have experienced unfortunate hardships in recent 
years. Her husband is suffering from a terminal illness, and he has been unemployed 
since February 2012. To their credit, they have managed to remain financially stable.  
 
In 2006, however, Applicant and her husband had not experienced these 
misfortunes. They contracted to purchase a new home. Their initial offer to purchase the 
second home was contingent upon the sale of the home they had purchased and lived 
in since 2001. When their old home did not sell as soon as they had hoped, Applicant 
and her husband removed the contingency and purchased the second home before 
selling the first. Thus, they accepted responsibility for paying mortgages on two homes 
simultaneously, something they could not afford to do. 
 
The circumstances which gave rise to Applicant’s financial problem were not 
beyond her control, and her decision to take on more debt than she could afford was not 
responsible. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Applicant has not had financial credit counseling. While she and her husband 
made intermittent inquiries about the delinquent mortgage debts, they did not diligently 
pursue information on their status, and they did not try to work out a payment plan with 
the mortgage creditors. At her personal subject interview in 2011, Applicant stated that 
she intended to contact the mortgage creditors and would make payment 
arrangements, provided the debts were determined to be her responsibility. However, 
she did not do this. In July 2013, while her security hearing was continued on a different 
matter, Applicant researched relevant land records and wrote to the creditors to request 
additional information. 
 
 DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
 
8 
 
 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim 
the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 06-14521 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2007) (quoting ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). 
 
Applicant’s efforts in July 2013 to obtain more information about her mortgage 
debts dating to 2007 show some effort to address her delinquencies but do little to 
demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve them.  By failing to timely adhere to her 
contractual agreement with the mortgage lender, Applicant did not fulfill her obligation 
as a borrower, and she did not act in good faith. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 
20(e) do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole- person concept.         
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 53 
years. She had been a homeowner at least twice before purchasing her present 
property, and she was aware of her obligations as a borrower to pay her mortgages.  
 
Since defaulting on her mortgages, Applicant has suffered hardships unrelated to 
her earlier financial conduct. Her husband’s unfortunate illness after years of service to 
his country and his current unemployment are circumstances beyond her control. They 
merit sympathy. However, they happened long after her decision not to pay the 
mortgages on the home she purchased in 2001. 
 
 
9 
 
 
The debts alleged on the SOR total approximately $41,404. On her personal 
financial statement, Applicant reported jointly-held assets totaling approximately 
$950,800. While not all of these assets were liquid, it would appear that she had 
sufficient resources to establish and follow a payment plan to satisfy her delinquent 
mortgage debts. 
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I 
conclude, after a careful review of the facts of her case, the financial considerations 
adjudicative guideline, and the whole-person analysis, that Applicant failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from her financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
 
                                                  Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
______________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
