 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                    )  ISCR Case No. 11-10249 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 30, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has 20 delinquent debts totaling $885,275.99, identified on the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR). Appellant failed to produce sufficient documentation that 
19 of his debts have been addressed or are otherwise satisfied. He has not mitigated 
the Financial Considerations security concerns. Additionally, Applicant owns a share of 
undeveloped real estate in Afghanistan, maintains contact with his cousins in 
Afghanistan, and is a childhood friend of a high-level Afghani leader. He has not 
mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on 
February 23, 2010. On February 13, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the 
Guidelines for Financial Considerations and Foreign Influence. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
 
2 
 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on March 16, 2013, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on April 30, 2013. A notice of hearing 
was issued to Applicant on May 3, 2013, scheduling the hearing for July 29, 2013. The 
hearing was convened on July 29, 2013, as scheduled. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 8, 2013. 
The record was left open until August 9, 2013, for receipt of additional documentation. 
On August 8, 2013, Applicant presented Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. Department 
Counsel had no objection to AE A and it was admitted into evidence. The record was 
then closed. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Request to take Administrative Notice 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided a six-page summary of the 
facts, supported by nine Government documents pertaining to Afghanistan, identified as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. 
Government reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, and not subject 
to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He was born in Afghanistan. He was conscripted for 
two years into the Afghan Army, where he served as a truck driver. He immigrated to 
the United States permanently in 1981, after visiting the United States on a student visa 
in 1976 or 1977. He has worked for the past four years as a linguist and is employed by 
a government contractor. He has been married to a naturalized U.S. citizen for over 30 
years. They have two adult children, who are natural born U.S. citizens. Neither of 
Applicant’s children have ever visited Afghanistan. Applicant’s mother, two brothers and 
two sisters are also naturalized U.S. citizens and reside in the United States. (GE 1; GE 
3; Tr. 28-33.) 
 
Applicant has received a number of certificates acknowledging his contributions 
as a linguist. They reflect appreciation for his loyalty, patriotism, and support during the 
war on terror. (AE A.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
3 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 20 delinquent debts totaling $885,275.99. Applicant’s debts appear in credit 
reports entered into evidence. Applicant admitted all of the allegations. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant attributes his debts to the failure of his retail store. He testified that he 
had good credit before 2008, when his business failed. However, when the U.S. 
economy declined in 2008, his business also declined. He borrowed money for six 
months to keep the store operational. However, the store continued to lose money and 
he was forced to close it. (Tr. 44-59.) 
 
Applicant testified that he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in December 2008. He 
testified that all of his debts listed on the SOR were included in the bankruptcy filing, 
although he did not provide a copy of any of his bankruptcy court records. He stated 
that he was current on his payments of $840 per month to the trustee. He stated in his 
post-hearing submission that he has paid the trustee a total of $46,200 as of August 
2013, but he did not provide documentation to support that claim. He indicated his final 
payment to the trustee would be made in December 2013, and then his debts would be 
discharged. Credit reports dated July 28, 2013; April 23, 2013; and February 18, 2010, 
show that the debts identified in SOR allegations 1.c through 1.q were reported on 
Applicant’s 2008 Bankruptcy filing. (GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7; GE 8; AE A; Tr. 44-59.) 
 
 Of Applicant’s remaining five debts, which were not identified on his credit reports 
as being part of the bankruptcy filing, only one has been satisfied. Applicant’s July 28, 
2013 credit report identified that SOR allegation 1.a has a zero balance and reflected no 
recent negative history. Allegation 1.b is listed as charged off in the amount of $21,118 
on the July 28, 2013 credit report. Allegations 1.r, 1.s, and 1.t, allege three debts to the 
same creditor totaling $36,976. They are not identified as part of Applicant’s bankruptcy 
on the credit reports. These debts remain outstanding. (GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 7; GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant stated in his post hearing submission that he currently has $65,000 in 
his savings account. (AE A.) 
  
Foreign Influence 
  
 Applicant’s father is deceased. When he passed away, Applicant, his mother, 
and his four siblings inherited vacant land in Afghanistan valued at approximately 
$100,000. Applicant hopes to sell the property and split the proceeds between his family 
members. Applicant does not own any other property in Afghanistan. He has no bank 
accounts there. (GE 3; Tr. 61-65.) 
 
 Applicant has two-or-three cousins in Afghanistan. His aunt, who resided in 
Afghanistan, passed away in 2012. Applicant communicates with one cousin in 
Afghanistan, who is helping him monitor the property there. They speak every two-to-
three months. (Tr. 60-61.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant is a childhood friend of a high-level Afghani leader. Their families were 
close when they were in high school. After high school, they had contact in 1981, when 
both Applicant and the Afghani leader were studying in another foreign nation. They last 
had contact in 2005, when Applicant met the leader for lunch at a government building. 
(GE 3; Tr. 66-69.) 
 
Afghanistan 
 
In May 2012 the United States and Afghanistan signed a ten-year strategic 
partnership agreement that demonstrated the United States’ enduring commitment to 
strengthen Afghan sovereignty, stability, and prosperity. Since that time, the core goal of 
the United States in Afghanistan has been to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaida 
and its affiliates, and to prevent their return to Afghanistan.  Despite progress made 
since the Taliban was deposed, Afghanistan still faces challenges like defeating 
terrorists and insurgents, recovering from over three decades of civil strife, and 
rebuilding shattered physical, economic, and political infrastructure. (HE I.) 
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record has remained poor, and the Afghan-Taliban 
dominated insurgency has become increasingly sophisticated and destabilizing. Human 
rights problems include: armed insurgent groups’ killings of persons affiliated with the 
government and indiscriminate attacks on civilians; torture and abuse of detainees by 
security forces; extrajudicial killings; poor prison conditions; arbitrary arrests and 
detention; prolonged pretrial detention; judicial corruption; violation of privacy; 
restrictions on freedom of speech; and abuse of children. Overall, the State Department 
has declared that the security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains 
critical as no part of Afghanistan is immune from violence. U.S. citizens who are also 
citizens of Afghanistan may be subject to other laws that impose special obligations.  
(HE I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems since at least 2008, when he borrowed 
money to support his business and was unable to repay his debts. SOR allegation 1.a 
has a zero balance and reflected no recent negative history. Thus 1.a raises no 
concern. However, allegations 1.b, 1.r, 1.s, and 1.t, continue to remain delinquent. 
Further, the debts identified in SOR allegations 1.c through 1.q were reported to be 
listed on Applicant’s 2008 Bankruptcy filing. Applicant bears the burden to produce 
evidence to establish he is current on his payments to his bankruptcy trustee; however, 
he presented no documentation to establish his claim. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant indicated that his financial problems were the result of a business 
downturn. However, he failed to show he acted responsibly once he found a new job. 
He has been employed for the past four years. During that time, he has managed to 
save $65,000. Yet, he has failed to address allegations 1.b, 1.r, 1.s, and 1.t, which 
continue to remain delinquent. Further, he did not provide proof he is paying his 
 
7 
 
bankruptcy trustee as agreed upon. Therefore, I cannot conclude that future financial 
delinquencies are unlikely to occur. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant explained that he incurred debts as a result 
of the failure of his retail clothing store. This was a circumstance beyond his control. 
However, to be fully applicable AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual demonstrate 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed to produce evidence 
that he has addressed his delinquent accounts.  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence that he attended financial counseling. Further, 
there is little evidence that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are being resolved or are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not provided evidence to establish he made a good-faith effort to 
pay or resolve his delinquent debts. While his credit reports show that allegations 1.c 
through 1.q are included in his Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing, he failed to document the 
status of his repayment plan. Further, allegations 1.b, 1.r, 1.s, and 1.t, continue to 
remain delinquent. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence to show that he was in the process of 
formally disputing any of his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
 
8 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  Applicant has ties to his cousin and his childhood friend, both of whom are 
citizens and residents in Afghanistan. Applicant also has a significant financial interest 
in the property he inherited in Afghanistan.  
 
  To be fully applicable, both AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require substantial evidence of a 
heightened risk. The heightened risk required to raise one of these disqualifying 
conditions is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk greater than the 
normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government or 
substantial assets in a foreign nation. Terrorist groups and other criminal organizations 
operate within Afghanistan. Further, the government of Afghanistan has been identified 
as committing human rights violations. In this instance, a heightened risk is present. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Additionally, a significant risk is present in Applicant’s friendship with a high-
ranking Afghani government official. This connection could create a potential conflict of 
interest between his duty to protect sensitive information and his desire to help his 
friend. AG ¶ 7(b) is disqualifying. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
 
9 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate evidence sufficient to refute or mitigate 
security concerns raised by the allegations and he has failed to produce sufficient 
mitigating evidence. Here, the primary concerns are Applicant’s relationships with 
Afghanistan including: his foreign property located there; his friend who is a high-
ranking government official; and his relatives in Afghanistan. His interest in the property 
in Afghanistan is approximately $16,666 (or one sixth of $100,000). This is not an 
insignificant amount in light of his significant debt in the United States (even in light of 
his stated savings of $65,000). Further, he keeps in contact with his Afghani cousin out 
of concern for his property. His childhood friendship with a high-ranking Afghani leader, 
while not recent, was once close and is still cause for concern because it could 
potentially create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. While I recognize that 
Applicant’s wife, children, mother, and siblings are all citizens and residents of the 
United States, I cannot find that Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S. that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interests in 
favor of the U.S. interests, due to his ties to Afghanistan. None of the above mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
10 
 
Applicant has supported the United States as a linguist for four years. He has 
earned a number of certificates in recognition of his exceptional work. However, 
Appellant failed to produce sufficient documentation that his debts have been 
addressed or are otherwise satisfied. He has not mitigated the Financial Considerations 
security concerns. Additionally, Applicant owns a share of undeveloped real estate in 
Afghanistan, maintains contact with his cousins in Afghanistan, and is a childhood friend 
of a high-level Afghani leader. Accordingly, continuation of these circumstances is 
highly likely, and the potential for coercion, exploitation, or duress remains 
undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations or Foreign Influence 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
