 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 12-01107                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                               Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 2, 2011. On April 11, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 On June 3, 2013, Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR and elected 
to have a hearing before an administrative judge at the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on July 11, 2013. I convened a hearing 
 
2 
 
 
on August 7, 2013, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant a security clearance to Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and 
introduced five exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through Ex. 5 and entered in the 
record without objection. Applicant testified, called one witness, and introduced six 
exhibits, which were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through F and entered 
in the record without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open 
until close of business on August 15, 2013, so that Applicant could, if she wished, 
provide additional documentation. On August 15, 2013, Applicant filed a request that the 
record remain open for one additional week, until August 23, 2013, so that she could file 
additional information. Department Counsel did not object, and I granted Applicant’s 
request. Applicant timely filed two additional documents, which I marked as Ex. G. and 
Ex. H and entered in the record without objection. I marked Applicant’s request for an 
extension as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and entered it in the record without objection. The 
record closed on August 23, 2013. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
August 15, 2013. 
 
                                                      Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 14 allegations of financial conduct that raise security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.n.) The financial 
delinquencies alleged in the SOR total approximately $85,184. In her Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted seven of the SOR allegations.1 She denied the SOR 
allegations at ¶¶ 1.b.through 1.g and 1.n. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant, a high school graduate, is 28 years old. She is employed as a 
receptionist by a government contractor, and she seeks a security clearance for the first 
time. (Ex. 1; Tr. 48, 52.) 
 
 When she was about 15 years old, Applicant began to cohabit with the man who 
is the father of her three children, aged 11, 5 and 2. The relationship existed for about 
13 years. In April 2012, the relationship ended when Applicant grew concerned about 
her partner’s instability. He paid child support for one or two months and then 
disappeared. Applicant is now the sole support of her three children. (Ex. A; Tr. 49-50.) 
 
 Applicant receives food stamps and state medical assistance for her children. In 
July 2013, she began to cohabit with another man. She and her children live with him in 
a house he purchased. (Tr. 51.) 
 
 Applicant testified that her financial problems began several years ago. In 
February 2007, she purchased a home for $185,000 with her former boyfriend. In 
September 2007, she was pregnant, experienced health issues, and lost her job. The 
home was foreclosed upon in August or September of 2009 and sold for approximately 
                                            
1 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.h., 1.i., 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., 
and 1.m. However, she later denied the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.h., 1.i., and 1.l. (SOR; Ex. A; Tr. 15-16.)  
 
3 
 
 
$95,000. Applicant stated that the creditor contacted her regarding a deficiency 
obligation, but she was unemployed and unable to pay. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.k. that 
Applicant owes $61,974 on a delinquent mortgage account with a total balance of 
$103,000. This debt has not been satisfied. (Ex. 4; Tr. 52-54.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant is responsible for a $586 judgment filed 
against her in May 2010. She acknowledged the debt and stated that she was unable to 
pay it. (Ex. A; Tr. 39-40.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is responsible for the following six delinquent 
medical debts: ¶ 1.b. ($214); ¶ 1.c. ($131); ¶1.d. ($215); ¶ 1.e. ($174); ¶ 1.f. ($90); and 
¶ 1.g. ($130). Applicant identified the debts as arising from her children’s medical care. 
She stated that, since 2007, her children have received, under public assistance, full-
coverage medical care provided by her state of residence, and she denied responsibility 
for the debts. She stated she had asked the medical provider to resubmit the charges 
alleged on the SOR to the state for reimbursement. However, she failed to provide 
documentation to support her statements. (Ex. A; Tr. 39, 60-62.)  
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.h. that Applicant is responsible for an unpaid collection 
account of $14,510. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debt, but in an 
explanatory letter written later, she denied it. She testified that she co-signed on an 
automobile note for her sister. When her sister did not honor the debt and make the 
required payments, the creditor turned to Applicant for payment. Applicant does not 
believe the debt is hers, and she is unable to pay it. (SOR and attached letter containing 
additional information; Ex. A; Tr. 40, 62-63.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.i. that Applicant owes a creditor $237 on a collection 
account. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debt, but in her later 
explanatory letter, she denied it. At her hearing, she stated that she did not recognize 
the debt. The debt appears on her credit reports of March 2013 and July 2013. (Answer 
to SOR and attached letter containing additional information; Ex. A; Ex. 4; Ex. G; Tr. 40-
41, 63.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.j. that Applicant owes a creditor a debt of $4,808, which 
is in charged-off status. Applicant admitted the debt, identified it as arising when her 
automobile was repossessed for the third time in 2010, and acknowledged that it had 
not been paid. (Tr. 63-65.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.l. That Applicant owes a creditor $676 on a delinquent 
account placed for collection. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debt. 
However, she later denied the debt in a letter written after her answer to the SOR. She 
claimed that the creditor wrongfully overcharged her. She did not provide 
documentation to corroborate her claim. (SOR and attached letter containing additional 
information; Ex. A; Tr. 16, 44-45.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶1.m. that Applicant owes a creditor $1,382 on an account 
placed for collection. Applicant admitted the debt, which arose when she purchased a 
vacuum cleaner. The debt has not been satisfied. (Tr. 45.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.n. that applicant owes a creditor a $57 debt, which had 
been placed for collection. Applicant denied the debt. She stated that she had closed 
the account seven years ago and had no outstanding balance. The debt appears on her 
credit report of November 2011. (Ex. A; Ex. 5; Tr. 45.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that none of the debts alleged on the SOR had been 
satisfied. She stated that she and her current boyfriend, who recently filed for 
bankruptcy, had entered into a debt repayment plan approximately two months before 
her hearing. They paid $600 down, and the firm they contracted with was using her 
current credit report to identify her creditors. No creditors had been paid as of the date 
of her hearing. Applicant failed to provide a list of creditors on her payment plan. (Ex. D; 
Ex. G; Tr. 54-59.) 
  
 Applicant’s witness testified that Applicant was a devoted mother to her children. 
The witness, Applicant’s sister, stated that she had observed Applicant at work and 
could see that she was a valued employee. Applicant provided three letters of character 
reference which attested to her trustworthiness and strong work ethic. One of her 
coworkers stated that Applicant was a valued member of their professional team. (Ex. 
E; Ex. F; Ex. G; Tr. 88-98.)  
 
 Applicant provided a current financial statement. Her monthly take-home pay is 
approximately $1,700. Her boyfriend’s monthly take-home pay is approximately $2,500 
a month. Applicant pays her boyfriend $500 a month to help pay his mortgage. In 
addition to the food stamps she receives, Applicant spends about $150 on groceries 
each month. She pays about $823 each month to maintain a 2012 automobile her 
boyfriend purchased for her. Her daycare expenses for her children are $600 each 
month. Applicant also pays the monthly cable bill of $68. Applicant’s monthly expenses 
total approximately $2,141. She testified that her boyfriend helps her with her gasoline 
expenses and by purchasing clothing and school supplies for her children. She stated 
she believes she has between $300 and $400 each month to use to pay her delinquent 
debts. The record does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. 
(Ex. 3; Tr. 66-77.)  
  
                                                 Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified. 
    
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. For several years, Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt 
and was unable or unwilling to pay her creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise 
these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial difficulties and inability to satisfy her financial 
responsibilities. Her substantial financial delinquencies are current and ongoing, and her 
attempts to resolve them occurred recently, when she and her current boyfriend 
contracted with a debt consolidation firm. To date, none of the debts on the SOR have 
been resolved. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has had a difficult life. She took on adult responsibilities at an early 
age, and her first boyfriend’s irresponsibility has caused her and their three children to 
live in difficult circumstances. However, her current expenditures exceed her income, 
and it is not clear that she will be able to attain financial stability, even with the 
assistance of her new boyfriend. 
 
 Applicant merits some credit for her recent attempt to consolidate and pay her 
delinquent debts. However, what is missing from Applicant’s record is consistent 
payment of her debts over time. She has not established a track record that 
demonstrates that she can be relied upon to allocate her limited resources to satisfy her 
many substantial financial delinquencies. 
 
 Applicant’s financial delinquencies occurred under circumstances that are likely 
to recur. She stated that a number of small medical debts were not hers, but she failed 
to provide documentation to corroborate her assertion that the debts would be paid on 
her behalf by the state. While legally responsible for her sister’s debt, she denied 
responsibility for it. She has not had financial credit counseling, and she lacks a clear 
and timely strategy for resolving her delinquent debts. 
 
 Accordingly, I conclude that while AG ¶ 20(b) has partial applicability in this case, 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d) and 20(e) do not apply in mitigation to the facts of this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s witness testified that 
Applicant was a good mother. Her coworker and friends consider her to be reliable and 
a hard worker.  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began several years ago and are ongoing. Her 
efforts to address her financial delinquencies are recent. She does not have a reliable 
history of timely and consistent payment of her financial obligations, and she has not 
sought credit counseling. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment as well as her eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
her financial delinquencies.  
 
                                                    Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.n.:            Against Applicant 
      
                                              Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
