 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04171 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 15, 2013, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 9, 2013. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled August 29, 2013. The Government offered exhibits 
 
2 
 
 
(GE) 1 through 5, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and 
three witnesses testified. Applicant offered exhibits (AE) A through G, and they were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until September 4, 
2013, to provide Applicant the opportunity to present additional exhibits, which he did. 
They are marked AE H through K. They were admitted into evidence without objection.1 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 10, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1999, a master’s 
degree in 2009, another master’s degree in 2010. He married in 2010, and he has an 
infant daughter. He has worked for his present employer since 2009.2  
 
 In 2004, Applicant was a graduate student and decided to invest his money in the 
purchase of his first home. He was able to pay the mortgage payments with the salary 
he was earning. He lived in the home for about three and a half years and paid his 
mortgage. In 2007, after advice from friends who worked in the real estate business, he 
decided to purchase a condominium (condo) for investment and eventually sell it at a 
profit. He was able to secure a loan for 80% as a first mortgage and 20% as a second 
mortgage. He made a down payment of about $7,000 on the condo. His intention was to 
sell the property after a year.3  
 
 Applicant rented the condo for the first year, but had difficulty finding renters after 
the first lease expired. He ended up moving into the condo and renting his primary 
residence. He then moved in with friends when he was able to rent the condo for a short 
period of time. In 2009, he was offered a new job in a different city. His salary 
increased. He was having difficulty paying the mortgages on both premises. His primary 
home remained rented, but he could not find renters for the condo. At this time, he 
began to aggressively pay off other debts he had, such as credit cards and his student 
loans. He began discussions with the mortgage company to resolve the debt for his 
primary residence first by way of a short sale. Despite having respectable offers on the 
short sale, the mortgage company rejected them. He then began to pursue resolution by 
a deed-in-lieu transaction. He has been frustrated by the process because he is 
repeatedly passed to a new person and each provided conflicting information. The most 
recent information he received is that he must put the property on the market for 90 
days before a deed-in-lieu transaction can move forward. Before doing that he must 
contact a realtor to assist him. He has been moving forward to accomplish the different 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 65, 69. 
 
3 Tr. 36, 50-55. 
 
3 
 
 
requirements for a deed-in-lieu transaction. The mortgage company has agreed not to 
pursue foreclosure because Applicant is going through the deed-in-lieu process.4 
 
Applicant also had a home equity line of credit on the home, which he obtained in 
2007 or 2008 for approximately $60,000. He paid approximately $20,000 on it and 
received an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 1099-C form for cancelation of debt in the 
amount of $61,016. He filed it with his federal income tax return and paid the taxes.5 
 
 The condo Applicant owned went through the foreclosure process and the county 
eventually took the property. Applicant had a second mortgage on the property for about 
$20,000. Applicant paid this mortgage for two to three years before he defaulted on it. 
The debt was sent to collections. He was advised by his lawyer to stop paying the loan 
while the property was going through foreclosure. When the foreclosure was completed, 
Applicant concentrated on repaying the second mortgage loan. He had difficulty finding 
the right department that dealt with the debt. He negotiated a settlement for $6,000 and 
provided proof of payment and resolution.6  
 
 Applicant is now earning approximately $99,000. In 2010, be began aggressively 
paying all of his credit card debts and both his wife’s and his student loans. He no 
longer has any credit card debt. His wife’s student loans are completely paid. He does 
not have student loans from graduate school, but has two from undergraduate school in 
the amounts of approximately $16,000 and $15,000. He is aggressively paying these 
loans. He has been following a financial program to systematically become debt-free.7   
 
Applicant admitted that he was young and ambitious and not fully informed of the 
potential risks of investing and reselling real estate. He entered the real estate market 
right before it experienced a severe economic downturn. He admitted it was the worst 
financial decision he could have made and getting out of debt has been stressful. 
However, he also acknowledged that this experience has helped him to focus on 
becoming debt-free. He has been paying off his debts for the past four year. He intends 
on teaching his family to live a debt-free life style.8  
 
Three character witnesses who have known Applicant personally and 
professionally testified on his behalf. He is described by the witnesses as a person of 
high moral character. He is considered honest, hardworking, trustworthy, dependable, 
responsible, loyal, and forthright. He has worked with sensitive information and was 
always conscientious to protect it and obeyed all of the security rules. Applicant also 
                                                          
4 Tr. 36, 39-43, 45, 49, 58; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. 43-44; 62-64; GE 3; AE I and J. 
 
6 Tr. 39, 45-49, 64; AE A and H. 
 
7 Tr. 39-40, 56-58, 66. 
 
8 Tr. 70-71. 
 
4 
 
 
provided character letters that reinforced his reputation for professionalism, loyalty and 
integrity.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 20-35; AE D and E. 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had two delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. I find 
there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established because Applicant only has one remaining debt that he 
is actively resolving. It is obvious that he now recognizes the risks associated with real 
estate investment, and he is unlikely to put himself in such a position again. His actions 
do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 The conditions that resulted in Applicant’s financial problems were not largely 
beyond his control. Applicant chose to invest in real estate hoping to make a profit. He 
could not anticipate the magnitude of the national economic crisis, but he was naïve in 
failing to understand the risks of investing in real estate. I find Applicant has acted 
responsibly in resolving his debts and AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 Applicant is actively resolving the debt associated with his primary residence by 
seeking a deed-in-lieu transaction. The delays, confusion, and misinformation that 
Applicant is frequently confronted with appear to be the standard in the mortgage and 
real estate industry. Applicant has kept copious notes about differing information 
provided to him and advice he has acted upon. I am confident he will resolve the 
mortgage associated with his primary residence. He settled the remaining debt on his 
condo. Applicant has no other delinquent debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 36 years old. He became involved in the real estate market at a time 
when it was poised for collapse. He learned a valuable life lesson and has taken it to 
heart. He has plotted a course to become debt-free and has followed through by paying 
off credit cards and student loans. He is resolving the remaining debt associated with 
his house. Applicant’s finances are not a security concern. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
