 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 12-00020 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 6, 2011, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP; SF 86). On April 24, 2013, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 1, 2013. He answered the 
SOR in writing on May 10, 2013, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request on 
May 15, 2013. The Department was ready to proceed on July 25, 2013. I received the 
case assignment on August 1, 2013. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 2, 
2013, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 19, 2013.  
 
2 
 
 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and did not submit any exhibits. After the hearing 
concluded, on August 22, 2013, Applicant sent Department Counsel an email stating he 
would resign his contractor position for the reasons stated.  
 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 30, 2013. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a of 
the SOR, with explanations. This paragraph was the only allegation in the SOR. He also 
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 61 years old, married for 31 years, and has two adult children. He 
retired from the Air Force in 1993 as a Master Sergeant. He graduated from high school 
in 1970. Applicant works for a defense contractor in the medical logistics business. He 
started that job in March 2006. (Tr. 13-16; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
After the hearing on August 19, 2013, Applicant sent an email communication to 
Department Counsel stating he would resign his position with his company effective 
September 13, 2013. He gave as his reasons his feeling that he would not receive a 
favorable decision because of a lack of time for rehabilitation. Also, he stated he never 
intended to cease drinking beer but only reduce it to “a more normal consumption level.” 
(Administrative Exhibit A) 
 
 Applicant has a diagnosis from an alcohol treatment facility in 2010 that he is 
alcohol dependent with continuous drinking behavior. Applicant admitted he started 
drinking beer at age 18. Applicant drinks only beer. His beer drinking increased when he 
was stationed in Germany in the 1980s. He drank only at home and at that time he had 
one or two cans of beer a day after work.  His consumption increased in 1983 when he 
got married the second time. After retiring from the Air Force in 1993, his beer intake 
increased to six beers per day. He drank eight to nine beers per day before his alcohol 
evaluation in 2010, and a package of 12 beers per day on weekends before the 
evaluation. (Tr. 17, 30, 43; Exhibits 1-3)  
 
Applicant self-reported to the military base alcohol evaluator after he came to 
work in 2010 on a Saturday at 5 p.m. with alcohol on his breath. He was called into work 
unexpectedly on a weekend. His wife drove him to work that day because she was 
concerned about his having consumed beer at home. She waited the hour while he 
performed his duty involving the logistics of a medical package for shipment overseas 
and then drove him home. The medical coordinator, an Air Force major, smelled alcohol 
around Applicant and reported him to his supervisor who was not present that Saturday. 
Two weeks later, after the supervisor returned from leave and was informed by the 
 
3 
 
 
major of his concerns, she counseled Applicant. Applicant thought he functioned 
normally on that Saturday. However, he decided to go to the alcohol evaluation program 
to address the concerns of his supervisor. (Tr. 23-40, 56; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
The alcohol evaluation diagnosis found that Applicant had alcohol dependency 
and should abstain from beer or any alcohol consumption. The dependency diagnosis 
was made and treatment given three times in March through September 2010, and 
three times in May 2013, the treatment document was signed by a substance abuse 
counselor, and reviewed by a physician, a licensed clinical social worker, a military staff 
psychiatrist, or a Ph.D in psychology attached to the recognized treatment program on 
the government installation where Applicant worked. (Tr. 16-40; Exhibits 2, 3) 
 
 As a result of the alcohol evaluation and three sessions of counseling, Applicant 
stopped drinking beer for several weeks. Then he resumed drinking about three or four 
weeks later by consuming a non-alcoholic beer. He changed again to regular beer after 
another three or four week period because it was cheaper than the other product. (Tr. 
31-40, 72; Exhibits 2, 3)  
 
 In May 2013 Applicant again attended the alcohol evaluation clinic wanting to 
learn how to quit drinking again and “maintain abstinence for life.” This action occurred 
after he received the SOR.  Applicant agreed to complete the outpatient recovery 
counseling program. He attended counseling sessions once a week. He started drinking 
non-alcoholic beer again. Applicant testified that he had no desire to return to drinking 
regular beer; however his post-hearing statement contradicts that assertion. The 
licensed clinical social worker at that latest session told Applicant that he needed to 
cease drinking altogether, not merely “cut back.” Drinking the non-alcoholic beer was 
not an acceptable alternative to the professional evaluators.  
 
Applicant attended sessions once a month in 2013 and another one several days 
after the hearing. Applicant did consume coffee at his breakfasts, and a soft drink, iced 
tea, or water with his lunches. Applicant also consumed regular beer at a July 2013 
family reunion. Apparently he drank the available non-alcoholic beer and then drank 
regular beer because it was the only beverage available that he enjoyed. His wife 
testified she saw him drink only two regular beers, but Applicant testified he had four or 
five “light” beers with lime. (Tr. 40-50; Exhibits 2, 3) 
 
 Applicant’s wife testified his drinking had concerned her during their marriage. 
She watched his drinking increase over the years. She tried to persuade him to reduce 
his consumption or abstain, but soon realized it was better to say nothing to him about 
it. Applicant’s personality changed when he drank. (Tr. 43-50; Exhibits 2, 3) 
 
 Applicant completed a one day tobacco cessation class in March 2013. He 
wanted to stop smoking cigarettes. He has been successful at that effort. (Tr. 64;   
Exhibit 2) 
   
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Three of those conditions apply to Applicant: 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant reported for work one Saturday in 2010 with the odor of alcohol on his 
breath. His supervisor was informed. AG ¶ 22 (b) applies. 
 
 Applicant engaged in habitual consumption of alcohol to the level of impaired 
judgment. The amount of his beer consumption over the past 20 years of several beers 
a weekday and up to 24 on the weekend showed he has little desire to control his 
consumption. His wife testified about his changed attitude toward family members after 
his drinking. His supervisor spoke with him in 2010 about his alcohol consumption after 
his wife drove him to work one Saturday when he was called in unexpectedly and an 
officer smelled alcohol on Applicant’s breath. These facts support the AG ¶ 22 (c) 
applicability.  
 
 Applicant attended an alcohol evaluation program in 2010 and reduced his 
drinking of alcohol, but later returned to his prior level of daily consumption and 
increased consumption on the weekends. He also attended a program in May 2013. He 
returned again to his previous drinking pattern. The alcohol program professionals 
diagnosed Applicant as being alcohol dependent. They are licensed professional staff 
 
6 
 
 
members, being psychologists, psychiatrists, or clinical social workers, in a recognized 
treatment program. AG ¶ 22 (e) applies. 
 
 Applicant relapsed to his regular beer drinking pattern after the 2010 alcohol 
program. He readmitted himself in April 2013 after receiving the SOR in this case. His 
post-hearing statement showed he was terminating his job and returning to his regular 
beer drinking program. AG ¶ 22 (f) applies as a consequence of the two relapses.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. None of 
them apply to Applicant’s condition: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
  
 Applicant’s alcohol relationship is of long duration and exists to the present time. 
His post-hearing statement shows it will continue into the future. AG ¶ 23 (a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant does not admit he has an alcohol dependence problem. He wants to 
continue to drink beer on a daily basis. He has not established a pattern of abstinence 
in view of his diagnosis of alcohol dependence. AG ¶ 23 (b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant is not participating currently in a counseling or treatment program 
according to his latest statement, has a history of a prior relapse, and is not making 
satisfactory progress. AG ¶ 23 (c) does not apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Finally, Applicant has not successfully completed an outpatient counseling or 
rehabilitation program with aftercare, has not demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of abstinence in accordance with the treatment program professional’s 
recommendation, and has not received a favorable prognosis from that program’s 
treatment professionals. Therefore, AG ¶ 23 (d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant continues to drink alcohol 
after treatment program professionals in 2010 and 2013 told him abstention is the best 
course to follow for him. He tried to quit drinking but does not have the will power or 
desire to stop drinking, even though his wife of 31 years is concerned about it. His 
drinking is daily and voluntary, and there are no changes in his behavior over the years 
except an increased consumption of beer.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol 
consumption. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
