 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                             ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 12-01476 
                    ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se. 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct. His request for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that cited security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). This action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In his June 8, 2013 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the two financial 
allegations, and denied the falsification allegation. He also requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. I received the case on July 11, 2013, and the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on July 16, 2013. At the 
August 7, 2013 hearing, I admitted into evidence four Government Exhibits (GE 1-4) 
and two Applicant Exhibits (AE A-B). I held the record open after the hearing, and 
Applicant timely submitted two documents, which I admitted without objection (AE C-D). 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 15, 2013. 
 
 
 
2 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record evidence, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old high school graduate who also completed training as a 
barber. He married in 1995 and divorced in 1998. Applicant had lived with his fiancée 
since 2006, and they married in July 2013. He has two teenage sons, one with his first 
wife and one with his second wife. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 16-22, 26-27, 36) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant and a partner have owned and operated a successful barber shop 
since 1993, and at times employed as many as three other barbers. When the economy 
declined, many of his clients lost their jobs, and his business suffered, starting in about 
2009. He cut staff, and at one point he and his partner were the only barbers. He 
decided to seek other employment. He attended a class for security officers, and found 
work in October 2011. He continues to work at the barber shop, but on a much-reduced 
level. He estimates the shop provides about 30% of his current income. This is his first 
application for a security clearance. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 16-22, 24-27, 36, 51-54) 
 
Applicant and his ex-wife share custody of their son. After his divorce in 1998, 
Applicant paid child support. His credit report shows that he was past due on his 
payments. Applicant testified that his ex-wife and son moved frequently, so in about 
2007, he bought them a house, so that his son would have a stable environment (House 
A). Applicant and his ex-wife agreed that he would pay toward the mortgage on the 
house instead of child support payments. He and his ex-wife shared the $2,700 monthly 
mortgage payments. Applicant's ex-wife wanted their son to attend a different school, 
and in 2010, she and their son moved out of House A. Applicant continues to provide 
funds for his son’s clothes, food, and half of his school costs. (GE 2, 3; Tr. 23-24, 28-35) 
 
After Applicant's business declined, he maintained the House A mortgage 
payments. In about 2010, he applied to refinance, but the request was not approved. In 
2011, he was unable to keep up his payments. His credit report shows that the two 
mortgage loans on House A became delinquent in July and August 2011. The first and 
second mortgage loans on House A are $9,201 and $4,404 past due, respectively. They 
are the only delinquent debts in Applicant's April 2013 credit report. (GE 3, 4; Tr. 31-33, 
58-65)  
 
Applicant has been working with a realtor to short-sell House A. As of April 2013, 
his realtor had obtained an offer to purchase at a price of $195,000. Applicant provided 
a copy of the sales contract, signed by the buyer. That same month, the original lender 
sold the loan, and the new lender increased the acceptable price to $215,000. All 
parties have agreed to the higher price. Applicant is awaiting approval of the sale. He 
 
 
3 
stays in touch weekly with his realtor. As of May 2013, Applicant had completed and 
submitted a form from the new lender authorizing his agent to handle the short sale on 
House A. (Answer attachment; AE A - D; Tr. 37-49, 66-67) 
 
Applicant owns several properties: House A, discussed previously; his residence 
(House B); a property he and his ex-wife purchased during their marriage (House C); 
and a property he inherited from his parents (House D). The loan on House B is current. 
Applicant has paid off the mortgage loans on Houses C and D. Applicant rents Houses 
C and D. (Tr. 58-65) 
 
Applicant's interrogatory response included a 2013 personal financial statement 
(PFS), showing net monthly income of $6,938. His monthly expenses and debt 
payments total $7,555, leaving a negative monthly remainder of $617. At the hearing, 
Applicant stated his tenant in House C had left within the previous few days. Although 
he lost the tenant, the mortgage loan is paid in full. In addition, Applicant receives rental 
income from House D; that mortgage loan is also paid in full. Applicant's current credit 
report shows no delinquencies other than House A. (GE 2 - 4; Tr. 55-65) 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in October 2011. He 
answered “No” when asked whether, within the previous seven years, he had defaulted 
on any loan or been more than 120 days past due on a debt. Applicant denies the 
Government’s allegation that he intentionally falsified these answers. (Answer; GE 1) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that when he was completing the 
application in October 2011, he thought about the House A mortgage, and knew that 
he had missed payments in 2011. However, he did not believe that this constituted a 
default, or that he had been 120 days delinquent then or within the past seven years.  
 
Applicant’s October 2011 credit report shows the primary loan on House A 
(allegation 1.a) became delinquent in July 2011, about 90 days before the Applicant 
completed his application. The secondary loan on House A (allegation 1.b) became 
delinquent in August 2011, about 60 days before the application. However, the October 
2011 credit report also states “late over 120 days” in relation to the primary loan. The 
report contains contradictory information by stating that the loans were 60 to 90 days 
past due, but also stating that one loan was over 120 days past due. (Answer; GE 3) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
 
 
4 
Guidelines (AG).1 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest2 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.3 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
                                                 
1 Directive. 6.3. 
2 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
3 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
4 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
5 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant experienced a number of financial setbacks starting in 2009. By 2011, 
he could no longer meet the mortgage payments on House A. The record contains no 
indication of financial problems related to alcoholism, gambling, drug abuse, or other 
issues of security concern. The following disqualifying conditions apply under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions, listed at AG ¶ 20, are relevant:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
  
 Applicant’s mortgage debt is recent, because, as of the hearing date, the short-
sale of the house had not yet been approved. However, Applicant's credit reports show 
that he has had a stable financial history. He has kept his residential mortgage loan 
current, and the mortgage loans on his two rental properties are paid off. Applicant's 
House A delinquency is isolated, unlikely to recur, and does not reflect poorly on his 
current trustworthiness. AG ¶ 20 (a) applies. 
 
  AG ¶ 20(b) concerns situations where an applicant is faced with unexpected 
events that are beyond his control. Here, Applicant ran a successful barber shop for 16 
years, and he had no financial problems. However, unforeseen events negatively 
affected Applicant's finances. When the U.S. recession hit, Applicant's business was 
affected. In response to the decline in his shop’s revenue in 2009, he acted responsibly 
by cutting staff, and ultimately, by seeking other sources of income. In 2010, Applicant 
absorbed other financial blows. His lender refused to refinance the House A loan, and 
his ex-wife, who had been sharing the cost of the mortgage, decided to leave House A. 
Applicant maintained the payments until about August 2011, when he could no longer 
 
 
6 
continue. He missed payments, but brought the mortgage current again until 2012, 
when his tenant left. Applicant has been working with a realtor since 2012 in an effort 
to sell House A. He now has a signed contract of sale for the price the new lender 
requires, and is awaiting only the lender’s approval. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant did not seek financial counseling while dealing with the House A 
mortgage. However, the record shows that the debt is under control. His realtor has 
obtained a buyer, who not only agreed to the original price of $195,000, but also to the 
increased price of $215,000 required by the current lender. Once the sale is complete, 
Applicant will owe only the mortgage on his personal residence, which he maintained in 
a current status throughout the financial crises. His financial situation is under control. 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the personal conduct guideline is that  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified information about the 
status of his mortgage loans when he completed his security clearance application, 
which implicates disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a) requires deliberate and knowing 
concealment: the applicant must have answered the question with an intent to deceive 
the Government. When a falsification allegation is controverted, the Government has 
the burden of proving it.5 An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant's 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant's state of mind at the time of the omission.6  
                                                 
5 DOD Directive 5220.6, Additional Procedural Guidance, Item E3.1.14. 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 4 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004). See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 17, 2004); ISCR Case No. 05-16743 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 11, 2007). 
 
 
7 
Here, the Government presented sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie 
case under Guideline E. However, Applicant denies he deliberately falsified his 
application. In his Answer to the SOR, he stated that when he completed the 
application, he thought about the length of time his House A mortgage was delinquent 
in mid-2011. Although he knew he missed some payments, he believed he had not 
defaulted on the loan or been delinquent more than four months.  
 
Applicant completed the security clearance application in October 2011. His 
October 2011 credit report shows that the first mortgage loan on House A became 
delinquent in July 2011, about 90 days before the application. The second mortgage 
loan became delinquent in August 2011, about 60 days before he completed his 
application. This record evidence supports Applicant's belief that his loans were not 
more than 120 days past due. However, the October 2011 credit report also states 
“late over 120 days” in relation to the first loan. The credit report contains contradictory 
information: it lists the first loan as 90 days past due, but also states it was over 120 
days past due. I find that, because Applicant's last payments were in July and August 
2011, he could have reasonably believed he had not been more than 120 days late 
when he completed the application in October 2011. 
 
I conclude Applicant's negative answer about delinquent loans stemmed from 
his honest belief that his mortgage loan had not been in default or more than 120 days 
past due in 2011. Based on the record evidence, including his credit report, I find his 
explanation credible, and conclude that Applicant did not intend to mislead the 
Government about his finances. As Applicant did not intentionally falsify his response, 
no mitigation is required. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
 
 
8 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 The file contains no evidence of untrustworthy behavior by Applicant. He 
credibly stated that he did not believe his mortgage on House A was more than 120 
days past due when he completed his security clearance application. Moreover, for 16 
years, his business was successful, and his financial situation was sound. After he 
bought a house to help stabilize his son’s life, the U.S. economic crisis occurred, and 
his income decreased substantially. Nevertheless, he maintained payments on House 
A even after the economic downturn affected his income in 2009, and after losing his 
ex-wife’s contribution to the mortgage in 2010. He reacted to these problems by 
seeking and obtaining employment in a new field. He was able to pay the mortgage 
until mid-2011, when he missed several payments. He maintained contact with his 
lender, and at various points sought ways to resolve the debt. Applicant’s efforts to 
refinance the loan failed. He hired a realtor in 2012, and sought a short sale. He has 
obtained a signed offer from a willing buyer, at the price requested by his new lender, 
and is awaiting final approval of the sale. Although Applicant currently has a negative 
cash flow, he has no outstanding debts other than House A, which is pending sale. His 
residential mortgage is current, and his two other rental properties are paid off. Based 
on this history, I am confident that he will resolve the mortgage and maintain a sound 
financial status. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F    FOR Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E    FOR Applicant  
 
 Subparagraph 2.a     For Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, It is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
