1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
        )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-08028
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On May 28, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 2013. A notice of
hearing was issued on July 30, 2013, scheduling the hearing for August 20, 2013.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-9 were admitted into evidence, without objection. Applicant
testified, presented the testimony of one witness, but did not submit any exhibits for the
record. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 28, 2013. Based on a review of the
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegation under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), with explanation. 
Applicant is a 57-year-old lead administrative assistant employed by a defense
contractor. She graduated from high school and attended college for approximately
three years. She is married and has one son. Applicant has held a security clearance
for almost 24 years. (Tr. 13) She has been with her current employer since October
1989. (GX 1)
The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted for a December 2011 judgment in the
amount of $82,781. The amount is not paid. Applicant has not presented a plan to
resolve the debt.
Applicant’s husband is a real estate agent. His income has fluctuated over the
years from $50,000 to $25,000. He handles the financial affairs in the family. He has
worked as an agent for almost 20 years. His current estimated income is about
$25,000.
Applicant and her husband purchased a lot for investment purposes about seven
years ago for $50,000. The loan to the bank was $40,000. The owner financed
$10,000. Applicant paid the $10,000, but refinanced with another bank. (Tr. 31) In
about 2009 or 2010, the property was refinanced. The $40,000 was used to pay
outstanding tax debt of $25,000. (Tr. 34)  They listed the property for sale, but it did not
sell. In 2011, it went to foreclosure. The $82,781 judgment represents the deficiency
balance on the mortgage loan.
Applicant explained that the family finances have been on a roller coaster for a
number of years. Due to the decline in the real estate market, they have encountered
financial difficulty. She believes that this issue does not put her at risk for any security
violations. She needs to keep her job, but will lose the job without a clearance. (Tr.17) 
Applicant and her husband attempted to obtain an equity loan on their primary
residence but the bank did not approve a loan. (Tr. 14) Applicant and her husband have
had their current home on the market for sale for almost two years. They have lowered
the price but it still has not sold. The sale price  is $600,000. They have refinanced the
house several times. (Tr. 41) 
Applicant owns another lot in another community that is free and clear, but they
cannot sell it due to restrictions on the land. The property is worth approximately
$100,000. 
Applicant’s husband has some outstanding Internal Revenue Service debt which
he pays through a debt repayment plan in the amount of $700 a month. The plan
started in 2012. He believes the total amount is $30,000. (Tr. 37)  They do not have any
extra income to pay the $82,000 judgment. Applicant’s husband was candid in that he
3
has been deficient in paying their property taxes as well. (Tr. 35)  He was also forthright
when he stated that he cannot remember when he did not have delinquent taxes. (Tr.
38)  Applicant’s husband states the reason for that is his sporadic income and market
turndown. Applicant and her husband file tax returns separately.  
Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $3,000. Her net monthly
remainder is less than $500. She has two retirement loan repayments deducted from
her paycheck for real estate taxes on her current residence.  Her husband
acknowledged that they do not have any disposable income. Applicant’s husband  filed
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1999 and 2002. (GX 8 and GX 9)
Applicant was candid and forthright. She explained that she has a long job
history with no negative incidents.  Applicant fully disclosed the situation onher SF-86
and during her investigative interview. She attempted to do everything that she could to
keep the property that eventually went to foreclosure. She is trying to sell her residence.
She admitted that she is not able to pay anything on the judgment at this time. Her
intention is to sell her home to satisfy the debt. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
5
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant admits the 2011 unpaid judgment against her and her husband in the
amount of $82,000. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying
conditions in ¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following
are potentially relevant:
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and
Applicant’s delinquent debt is the result of a property foreclosure in 2011. The
delinquent debt is tied in large part to her husband’s financial issues. While Applicant
has worked steadily for 24 years with no previous issues, the judgment is listed in her
name and her husband’s.  She is responsible for the debt. She has tried to rectify the
problem by selling her primary residence, but has not been successful. Applicant does
not appear to have any tax issues, but her husband’s tax problems and lower
commissions  in the current real estate market do not allow them to pay the debt. The
tax issue has been ongoing for Applicant’s husband and it does not appear that the
debt will be paid in the foreseeable future.  AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part. Applicant has not
met her burden in this case to mitigate the financial considerations security concern.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
7
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of defense contractor who has held a security
clearance for almost 24 years. She has worked without incident for many years. She
admitted that her financial situation has fluctuated greatly due to her husband’s job as a
real estate agent based on commission. Although Applicant and her husband file their
taxes separately, her husband’s tax plan takes $700 a month from their income. The
investment property purchased seven years and the refinancing has caused the current
financial security clearance issue. 
Applicant was candid and forthright at the hearing. She does not believe that this
one judgment should impact on her security clearance. She fully disclosed the situation
on her SF-86 and during her investigative interview. Applicant believes that it is beyond
her control and that she has acted in good faith. However, this is not the first time that
her husband’s tax issues have affected Applicant. At the current time there is no
imminent sale of her home to pay the judgment. Applicant does not have the funds to
pay the amount. It is not clear that she can resolve the issue in the near future. Any
doubts that arise must be resolved in favor of the government. Applicant has not met
her burden of proof in this case.  Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
