 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09735 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel issued an amended SOR with one 
additional allegation (¶ 1.oo) on May 3, 2013. Applicant answered the amended SOR 
with a fax transmission dated May 22, 2013. The case was assigned to me on June 21, 
 
2 
 
2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on July 9, 2013, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 30, 2013. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 17, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and offered exhibits (AE) A through I 
into evidence. Department Counsel objected to AE A through F based upon relevancy 
and hearsay. Those objections were overruled. All of Applicant’s exhibits were admitted 
into evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted AE J through N, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 8, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.i. 1.k – 1.p, 1.aa, 1.cc – 
1.gg, and 1.jj – 1.oo. He denied ¶¶ 1.a – 1.h, 1.j, 1.q – 1.z, 1.bb, and 1.hh – 1.ii.1 The 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings, and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old former employee of a defense contractor. He worked 
for that contractor from November 2011 until his security clearance was denied in July 
or August 2012. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married and has two children. He 
served in the U.S. Marine Corps for eight years and was an aviator. He held a security 
clearance at that time. He does not currently hold a secret security clearance.2  
 
 The SOR and amended SOR allege 35 delinquent debts and six bankruptcy 
filings by Applicant or his business entities. The total for all the debt is in excess of $24 
million (some of the debt is duplicated). The debts were listed in various bankruptcy 
schedules filed by Applicant and his business entities in May, June, and August 2010, 
and June 2012.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose because of various real estate development 
businesses he owned sometime after December 2003. At the same time he was a 
branch manager for a local realty firm, he also incorporated four businesses to facilitate 
the acquiring of development real estate and soliciting investors in these real estate 
ventures. The real estate ventures included developing raw land, constructing a 
condominium project, and building homes on a different site. In 2007, to fund the 
operating costs for these various projects, Applicant moved developmental loans from 
one financial institution to another institution. Through this financial arrangement, he 
was extended lines of credit for his businesses. These lines of credit were in excess of 
several million dollars. He claimed he had an agreement with the financial institution 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s answer to the SOR listed two ¶¶ 1.ii. The first ¶ 1.ii was a denial and the second was 
an admission. The second ¶ 1.ii should have been listed as a response to SOR ¶ 1.jj. 
 
2 Tr. at 80-81; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 2-3, 8, 11-13. 
 
 
3 
 
that he would only make principal and interest payments on the loans when the various 
real estate properties were developed and sold. He personally guaranteed all of these 
business loans in excess of nine million dollars. This arrangement worked well for some 
time, but in late 2009, the financial institution wanted payments made on an upfront 
basis rather than waiting until the property was developed and sold. In February 2010, 
Applicant’s access to his line of credit was denied. Applicant asserts this change came 
about because the financial institution was experiencing its own financial difficulties 
caused by excessive loans it was making and because of criminal conduct by one of its 
officers. That bank officer was ultimately convicted in federal court on fraud charges. 
Additionally, in December 2010, the financial institution was taken over by a 
governmental financial oversight agency and placed in a conservatorship. He first filed 
for bankruptcy relief under Chapter 11 in June 2010. He also filed for bankruptcy relief 
personally and for all four of his companies between May 2010 and June 2012. He 
claims his attorney advised him to file these “defensive” bankruptcy actions to protect 
his assets. Ultimately, all these bankruptcy petitions were dismissed for either failing to 
complete a plan or for exceeding the unsecured debt limit allowed by law for that type of 
bankruptcy (SOR ¶¶ 1.ii – 1.nn).4 
 
 In September 2011, Applicant filed a civil lawsuit in state court against the 
financial institution alleging fraudulent misrepresentation, tortious breach of contract, 
and defamation. The case was removed to federal court and ultimately dismissed for 
failure to state a claim and a judgment was issued against Applicant on a counterclaim 
in the amount of $15,000 (the judgment alleged in amended SOR ¶ 1.oo) by order 
dated July 3, 2012.5 
 
 In April 2013, Applicant and his wife filed a petition for bankruptcy relief and 
discharge of debts under Chapter 7 of the bankruptcy code. Among the debts listed in 
this petition are over nine million dollars of unsecured non-priority claims. The debts 
listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d – 1.s are all included in the listing of bankruptcy claims. As 
of August 13, 2013 (date the record closed), the debts had not been discharged.6 
 
 The debt alleged in ¶ 1.a is a personal secured loan that is included in the 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant also offered documentation from the creditor 
establishing that the loan is current and has never been in a delinquent status. This debt 
is resolved.7  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are for a mortgage debts and a home 
equity line of credit on Applicant’s personal residence. The mortgage was $465,000 and 
the home equity loan was $55,000. He stopped making payments on these loans in 
2010 based upon his attorney’s advice. Ultimately the residence was sold through a 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 81-84, 127-128; GE 2-4, 8, 11-14. 
 
5 Tr. at 124; GE 6, 14. 
 
6 Tr. at 86-87; AE M. 
 
7 Tr. at 92; AE I. 
 
 
4 
 
short sale in April 2012. A deficiency resulted from the sale and Applicant believed he 
received IRS Forms 1099 for the cancellation of the debts. No documentation was 
provided to show the status of these debts. These debts are not included in the Chapter 
7 bankruptcy. The evidence is inconclusive as to whether these debts are resolved.8 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are federal and state tax obligations. 
Applicant provided documentation showing that he settled the state tax debt and that he 
owed nothing on the federal tax debt. These debts are resolved.9 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.h are the personal loan guarantees 
Applicant made for the businesses lines of credit he received in the amount of over nine 
million dollars. These are included in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy.10   
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.k through 1.p are all delinquent credit card 
accounts ($75,464) that Applicant used in order to support his businesses after his lines 
of credit were stopped. He allocated about 90 percent of this debt to his businesses and 
the remaining 10 percent was for personal use. These are all included in the Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j ($248) is a consumer debt that is also 
included in the bankruptcy.11 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.q and 1.r are consumer debts ($685 and $338) 
and both have been included in the Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.s is a personal loan ($30,000) from Applicant’s father. Applicant stated that his father 
is not seeking to collect on the loan, but it was included in the Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.t is for an automobile loan ($15,000). Applicant paid this 
loan and offered a copy of a lien-free title as proof. Applicant does not know about the 
debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.u ($600). It was not included in the Chapter 7 bankruptcy and 
is unresolved.12 
  
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.v through 1.hh all are affiliated with the defunct 
businesses Applicant created. He testified that none of these businesses have any 
assets. He signed personal guarantees for these loans, and thus they are duplicate 
debts as alleged in the SOR. The debt amounts listed in the SOR were taken from the 
various dismissed bankruptcy schedules associated with the businesses.13 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 93-95; AE M. 
 
9 Tr. at 96-100-101; AE K, L. 
 
10 Tr. at 113-115; AE M. 
 
11 Tr. at 101-102, 105-106; AE M. 
 
12 Tr. at 107-109; AE M, N. 
 
13 Tr. at 84; GE 2, 3, 8, 11-13; AE M. 
 
 
5 
 
 According to his Chapter 7 bankruptcy summary of schedules, Applicant lists his 
current monthly income as $7,481 and his expenses as $7,444, with a remainder of 
$37. He received financial counseling through the bankruptcy process. Applicant called 
two witnesses who recently worked with him. They both testified that Applicant is highly 
respected in his field, is a consummate professional, and supported his effort to gain a 
security clearance.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
14 Tr. at 53-74; AE M. 
 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has over nine million dollars in delinquent personal loan guarantees, 
sold his residence through a short-sale leaving a deficiency on both the primary 
mortgage and a home equity loan, and sought bankruptcy relief for four businesses he 
established. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on his reliability,  
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant made conscious decisions to finance his real estate ventures with 
leveraged funds backed by his personal loan guarantees. When his financial institution 
stopped extending his lines of credit and the businesses could not make the loan 
payments, his personal guarantees made him responsible for the loan amounts. 
Regardless of how the financial institution operated, Applicant was responsible to pay 
back the loans. When he could not, he decided to file for bankruptcy protection. 
Although the action of the financial institution (calling in the loans) may have been 
beyond his control, I am unable to find that he did acted responsibly by allowing himself 
to become so heavily leveraged in the first place. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 The only evidence of financial counseling is what Applicant received as required 
by his bankruptcy filing. However, seeking bankruptcy relief is not a good-faith effort to 
repay his debts.15 Although AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies, ¶ 20(d) does not.  
 
 Applicant provided documentary evidence that the SOR debts listed in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.d, 1.e, and 1.t were paid. Additionally, the corporate debts that are also covered by 
Applicant’s personal loan guarantees will be considered duplicate debts (¶¶ 1.v, 1.w, 
1.x, 1.y, 1.z, 1.aa, 1.bb, 1.cc, 1.dd, 1.ee, 1.ff, 1.gg, and 1.hh). 
                                                          
15 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the predecessor mitigating condition to AG ¶ 20(d)], 
an Applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the Applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an Applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [AG ¶ 20(d)].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, the good character testimony of his 
witnesses, and the circumstances by which his financial institution called in his personal 
loan guarantees. However, I also considered that he purposefully engaged in his 
speculative, high risk, real estate development business for many years. He is seeking 
a bankruptcy action to extricate himself from his personal loan guarantees. Since his 
current bankruptcy is not completed and no debts have been discharged, and his 
previous bankruptcies were all dismissed by the court, his past financial track record 
reflects a troublesome financial history that causes me to question his ability to resolve 
his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph:   1.a:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.b – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.d – 1.e:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.f – 1.s:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.t:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.u:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.v – 1.hh: For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.ii – 1.oo: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
