 
1 
 
 
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 12-00023 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the financial security concerns related to a mortgage 
deficiency and foreclosure that involved a mortgage he held with his former wife. He 
mitigated the personal conduct security concerns raised by his non-disclosure of 
information related to that mortgage. Based upon a review of the record evidence as a 
whole, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case  
 
On September 2, 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 
86). On March 29, 2013, the Defense of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
 
2 
 
 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within DOD for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 7, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge (Answer). On June 27, 2013, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On July 12, 2013, DOHA 
issued a Notice of Video Teleconference Hearing. The case was heard on August 1, 
2013, as scheduled. Department Counsel and Applicant’s Counsel were located in 
DOHA’s office in Arlington, Virginia. I and Applicant were located in Arlington Heights, 
Illinois. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through I into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The record was left open until August 20, 
2013, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional documents. That deadline 
was extended to August 23, 2013, per Applicant’s request. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on August 9, 2013. On August 23, 2013, Applicant submitted ten exhibits that 
I marked as AE AA through JJ and admitted into the record without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied both allegations and offered 
explanations.  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and married since December 2008 to his second wife. 
He and his first wife divorced in October 2007. They had been married for eight years 
and have two children, ages 18 and 23. Applicant has a bachelor’s degree in business 
management and certifications in information technology. From about 2000 to 2011, he 
was self-employed, working for various businesses and contractors. In 2009 he held a 
Secret security clearance for several months while working on a project for a defense 
contractor. He is seeking a Top Secret clearance for a position as a Windows 
administrator. (Tr. 22.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 In 2005 Applicant and his ex-wife obtained a mortgage and purchased a home. 
About a year and a half later, they separated and he moved out of the home. His ex-
wife continued residing there with their two children. (Tr. 26.) 
 
 On October 3, 2007, the circuit court entered a Judgment for Dissolution Order 
(Order) that incorporated a Marital Settlement Agreement executed by Applicant and his 
ex-wife. Both parties agreed that the marital home, held jointly, would be placed on the 
real estate market for sale in June 2009 after their son graduated from high school. That 
Order also required Applicant to pay $1,674 in child support for both children, which 
amount was to be reduced when his son graduated from high school in 2009. (AE JJ.) 
Applicant and his ex-wife verbally agreed to extend the deadline for the sale of the 
property until their younger daughter graduated in May 2013. (Tr. 37.) In June 2013 he 
filed a Motion to Terminate Child Support with the circuit court. (AE CC.) 
 
3 
 
 
 The Order further stated that “Title to the marital home shall remain in both 
parties until such time as the house is sold. . . . Wife shall pay and shall and does (sic) 
hereby indemnify Husband and hold him harmless for all expenses associated with the 
marital home, including but not limited to mortgages, taxes, and insurance.” (AE JJ at 
Sec. 5.8.) The Order does not contain language requiring Applicant to pay a portion of 
the mortgage. 
 
 Applicant testified that he and his former wife agreed to split the mortgage 
payments. (Tr. 36.) He stated that he consistently made child support and mortgage 
payments to her after the divorce was final, up to June 2011 when he stopped as 
explained below. He submitted copies of numerous checks verifying payments. (Tr. 47; 
AE EE to AE II.)  
 
 In February 2011 Applicant’s ex-wife stopped making payments on their jointly 
held mortgage.1 (GE 4 at 8.) In April 2011 the mortgagor filed a Summons for a 
Foreclosure in the local circuit court and served it on someone residing in the marital 
home. Applicant is a named defendant, along with his ex-wife. (AE I.) A credit bureau 
report (CBR), dated September 17, 2011, indicated that the mortgage was 180 days 
delinquent and noted that foreclosure proceedings had started. (GE 2 at 10.) According 
to a CBR, dated February 7, 2013, the residential mortgage was reported as a loan 
modification in December 2012. (GE 3.)  
  
 Applicant’s ex-wife hired a lawyer to represent her in the foreclosure suit. (GE 4.) 
In a March 4, 2013 letter, the lawyer informed DOHA that he was working with the 
borrowers (Applicant and his ex-wife) to resolve the litigation. (Answer.) On May 19, 
2013, the court entered an Order setting the foreclosure matter for a Case Management 
call on August 22, 2013. Applicant remains a named defendant. (AE I.) He believes that 
his ex-wife, who continues to reside in the property, is attempting to delay the 
foreclosure and subsequent eviction because she has been living in the home for the 
past couple of years and not making mortgage payments. He acknowledged that he 
remains a title holder of the property, but is not participating in the lawsuit. (Tr. 49-51.) 
He submitted Docket Sheets relating to the mortgage foreclosure that recorded action 
on the case, beginning on April 20, 2011, and continuing through May 9, 2013. 
(Answer.) The case remains unresolved. 
 
 On June 13, 2013, Applicant completed a credit counseling course required by 
the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for people filing bankruptcy. (AE G.) On June 15, 2013, 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 Voluntary Petition (Petition). (AE A.) The bankruptcy 
Petition listed two credit card companies holding unsecured claims, which totaled 
$9,859. It listed three creditors holding secured claims, which totaled $473,317. Those 
creditors are Applicant’s previous residential mortgage company with a claim for 
$315,234 on the home he purchased with his ex-wife; a mortgage company for an 
                                                          
1 A credit bureau report (CBR), dated September 17, 2011, noted that the last payment on the mortgage 
was in October 2010. (GE 2 at 10.)  
 
4 
 
 
investment property with a claim for $155,989, which appears to be in a current status;2 
and an automobile loan company with a claim for $2,094. (AE B.)  
 
 On June 13, 2013, Applicant also filed a Chapter 13 Payment Plan (Plan). (AE 
F.) According to the Plan, he will resolve $15,000 of debt with monthly payments of 
$500 for 29 months. That Plan will resolve the $9,859 of credit card debt and $5,000 of 
fees. The Plan does not contain any reference to either mortgage company listed in the 
Petition or to the automobile loan creditor. (AE F.) Applicant asserted that the 
automobile debt belongs to his ex-wife, who had been paying the debt. He 
acknowledged that he is a co-debtor of that loan. (Tr. 52-53; AE A.) On June 24, 2013, 
Applicant completed a personal financial management course required by the trustee 
assigned to his bankruptcy case. (AE H.)  
   
 On July 15, 2013, Applicant made the required first $500 payment to the trustee 
of the Plan, prior to the July 24, 2013 meeting with creditors. (Tr. 51-52; AE DD.) On 
August 19, 2013, the bankruptcy court entered an Order confirming the Chapter 13 
Payment Plan filed in June 2013. (AE  BB.)  
 
 It appears that Applicant has decided to allow the property he owns with his ex-
wife to be foreclosed upon, since it is not mentioned in his confirmed plan. He has been 
maintaining the payments on his investment property outside of the bankruptcy, which is 
appropriate. 
 
 According to the budget Applicant submitted to the bankruptcy court, he and his 
wife have a net monthly income of $9,444 and expenses of $2,930, leaving about 
$6,500 remaining to make the monthly payments to the trustee. (AE B.) A review of the 
February 2013 CBR listed the two mortgages noted above, and the two credit cards, 
now in the Plan, as Applicant’s only ongoing debts. (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant asserted that the mortgage problems arose because his ex-wife failed 
to make monthly payments to the bank. He denied that he was responsible for that 
problem because he made payments to her with the expectation that she would pay the 
mortgage. (Tr. 53.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On September 2, 2011, Applicant submitted a SF 86. In response to “Section 26: 
Financial Record: Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts,” which inquired as to 
whether he had ever defaulted on any type of loan or whether he was “currently over 
120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial obligations for which you are the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you are a cosigner or guarantor),” Applicant 
answered, “No.”  
 
                                                          
2 Both the September 2011 CBR and the February 2013 CBR indicate that this March 2007 mortgage is 
current and not delinquent. It was transferred from a previous lender to the current lender in 2011. 
Applicant disclosed it as a monthly expense of $861 on his March 2013 budget. (GE 2, 3, and 4.)  
 
5 
 
 
 On November 14, 2011, a government investigator interviewed Applicant about 
his answers in the SF 86, including those related to financial matters, his delinquent 
mortgage, and other debts. When confronted by the investigator that his mortgage on 
his previous marital home was over 120 days delinquent, he indicated that he was 
aware that payments on the mortgage had become late in the last four to six months. 
His ex-wife had told him about the problem and she had negotiated a reduced payment 
with the bank. After learning that from his former wife, he reduced his monthly mortgage 
payments to her in February 2011. He stopped making any mortgage payments to her 
in June 2011 because the bank told his ex-wife to stop making payments in order to 
qualify for a loan modification. (Tr. 48, 61.) He and his ex-wife subsequently began 
applying for a loan modification. (GE 4 at 7-8.) 
 
 During that same interview, Applicant told the investigator that the bank had not 
initiated foreclosure proceedings. He insisted that his former spouse would have 
informed him of that. (GE 4 at 8.) According to the file, the bank had initiated a 
foreclosure action in April 2011. 
 
 On November 16, 2011, two days after his interview, Applicant telephoned the 
investigator and told him he just spoke to his ex-wife about the mortgage problems. She 
told him that she received a letter in July 2011 from the bank, indicating that they were 
defendants in a foreclosure proceeding. He was unaware of the foreclosure proceeding 
until that conversation. (GE 4 at 2.)  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR regarding the failure to disclose information about the 
delinquent mortgage, he denied that he intentionally attempted to conceal the debt. He 
explained that he misunderstood the question and thought that because he and his ex-
wife were applying for a homeowner’s assistance program and a loan modification, he 
did not need to disclose it as a delinquent debt. (Tr. 55; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant reiterated in his testimony that because he was working on a resolution 
to the mortgage problem in September 2011, he did not think the mortgage was 
delinquent or in default, and required disclosure. (Tr. 58.) He said he had no intention to 
deceive the government. (Tr. 34.) He also did not think that a mortgage was considered 
a “Delinquency Involving Routine Account” as captioned for Section 26. He thought 
routine accounts related to credit card accounts. (Tr. 56-58.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, those guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
6 
 
 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
There is evidence that in February 2011 Applicant learned that the mortgage for 
which he remained a title-holder was not being adequately managed by his ex-wife. 
Although he believes that he is resolving his financial problem by filing Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, he has not yet been discharged with an explicit order absolving him of his 
mortgage obligation.  
 
AG ¶ 20 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
There is sufficient evidence for the application of AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s financial 
problems occurred as the result of his ex-wife’s failure to pay a jointly held mortgage 
beginning sometime in early 2011, and after their October 2007 divorce. He provided 
proof that he made monthly payments to her for the mortgage and child support. This 
situation occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, as he made payments 
to her in anticipation that she would pay the mortgage. For similar reasons, AG ¶ 20(b) 
also has application. Applicant’s ex-wife’s decision not to make payments was largely 
beyond his control. At some point, he attempted to cooperate with her to obtain a loan 
modification, demonstrating his intention to act responsibly under the circumstances. In 
addition, his former wife is obligated to indemnify him on the mortgage. Although he was 
helping her and his children to remain in the home, she had the primary and legal 
responsibility for payment of the mortgage.  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant obtained credit and financial counseling through the bankruptcy 
process. There are clear indications that two credit card debts are being resolved 
through a Chapter 13 Payment Plan. His mortgage on an investment property was 
current as of February 2013. Because the legal process addressing the foreclosure on 
his previous marital home is not completed, AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. His recent 
action to pay his outstanding debts through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy demonstrates a 
good-faith effort to resolve his debts, and warrants the application of AG ¶ 20(d). 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant deliberately falsified 
answers to a question on his September 2011 SF 86, by failing to disclose information 
relevant to a mortgage that was delinquent and in foreclosure at the time he completed 
it. The Government contended that that falsification constituted potential disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he did not disclose the adverse information about 
the mortgage, but denied that he intentionally misled the Government regarding it. 
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it.  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does 
not establish or prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time the omission occurred. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 
2004)). 
Applicant’s explanation that he did not intentionally fail to disclose negative 
information about the delinquent status of the mortgage on his previous marital house is 
credible. It is clear that he was aware that his ex-wife had failed to make payments for 
several months prior to completing the SF 86. However, it is also apparent that he and 
his ex-wife were in a loan modification process with the bank, leading him to believe that 
 
9 
 
 
the mortgage was not delinquent. That and his confusion about whether the mortgage 
was a “routine account” lend sufficient credence to his misunderstanding or 
misinterpretation of the questions set out in Section 26. Based on the record evidence, 
he did not have knowledge of the foreclosure proceeding in September 2011. 
  
After listening to Applicant testify and observing his demeanor, I find that his 
explanations for failing to disclose specific information as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a are 
adequate and credible. SOR ¶ 2.a is found in his favor. As a consequence, a discussion 
of the applicability of mitigating conditions is not warranted.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including Applicant’s age, and 
candid testimony. Applicant is a 39-year-old man, who began encountering a financial 
problem in early 2011, related to his 2007 divorce. Over-all, his finances and financial 
obligations appear to be solid and under control. He is resolving about $10,000 of credit 
card debt through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, and is current on his payments on a 
piece of investment property. According to file documents, he remains a borrower-
defendant in the ongoing foreclosure case with his ex-wife, and may be liable for a 
mortgage deficiency in the future by the mortgagor. That possibility, though remote, has 
been considered. At this time, he has attempted to address his responsibilities. Should 
he become responsible for additional monies in the future as a consequence of the 
foreclosure proceeding, which his former wife cannot pay, there is little doubt that he will 
pay his portion of a judgment or mortgage deficiency. 
  
In DOHA cases, allegations of falsification are considered seriously and carefully. 
Based on the circumstances surrounding this case, including Applicant’s  ex-wife’s 
 
10 
 
 
failure to promptly disclose the foreclosing proceedings, his attempts to work out a loan 
modification after June 2011 with her, and his misinterpretation of the scope of the 
pertinent question in Section 26, his testimony is sufficiently credible to conclude he did 
not intentionally attempt to defraud the Government. In the future, he will undoubtedly 
be more diligent in reading applications and opt for “over” disclosure, rather than non-
disclosure. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
      Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR Applicant 
 
      Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
