 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-12335 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct and drug involvement security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and H (drug involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 22, 2013, and April 29, 2013, and 
elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The 
Government’s written case was submitted on July 23, 2013. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
2 
 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on August 5, 2013. As of September 
13, 2013, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on September 16, 2013. 
With no objection from Applicant, the Government exhibits included in the FORM are 
admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
the same employer since 1978. He attended college for a period, but he did not earn a 
degree. He married in 1979 and divorced in 1984. He has been married to his current 
wife for more than 20 years. He has three adult children.1   
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI) or a 
similar alcohol-related driving offense five times between about 1978 and 1989. At least 
four of the arrests resulted in a conviction. He was arrested in 2005 and charged with 
DUI and possession of marijuana. He pleaded nolo contendere to DUI in 2006. The 
possession of marijuana charge was dismissed. He was sentenced to a fine, court 
costs, community service, loss of driver’s license for four months, and attendance at an 
alcohol safety school.2 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana regularly from 1973 through 1978. He stopped using 
marijuana for a period when he was hired by his current employer in 1978. His current 
wife was a marijuana smoker when they met. He resumed smoking marijuana with her 
in about 1985 and smoked on an almost-daily basis until about 1989, when his wife 
became pregnant and they both stopped smoking marijuana. Applicant held a security 
clearance from about 2002 to 2007. He resumed smoking marijuana in about 2005. He 
smoked marijuana several times a week from 2005 through April 2011.3 
 
 Applicant was arrested in November 2004 and charged with possession of 
marijuana, first offense. He stated that he was angry at his wife for smoking marijuana. 
He took her marijuana and left their home. He was intoxicated and walked over a bridge 
that did not permit pedestrian traffic. He was stopped by the police, and the bag of 
marijuana was found during a search. He was charged with possession of marijuana. 
The disposition of the charge is unclear.4 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
February 2006. Section 23d asked: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of 
any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?” He listed his 2005 DUI arrest, but he did not 
include that he was also arrested for possession of marijuana. He did not list his five 
alcohol-related arrests between 1978 and 1989, and he did not list his 2004 possession 
                                                          
1 Items 4-6, 11.  
 
2 Items 2, 4, 7-11.  
 
3 Items 2-4, 9, 11.  
 
4 Items 2-4, 7, 11.  
 
3 
 
of marijuana charge.5 Applicant answered “No” to Section 24a of the SF 86, which 
asked:  
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?6 
 
 Applicant admitted that he deliberately failed to disclose his marijuana use on the 
SF 86. He denied that he intentionally failed to list his 2004 possession of marijuana 
charge and his five alcohol-related arrests between 1978 and 1989. He stated that he 
did not list the DUI charges because he misread the question to be limited to the 
previous seven years. He stated that he did not list the 2004 possession of marijuana 
charge because the charge was dismissed.7   
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in about 2007. He 
terminated the interview because he did not like the questions the investigator was 
asking about his son. Applicant felt the investigator was unpleasant, condescending, 
and harsh. The investigator also asked him why he provided incorrect information on his 
SF 86.8 
 
 Applicant reapplied for a security clearance and submitted another SF 86 in 
January 2013. He listed all six DUIs and that, when he was arrested in 2005 for DUI, he 
was also charged with possession of marijuana. He listed marijuana use from 1973 
through April 2011. He wrote that he “[s]moked when [he] was young. On and off since 
then. Not crazy about it.” He also wrote: “I have never been much of a marijuana user. I 
don’t feel as if I’m missing anything by not using it.”9 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in February 2013. He 
discussed his criminal charges and marijuana use. He stated that he had not smoked 
marijuana since April 2011, and he did not intend to use it in the future. He had alcohol 
treatment related to his DUIs, but he never received drug treatment. He stated that his 
wife was still a marijuana smoker.10 
 
 
                                                          
5 Item 5.  
 
6 Item 5.  
 
7 Item 2.  
 
8 Items 9, 11.  
 
9 Items 4, 9.  
 
10 Item 11.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) any drug abuse;11  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant possessed and smoked marijuana while he held a security clearance. 
All of the above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana regularly from 1973 through 1978. He stopped using 
marijuana for a period when he was hired by his current employer in 1978. He resumed 
                                                          
11 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
6 
 
smoking marijuana with his current wife in about 1985 and smoked on an almost-daily 
basis until about 1989, when his wife became pregnant and they both stopped smoking 
marijuana. He resumed smoking marijuana in about 2005, and he smoked marijuana 
several times a week from 2005 through April 2011. He stopped using illegal drugs in 
April 2011, but his wife continued to smoke marijuana.  
 
 There is no bright-line rule for when conduct is recent. Applicant has not used 
illegal drugs in more than two years. However, he went long periods without using illegal 
drugs, and then smoked marijuana on numerous occasions with full knowledge that 
illegal drug use is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. I am unable to 
conclude that illegal drug use is completely in his past. His drug use continues to cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) have 
some applicability. Notwithstanding, I conclude that security concerns remain despite 
the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information about his marijuana use on his 
2006 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable to SOR ¶ 2.b. He did not list his 2004 possession 
of marijuana charge and his five alcohol-related arrests between 1978 and 1989 on his 
2006 SF 86, but there is insufficient evidence to determine that the omissions amounted 
to intentional falsifications. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant.   
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug use while holding a security clearance created a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable to SOR 
¶ 2.c.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant continued to smoke marijuana after he submitted his 2006 SF 86. He 
did not correct his falsification when he was interviewed for his background investigation 
in about 2007. Instead, he terminated the interview. AG ¶ 17(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant receives credit in mitigation for revealing his drug and alcohol problems 
in his January 2013 SF 86 and during his February 2013 interview. He has not used 
illegal drugs since April 2011. However, I am unable to conclude that illegal drug use is 
completely in his past. His drug use and intentional falsification of his SF 86 continue to 
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) 
are not applicable. AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable. With unresolved doubts about Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment, I conclude that personal conduct 
security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
8 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and H in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a long history of smoking marijuana, including while holding a 
security clearance. He lied about his drug use on his 2006 SF 86. There is no evidence 
of any illegal drug use after April 2011, and Applicant revealed his drug use in 2013. 
Notwithstanding, there are significant concerns about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
