 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                             ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 13-00453 
                    ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard M. Sissman, Esq. 
 
________________ 
 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. His request for a security clearance is granted. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 2, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that cited security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
In his June 17, 2013 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. I received the case 
on July 25, 2013, and the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing on August 7, 2013. At the hearing on September 4, 2013, I admitted 
five Government Exhibits (GE 1-5) and seven Applicant Exhibits (AE A-G). The record 
also includes Department Counsel’s exhibit list, identified as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I; 
Applicant's exhibit list (HE II); and Applicant's witness list (HE III). DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on September 12, 2013. 
 
 
 
2 
Procedural Ruling 
 
On September 26, 2013, Department Counsel moved to withdraw GE 5 as 
irrelevant. Applicant had no objection. By Order dated the same day, I granted 
Department Counsel’s motion. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He is married with two children in school, aged 16 and 
21. Applicant also supports his mother-in-law, who has lived with him since her stroke in 
2007. Applicant holds a bachelor’s degree in accounting, and a master’s degree in 
finance. He is a certified public accountant, and has owned and operated his own 
company since 1991. His ten full-time staff and 15 independent contractors provide 
financial services to federal agencies. Applicant has held a secret security clearance 
since 2002. He stated in his response to DOHA interrogatories, and at the hearing, that 
his business experienced a steep decline in 2009 to 2010, during the U.S. economic 
recession. He lost his major contract, and had no income from his business for about 
one year. (GE 1; GE 4/Attachment A; AE A; Tr. 29-33, 44-45, 83-86, 102) 
 
Applicant's wife operates a medical services business, incorporated as an “S 
corporation.” In about 2005, a local government department paid for services from her 
business. However, the county issued the payment to her, under her own social security 
number, instead of to her business, under its federal tax identification number. When 
Applicant and his wife completed their joint income tax returns, they reported the 
income on their personal returns, but then “backed it out,” and included it on the 
corporation’s return. In about 2008, State A audited their returns and determined that 
they had failed to pay the correct income tax for tax years 2005 and 2006. Applicant 
was convinced the state auditor’s position was in error, and retained an attorney. From 
2008 to 2010, Applicant contested the state’s determination. He testified that his appeal 
was successful, but, “. . . somehow, somewhere, the communication broke down. The 
last thing I saw was a lien, and I have to ask a tax resolution company to try to resolve 
it.” State A filed the tax lien in May 2011. (GE 1-4; AE B; Tr. 34-39, 107-114) 
 
In April 2012, Applicant decided to pay the amount the state contended they 
owed: $11,051. He testified he made an initial payment of $1,000, and began a 
payment plan for monthly installments of $334. Subsequently, he decided to pay the 
balance in a lump sum. By check dated June 3, 2013, Applicant paid $9,866. He 
provided documentation showing the state released the lien June 4, 2013. (GE 1-4; AE 
B; Tr. 34-39, 107-114) 
 
 
 
3 
In June 2006, Applicant bought two houses (House A and House B) in a run-
down urban area. He planned to rehabilitate the homes and rent them. (Tr. 39) 
 
House A (allegation 1.b): House A cost about $77,000. Applicant put down 
$17,000. His monthly payment was approximately $535. After spending about $40,000 
to rehabilitate the property, he rented it for $1,100 per month. After paying from 
September to November 2006, the tenants stopped making their monthly payments. 
The eviction process lasted nine months. Shortly after the house became vacant, it was 
vandalized. Applicant testified, “You know, my 40,000 in cash that I invested in it was 
‘down the drain’ too. Everything. They just took everything.” (AE E, F; Tr. 54-57) 
 
Applicant continued paying the mortgage for about three years. However, he 
stopped during the financial downturn in his business. Applicant contacted the lender 
and applied for a loan modification, but was declined. He proposed a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure. The arrearage is about $21,000. Subsequently, he offered to restart the 
payments. However, the lender required all arrearages to be paid at once, which 
Applicant could not afford. He retained a real estate agent, who eventually found a 
buyer. However, before the offer was finalized, the lender foreclosed in July 2013. 
Applicant has not been informed of a deficiency balance. He testified that if a deficiency 
results, he has the funds to pay it. (GE 2, 4; AE E, F; Tr. 44-45, 54-60, 87-89) 
 
House B (allegation 1.c.): Applicant purchased House B for about $62,000 and 
made a $15,000 down payment. His monthly payments were approximately about $430. 
Applicant spent $40,000 to rehabilitate the property. He secured tenants, with a rental 
charge of $900 monthly. They paid the rent for the first three months and then stopped 
paying. The eviction process took nine months. One week after they were evicted in 
about 2007, the property was vandalized. The thieves took the plumbing, air 
conditioning, carpeting, refrigerator, and other fixtures.  (GE 4; AE C; Tr. 40-44, 47-48, 
67-70) 
 
Although Applicant had no income from the property after 2006, he continued to 
make the mortgage payments. He boarded up the property for about one year. He then 
rehabilitated the property a second time, spending about $30,000. The property was 
vandalized a second time. At about that time, the real estate market crashed, affecting 
his ability to sell the properties. His loans were “under water”: the market value of the 
houses was less than the balance on his loans. Then his business declined 
substantially from 2009 to 2010 because of the U.S. recession. Applicant stopped 
making mortgage payments, and accrued arrearages of approximately $18,000. He 
retained a real estate agent in 2011, who sought buyers for House B and helped 
Applicant deal with the lender. Applicant requested the House B lender to approve a 
loan modification or participation in any available assistance program. The lender 
declined, but did agree to consider a deed in lieu of foreclosure. Applicant spent several 
months providing documentation to finalize it. However, after viewing the vandalized 
property, the lender reneged, and refused to accept the deed in lieu of foreclosure. (GE 
2, 4; AE C, D; Tr. 44-54, 67-70, 78, 87-89) 
 
 
4 
After trying to sell the property for years, Applicant applied to the lender to short-
sell the property. In August 2013, a few days before the hearing, Applicant received a 
short-sale offer of $11,000. He is hopeful the lender will accept the offer, which is more 
than the current fair market value of the property. Applicant testified that, were it not for 
the real estate crisis, he believes he would have been able to sell the two properties. 
(GE 4; AE C, D; Tr. 44-54, 62, 78) 
 
Applicant’s April 2013 personal financial statement shows that his and his wife’s 
businesses provide approximately $18,800 net income per month. Their monthly 
expenses and debt payments, which total $14,500, include their son’s annual tuition of 
$40,000 and the cost of supporting his mother-in-law. Their monthly discretionary funds 
total $4,300. The listed debt payments include $334 payments on the state tax lien. (GE 
4; Tr. 119-120) 
 
Applicant's February 2013 credit report shows that, other than the SOR debts, 
Applicant's open accounts are in current status, including the mortgage loan on his 
residence. He no longer invests in real estate. He does not have credit card accounts; 
he uses only a debit card for purchases, and if the funds are not available in his 
account, he does not buy the item. (GE 2; Tr. 60-64)  
 
One of Applicant's witnesses was a conference manager at his company from 
1998 to 1999. She continues to have social and professional contact with Applicant. 
She places her trust in him because she provides him with all of her confidential 
financial information when he prepares her annual tax returns. Applicant's current office 
manager has worked for him since 2000. She described him as loyal, honest, and 
trustworthy, and she trusts him to prepare her tax returns. Applicant's current project 
manager also testified. He has worked for Applicant for seven years. He spent 37 years 
in federal government as a deputy finance officer, and has held a security clearance 
since approximately 1980. He stated that Applicant operates a “fair and upright” 
business. He allows his employees to exercise judgment and work independently. He 
described Applicant as being knowledgeable, trustworthy, and dependable. None of 
Applicant's witnesses were aware of his financial issues. (AE G; Tr. 123-150) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).1 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 
                                                 
2 Directive 6.3. 
 
 
5 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest2 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.3 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 After Applicant purchased two properties in 2006, his tenants stopped paying 
rent. Applicant paid the mortgage loans for three years. A business downturn affected 
                                                 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
5 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
6 
his finances in 2009 and 2010 and eventually he failed to meet his payments, which 
resulted in substantial arrearages. State A filed a tax lien against Applicant and his wife 
in 2011. The following disqualifying conditions apply under AG ¶19: 
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 I have considered the following mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and, 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
  
 Applicant’s real estate investing is not recent, as he bought the investment 
properties seven years ago. The negative events surrounding the houses have made 
him “gun shy,” and he has no intent to invest in real estate in the future. The events do 
not cast doubt on Applicant's current reliability and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant had no way to foresee several events that affected his ability to 
continue his payments: his tenants’ failure to pay the rent; the loss of more than 
$100,000 in rehabilitation costs because of repeated vandalism; his mother-in-law’s 
stroke and subsequent need for his full-time financial support; and the nationwide real 
estate crisis that reduced values precipitously and made the properties virtually 
impossible to sell. Following the real estate market crash, one of the houses he bought 
lost approximately 80% of its previous value. 
 
 
7 
 Applicant acted responsibly. He continued the payments for three years after he 
stopped receiving income from the properties. He repaired both properties after the 
vandalism, and even repaired one property twice, so that they were marketable. He 
contacted the lenders and requested to have the loans modified. He hired a real estate 
agent, who marketed the properties for several years. However, with the real estate 
market collapse, he was unable to sell them. The House B lender has agreed to a short 
sale, but the House A lender foreclosed. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d) apply.  
 
 Applicant and his wife are both employed, and they have substantial monthly 
income and assets. If he is informed of a deficiency on the foreclosed property, he has 
the financial resources to resolve it. The remaining property has an offer awaiting 
approval. Applicant's financial situation is under control and it is unlikely the problem 
will recur. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
 Applicant is a certified public accountant, with an advanced degree in finance. 
He had a good-faith belief, based on his professional training and experience, that 
State A’s interpretation of his tax liability was incorrect. However, after several years 
trying to resolve the issue, he decided to pay the lien. He provided evidence that State 
A has released it. AG ¶ 20(e) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Despite Applicant's knowledge of finance and auditing, the state did not accept 
his argument concerning the appropriate taxes due on his wife’s 2005 and 2006 
income. Applicant has paid the resulting tax lien. He invested in real estate in 2006, but 
 
 
8 
after rehabilitating the two houses, his renters stopped paying, were evicted, and the 
properties were vandalized. Applicant continued paying the mortgage loans from 2006 
to 2009. At about that time, his business suffered losses so that he was without income 
from his company for one year. His mother-in-law had a stroke in 2007, and he began 
supporting her full time. The real estate market crashed, causing his properties to drop 
precipitously in value, and he could not find buyers. He worked with the lenders to 
resolve the mortgage loans. Although one loan was foreclosed, he has the funds to pay 
any deficiency that may result. He is awaiting lender approval of the buyer’s offer on 
the other property, which is more than the fair market value. Given Applicant’s 
demonstrated maturity and stability, his substantial resources, and aversion to real 
estate investing, I conclude such a situation will not recur. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F    FOR Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
