1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-00546
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant neither falsified material facts on his 2006 or 2012 security clearance
applications, nor did he fail to disclose material facts during the corresponding
investigative interviews. Nevertheless, his 2013 alcohol-related conviction generates
personal conduct security concerns that he failed to mitigate. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On June 5, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DODCAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG).
SOR subparagraphs 1.b through 1.d, 1f and 1.g each allege that Applicant omitted relevant information from1
security clearance applications or from security clearance investigators. Applicant  admitted to all of the
omissions, but stated they were not intentional.  
2
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 11, 2013, admitting subparagraphs 1.a,
1.e, and 1.h, and admitting, in part, and denying, in part, the remaining allegations.  He1
requested a hearing, whereupon the case was assigned to me on July 11, 2013.
On July 24, 2013, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for August
6, 2013.  At the hearing, I received six Government exhibits marked as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, in addition to two Applicant exhibits, marked as Applicant’s
Exhibit (AE) A and B. Also, I received Applicant’s testimony. The transcript was received
on August 14, 2013.
Procedural Ruling
At the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend SOR
subparagraph 1.a to read, as follows:
You used marijuana from about March 1994 to about 1998, and once in
December 2007.
Applicant did not object to the motion, and admitted to the amended allegation.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old married man with three children, ages ten, nine, and
five. He has a high school education. Applicant is an audiovisual technician. He has
worked in this field since 2004, and has been working on his current job since February
2013. His work duties include servicing audiovisual equipment at classified locations.
(Tr. 16-17)
Applicant is highly respected on the job. According to his former employer,
Applicant was a talented employee who started as a warehouse specialist before being
quickly promoted to the position of integration engineer “because of his dedication and
dependability.” (AE B) According to the vice president of the company where Applicant
currently works, Applicant is a reliable man “who always takes responsibility for his
actions.” (AE A) 
Applicant abused marijuana throughout high school, from 1994 to 1998. (Answer
to SOR subparagraph 1.a, as amended by Department Counsel) In 1996, Applicant was
arrested and charged with possession of alcohol, possession of marijuana, and assault.
(GE 2 at 1;  GE 4 at 9) As a result of this arrest, he was sentenced to one month in a
juvenile detention facility and placed on probation for two years. (GE 2 at 1) Also, the
juvenile court ordered him to enter into a rehabilitation center, as a result of the arrest.
(GE 4 at 9) How long he attended the rehabilitation center is unclear from the record.
Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?2
Have you ever been involved in an offense involving alcohol or drugs?3
3
 
  In 1997, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana with
intent to distribute. (GE 2 at 1) He was convicted and ordered to spend one year in a
juvenile detention center. (GE 2 at 1) 
Applicant stopped using marijuana after high school, and stayed drug-free for
approximately nine years. In December 2007, Applicant used marijuana at a party. (Tr.
27) By then, he had a security clearance. (Tr. 30) Applicant has not smoked marijuana
since then.
In December 2012, Applicant attended a company Christmas party and
consumed five to seven beers. After the party, while driving home, he accidentally rear-
ended a vehicle in front of him at an intersection. (GE 4 at 8) When the police arrived,
they administered a breathalyzer to Applicant. He failed it, and was arrested and
charged with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). (GE 4 at 8) Subsequently,
Applicant was found guilty. He appealed, and in March 2013, Applicant pleaded guilty to
the lesser charge of reckless driving. He was sentenced to 30 days in jail (suspended),
fined approximately $800, and ordered to attend an alcohol awareness class. Also, the
court placed him on supervised probation for a year, restricted him to driving to work
only, and ordered the installation of an interlock breathalyzer system in his car. GE 4 at
8) Currently, Applicant remains on probation with an interlock ignition device on his car.
(Tr. 58; GE 5 at 2) He recently completed the alcohol awareness class. (Tr. 56-58) 
The SOR alleges that in 2006, Applicant falsified a security clearance application
by answering “no” in response to Section 24, regarding whether he had  used any illegal
drugs in the last seven years. (SOR subparagraph 1.b) Further, the SOR alleges that
Applicant falsified material facts during a January 2007 follow-up interview with an
investigative agent when he stated that his last use of marijuana was in 1998. (SOR
subparagraph 1.d) Applicant  had not used marijuana within seven years of when he
completed the 2006 security clearance application, and his marijuana use did not recur
until after the completion the 2007 subject interview. (Answer to SOR subparagraph 1.a)
When Applicant completed his security clearance application in 2006, he
disclosed his 1996 arrest, in response to Section 23,  for possession of alcohol, but he2
did not disclose either of his marijuana charges. Applicant contends that the omission
was unintentional. He voluntarily disclosed these arrests during his 2007 investigative
interview. (GE 2 at 1) The investigative agent characterized him as “forthright and
corporative [sic].” (GE 2 at 2) 
Applicant completed a security clearance application in March 2012. In response
to Section 22,  he did not list his 1997 arrest for possession of marijuana with intent to3
distribute. Moreover, the Government contends that he did not disclose this arrest to the
4
 
investigator during the follow-up interview in May 2012. Elsewhere on the 2012 security
clearance application, Applicant disclosed that he was ordered to attend drug treatment
on two occasions between 1996 and 1998. (GE 3 at 32-33) Also, he listed the name,
address, and phone number of the drug treatment center where he received the court-
ordered treatment. (GE 3 at 32-33) As for the 2012 interview, Applicant contends that
he discussed the 1997 arrest with the agent, but the agent did not address the issue in
depth because it had been covered during the earlier investigation. (Tr. 46)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing
the complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in
the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern under this guideline is as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)
Applicant’s answers to questions on his 2006 and 2012 security clearance
applications, together with responses during corresponding subject interviews raise the
question of whether the following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16 apply:
(a) deliberate omission concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
5
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and,
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative.
When Applicant completed his 2006 security clearance application, he had not
used marijuana in more than seven years. Consequently, his answer to Section 24 was
truthful. Similarly, Applicant’s corresponding subject interview occurred in January 2007,
approximately 11 months before Applicant’s marijuana use recurred. Therefore,
Applicant did not engage in falsification either on his 2006 security clearance application
or during the 2007 interview. Neither of the disqualifying conditions apply. I resolve SOR
subparagraphs 1.b and 1.d in Applicant’s favor.
Although Applicant did not disclose his marijuana-related arrests that occurred
between 1996 and 1997 on his 2006 security clearance application, he voluntarily
disclosed them to an investigative agent during his subsequent subject interview. This
fact, together with the investigative agent’s positive credibility determination compel me
to accept Applicant’s contention that the omissions were unintentional. Neither of the
disqualifying conditions apply, and I resolve SOR subparagraph 1.c in Applicant’s favor.
Applicant did not disclose his 1997 arrest for possession of marijuana when he
completed the March 2012 security clearance application. Because he listed two
episodes of court-ordered drug treatment that occurred between 1996 and 1998, and
listed all of his other charges, I conclude that his contention that his security clearance
application omission was unintentional is credible. I resolve SOR subparagraph 1.f in
Applicant’s favor. 
As for SOR subparagraph 1.g, which alleges Applicant omitted his 1997 arrest
during his 2012 subject interview, Applicant thoroughly discussed this arrest during a
2007 subject interview as part of an earlier investigation. Under these circumstances, I
conclude that its omission from the 2012 interview was immaterial. I resolve SOR
subparagraph 1.g for Applicant.
Applicant’s history of drug use and his 2012 DUI trigger the application of AG ¶
16(c), as follows:
Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.
6
 
 Applicant’s habitual marijuana use occurred in high school, and the one
recurrence in the 15 years since finishing high school occurred nearly six years ago.
Although the nature and seriousness of the recurrence was certainly significant because
of Applicant’s possession of a security clearance at the time, it is sufficiently outweighed
by its isolation and remoteness in time. I resolve SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.e in
Applicant’s favor.
Conversely, Applicant’s DUI occurred less than a year ago, and he is still on
probation with an interlock ignition device installed on his car. Under these
circumstances, it is too soon to conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concern.
None of the mitigating conditions apply to SOR subparagraph 1.h.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant deserves credit for overcoming a troubled adolescence to become a
valued employee and a stable family man. Moreover, his testimony was credible and
contrite. These positive attributes, however, are outweighed by the recency and
seriousness of the 2012 DUI. Consequently, I conclude that Applicant has failed to
mitigate the security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
7
 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
