 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00337 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant started using 
marijuana in January 1982 and last used it in August 2012. His drug involvement 
remains a security concern. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on April 25, 2013, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing drug involvement and personal 
conduct security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance. On May 9, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and 
elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 30, 2013. The FORM contained six attachments. 
On August 13, 2013, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. On August 27, 2013, Applicant responded to the 
FORM. Department Counsel did not object to the response, which was admitted into the 
record. On September 10, 2013, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted purchasing and using 
marijuana between 1982 and the present. There are no contested facts. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old president of a company he founded in March 1999, 
who seeks to obtain a security clearance. No evidence as to his job performance or 
character was submitted. In September 2012, he completed an Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In response to questions in 
Section 23 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity, he stated he used THC such as 
marijuana once or twice a quarter, four to eight times a year. (Item 5) He used it for 
relaxation and used it with his best friend. He indicated he intended to use the drug in 
the future.  
 
 During a December 2012 personal subject interview, Applicant stated he started 
using marijuana in January 1982 and last used it in August 2012. (Item 6) He stated he 
knew marijuana was illegal, but used it to relax at his home with friends. He would use it 
once or twice a quarter. At the time of his interview, he stated he intended to use 
marijuana in the future, but was willing to forgo future use if using marijuana would 
hinder him in obtaining a security clearance or obtaining government employment. (Item 
6) 
 
 From 1982 to 1995, Applicant used marijuana two or three times a week. (Item 6) 
From 1995 to 1999, he used it weekly, and from 2000 to the present, he used it once a 
quarter. (Item 6) He stated he had occasionally purchased marijuana. In his response to 
the FORM, he stated he found the whole process to be an eye-opening experience. He 
has made a choice to refrain from using marijuana and has not used marijuana since 
his December 2012 interview. (FORM Answer) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement in that 
the use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. 
 
 
4 
Under AG ¶ 25(a) any drug abuse could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Between 1982 and August 2012, Applicant purchased and used 
marijuana. In his December 2012 interview, he stated he intended to use marijuana in 
the future unless his future use interfered with obtaining government employment or 
obtaining a security clearance. AG ¶ 25(a) drug abuse applies.  
 
AG ¶ 26 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such 
as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since 
ended; and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
Applicant used marijuana with his best friend. There is no indication he no longer 
associates with this friend. Nor is there any testimony or other evidence he no longer 
associates with any other individuals with whom he used marijuana. He says he will not 
use marijuana in the future if using it would hinder him obtaining a security clearance or 
government employment. Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled 
administratively, I am unable to test the veracity of his assertion he will stop using 
marijuana in the future. I am unable to evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or to form a 
positive determination as to his truthfulness. From the record, I am unable to find 
Applicant was sincere, open, and honest in his claim he will not use illegal drugs in the 
future. 
 
 
5 
None of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns apply. AG ¶ 26(a) 
does not apply. He used marijuana four to eight times a year to relax and used over a 
thirty-year period. His usage is not infrequent. He did not use under unusual 
circumstances. His use does cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. There is no evidence he no longer associates with 
drug-using friends. There is no showing he has executed a signed statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. It has been less than one year 
since his last use of marijuana. Considering the thirty-year history of his use this period 
of abstinence is insufficient. 
 
In September 2012, he stated he intended to use marijuana in the future. In 
December 2012, he stated he intended to use marijuana in the future, but was willing for 
forego future marijuana use if it hindered him obtaining a security clearance or 
government employment. In August 2013, he stated he had made a choice to no longer 
use illegal substance and has refrained from doing so since his December 2012 
interview. I have no way of ascertaining the veracity of this assertion. He provided no 
explanation for his decision to refrain from marijuana use after having used it for thirty 
years other than he wants a security clearance and to obtain government employment.  
 
AG ¶ 26(c) does not apply because prescription drugs were not abused. AG ¶ 
26(d) does not apply because Applicant was never in aftercare.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct, which is 
conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
 
Applicant used marijuana over a thirty-year period. He acknowledged he knew 
marijuana use was illegal. In completing his e-QIP, Applicant indicated he had used 
marijuana once or twice a quarter, four to eight times a year starting in January 1982. 
He indicated his last use was in August 2012. Applicant was forthcoming about this 
adverse information. There was no falsification of his e-QIP.  
 
Under AG ¶ 16(d) a security concern could be raised and may be disqualifying if 
there is “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, 
when combined with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person 
may not properly safeguard protected information.” Having previously found against 
Applicant as to his marijuana use, I find no additional disqualifying or additional security 
concerns under the personal conduct guideline. I find for Applicant as to SOR ¶ 2.  
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant purchased and used 
marijuana over a thirty-year period. Applicant’s last marijuana use occurred one year 
ago. I am unable to make a finding that illegal drugs are no longer a part of his life. The 
awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a life time occurrence, but is based on 
current disqualifying and mitigating conditions. Although the Applicant=s evidence of 
rehabilitation is insufficient at this time, should he in the future be afforded an 
opportunity to reapply for a security clearance, with the passage of sufficient additional 
time and no future illegal drug usage, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of 
his security worthiness. But that time has not yet arrived.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-d: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
  
 
7 
 Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
