 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate1
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------- ) ADP Case No. 14-03299
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a
public trust position. The evidence shows Applicant has a history of financial problems
or difficulties. But Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the
concern stemming from her unfavorable financial history. Accordingly, this case is
decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On September 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR) detailing a trustworthiness concern under Guideline F for
financial considerations.  The action was taken under Department of Defense Directive1
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as
 The AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The2
AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal Board4
restated existing caselaw that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
 Department Counsel Brief at 2, n. 1. 5
 W avier means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or6
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right and
the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9  ed., W est 2009).th
2
amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security
Program (Jan. 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)2
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR recommended submission
of Applicant’s case to an administrative judge to determine her eligibility to occupy an
automated data processing (ADP) position to support a contract with the DOD.  
Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2014, and she opted for a decision
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Thereafter, on April 29, 2015,
Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material information that could be
adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to3
Applicant, who received it on May 28, 2015. Applicant replied to the FORM on about
June 26, 2015, and her response is made part of the record as follows: (1) Exhibit
A–memorandum of explanation; (2) Exhibit B–law firm paperwork; (3) Exhibit C–copies
of federal income tax returns for 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014; and (4) Exhibit D–copies
of state income tax returns for 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014. The case was assigned to
me on July 18, 2015. 
Ruling on Evidence
Exhibit 8 is a report of investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of
Applicant. The document is a summary of an interview of Applicant conducted on
January 15, 2014. An ROI may be received and considered as evidence when it is
authenticated by a witness.  Here, Exhibit 8 is not authenticated in any way. Although4
Applicant, who is representing herself, has not raised the issue via an objection, I am
raising it sua sponte. With that said, it is evident that Department Counsel is acting in
good faith, having highlighted the issue in their brief.  Nevertheless, Applicant’s lack of5
an objection in her response to the FORM does not amount to a knowing waiver of the
right to object to the ROI.  Accordingly, Exhibit 8 is not admissible and I have not6
considered it.
 Exhibits 5, 6, and 7 (credit reports from 2013, 2104, and 2015, respectively).   7
 Exhibits C and D. 8
3
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a health care contractor for the Defense
Department. She has been employed with health care companies since at least 2004.
She is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public trust for her current job
responsibilities. Eligibility is necessary because her job involves access to sensitive but
unclassified information known as personally identifiable information (PII). 
Applicant is twice divorced and the mother of a 21-year-old daughter. In her
answer to the SOR, she acknowledged that she had poor credit and had outstanding
debts. She stated that she is a trustworthy person who takes her job seriously. She
further stated that she is a hard worker who does the best she can to provide for her
family. She described herself in the past as homeless with a young daughter, but she
bounced back. 
The available documentary evidence shows that Applicant has a history of
financial problems or difficulties.  That history as set forth in the SOR is as follows: (1)7
failure to file state and federal income tax returns for 2011 and 2012; (2) nine medical
collection accounts for a total of $1,748; (3) two collection accounts owed to a local
government for juvenile service for a total of $293; and (4) a single consumer collection
account for telephone service for $5,046. Applicant admitted all these matters except for
the tax returns, which she stated she had filed. Those matters are addressed below. 
(1) Applicant provided copies of her state and federal income tax returns for
2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014, all of which were prepared and filed with the assistance of
a tax preparation firm.  The state and federal returns for 2011 and 2012 were filed in8
June 2015. A review of the returns shows a mix of refunds and taxes owed with a final
outcome of a $7 refund from the state and $1,123 in taxes owed to the IRS. The returns
also show a substantial increase in income in 2014. Her 2014 adjusted gross income
was $42,884 whereas it never exceeded $34,000 in the three previous years.   
(2) Applicant admitted the nine medical collection accounts, and she stated that
she intended to seek assistance with a credit service agency to repay her debts.
(3) Applicant explained that the two collection accounts owed to a local
government stem from her daughter’s involvement with a county juvenile court service.
She further explained her daughter was paying fees associated with probation, but
stopped. She stated she asked her daughter to take care of the debts. The two
collection accounts appear in the 2013 credit report, but they do not appear in the more
recent credit reports from 2014 and 2015.
 Exhibit B. 9
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 10
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant11
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  12
 AG ¶ 19(a).  13
 AG ¶ 19(c). 14
4
(4) Applicant admitted the single consumer collection account for telephone
service. The account appears in the 2013 credit report, but it does not appear in the
more recent credit reports from 2014 and 2015.
Applicant retained the services of a law firm that specializes in providing credit
repair services.  A recent case status report shows the law firm has taken action to9
intervene with Applicant’s creditors as well as challenge information on credit reports. 
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant10
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 11
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect [sensitive] information.  12
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly compromise
sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It encompasses
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important qualities. A
person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or
negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. The facts indicate inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and13
a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The14
facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions, and the facts also
 AG ¶ 19(g). 15
 AG ¶¶ 20(a)–(f). 16
5
establish that she failed to timely file state and federal income tax returns for 2011 and
2012.  15
I have considered the six mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and the
following are most pertinent to Applicant’s case:  16
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control; and 
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
Although Applicant has a problematic financial history, this case has a number of
mitigating circumstances to consider. First, she sought assistance and followed
professional guidance by retaining the services of a tax preparation firm. As a result,
she has now filed state and federal income tax returns for the two years in question as
well as for the past two tax years. That means she is in compliance with tax authorities
on filing requirements, and she owes a relatively small amount, less than $1,200, to the
IRS. 
Second, she has not resolved any of the nine medical collection accounts, but
those accounts have diminished security significance. That is because the debts were
incurred for necessary medical care. The debts were not caused by frivolous or
irresponsible spending, high living, or other matters of security significance. 
Third, the two collection accounts owed to the local government also have
diminished security significance. That it so because the debts were incurred by
Applicant’s daughter’s involvement with juvenile probation. Moreover, those two
collection accounts do not appear on the most recent credit reports, which suggests
they may be otherwise resolved.
Fourth, the single consumer collection account for more than $5,000 is a sizeable
and substantial debt with security significance. But it too does not appear on the most
recent credit reports, which suggests it may be otherwise resolved. 
Fifth, Applicant sought assistance and followed professional guidance by
retaining the services of a law firm to improve her credit worthiness. The law firm
specializes in helping consumers repair their credit, and it is taking action on her behalf.
It is too soon to predict the outcome of those actions. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).17
6
Sixth, Applicant’s income has recently increased by a substantial amount. In
2014, her adjusted gross income was more than $12,000 more than in the previous
year. The additional income should improve her overall financial stability and allow her
to address delinquent debts. 
Based on all those circumstances, taken together, I am persuaded that Applicant
has presented sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the concern stemming from
her unfavorable financial history. The evidence leaves me without doubt or concern
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. In reaching this
conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence
outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I gave due consideration to the
whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude Applicant explained and mitigated the17
financial considerations concern.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.m: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for an ADP position. Eligibility for access to
sensitive information is granted. 
        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
