 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00596 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 3, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E. This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD CAF could not make the affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. On April 30, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. On May 20, 2014, Department Counsel requested a hearing 
 
2 
 
in this matter. This case was assigned to me on July 15, 2014. On July 24, 2014, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling 
the hearing for August 12, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
5, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A though C. The record 
of the proceeding was left open until August 19, 2014, to provide Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional matters, but he did not present anything further. All 
proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The prehearing 
guidance letter sent to Applicant was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE 1), Department 
Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as HE 2, and Department Counsel’s post-hearing 
email was marked as HE 3. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on August 
21, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old site supervisor/mechanic who is sponsored for a 
security clearance by a defense contractor. He began working for that defense 
contractor in April 2013 and was released from employment in October 2013 pending 
the results of this security clearance determination. He graduated from high school in 
1989. He served in the U.S. Navy from 1989 to 1994, attained the grade of petty officer 
third class (E-4), and received an honorable discharge. He has been married three 
times. His current wife was also his second wife. He has no children. Applicant held a 
security clearance in the past without incident.1 
 
 The SOR contained 12 Guideline E allegations. These allegations consisted of 
ten instances in which Applicant was charged with criminal or traffic violations and two 
instances in which his employment was terminated. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted each allegation, some with comments. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact.2 
  
In about April 1998, Applicant was charged with urinating in public or on private 
property. At that time, he was about 27 years old. This was an alcohol-related offense. 
In August 2000, he was convicted of that offense, underwent an alcohol screening, and 
was required to pay $88.3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged that Applicant was charged with driving under the influence 
(DUI) in March 1999 and, as a result of that offense, was placed on probation for one 
year. In his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he listed a 
DUI arrest and conviction in August 1998, but none in 1999. In an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) interview, he was asked about a 1999 DUI charge and indicated 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-6, 23-25, 48-49; GE 1, 2. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 34-36; GE 4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
that it was the same charge that he listed in his e-QIP as occurring in August 1998. 
Even though Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, no police record admitted 
into evidence reflected that Applicant was arrested, charged, or convicted of DUI in 
either 1998 or 1999. It is unknown where the OPM investigator obtained the information 
about a 1999 DUI charge. At the hearing, Applicant responded “Yes” to a question that 
asked if he was convicted of DUI in March 1999 and placed on probation. He also 
indicated that he received an alcohol screening and voluntarily participated in a 
treatment program.4   
 
In about April 2000, Applicant was charged with aggravated battery. He was 
convicted of assault and placed on supervised probation for one year. He indicated this 
assault was an alcohol-related offense. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated 
that he hit an individual during this incident and broke his nose. He also stated, “I did 
NOT beat this guy senseless as this charge would imply.” In his e-QIP, he indicated he 
broke the individual’s nose in three places. In January 2001 and September 2001, he 
was charged with two probation violations and confined for about six months.5 
 
 In about November 2000, Applicant was charged with disorderly intoxication in a 
public place causing a disturbance. At the hearing, he stated that he and his brother 
went out one night to celebrate the birth of his brother’s first child. His brother was 
driving the vehicle. They were pulled over by the police, and both of them were 
arrested. They spend the night in jail and a judge dismissed the charges against both of 
them the next day. The police record did not reflect a disposition of that charge.6 
 
 In about December 2000, Applicant was charged with DUI (liquor), driving with 
no driver’s license, careless driving, and transporting an open container. In September 
2001, he was convicted of the DUI offense and placed on probation. The other charges 
were dismissed. At the hearing, he indicated that he received an alcohol screening and 
voluntarily participated in a treatment program.7 
 
 In about August 2001, Applicant was charged with DUI (alcohol or drugs) and 
driving on a suspended/revoked/fraudulent driver’s license. In February 2002, he was 
convicted of DUI and placed on probation for one year. The other charge was 
dismissed.8 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 35; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
5 Tr. 35-37; GE 1, 2, 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
6 Tr. 37-39; GE 2, 3, 4, 5; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
7 Tr. 39-40; GE 2, 4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
8 Tr. 40; GE 2, 4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 
 
In about September 2001, Applicant was charged with driving with no driver’s 
license and no proof of insurance. He was convicted of the no proof of insurance and 
the other charge was dismissed.9 
 
In about December 2005, Applicant was charged with sexual battery – unlawful 
touching. In October 2006, he was convicted of disorderly conduct – brawling/fighting. 
He was sentenced to probation for six months and a fine.10   
 
In about January 2007, Applicant was charged with willful criminal damage to 
property and battery – physical contact/rude – domestic violence. These charges were 
dismissed.11 
 
From about May 2007 to July 2008, Applicant worked as the director of 
maintenance at an aviation company. He stated that he has a tumultuous relationship 
with the president of the company. He indicated that he gave the president two weeks’ 
notice that he was quitting and the next day he was terminated. He contends that he is 
not aware of why he was terminated from that job.12 
 
In about December 2008, Applicant was charged with DUI (alcohol). This 
occurred after he attended a coworker’s party on New Year’s Eve. In May 2009, he was 
convicted of that offense and sentenced to 72 hours of confinement with credit for time 
served, 40 hours of community service, and 12 months of probation. He also attended a 
three- or four-day alcohol course. At the hearing, he indicated that his driver’s license 
was still in a restricted status due to this conviction, and he currently had an interlock 
system on his car. He expects these restrictions to be removed in December 2014.13   
 
In about June 2011, Applicant was working for a subcontractor in Afghanistan. 
He assisted a military aircrew in obtaining parts for an aircraft that enabled them to fly a 
mission. As an expression of appreciation, the aircrew gave Applicant two shell casings 
for rounds fired during the mission. Applicant placed the shell casings in a box 
addressed to his home in the United States and put the box on an aircraft returning to 
the United States. He intended to keep the shell casings as souvenirs. He knew that it 
was against regulations to ship the shell casings back to the United States. The shell 
casings were discovered on the aircraft when it arrived in the United States and were 
confiscated. When the prime contractor learned that Applicant shipped the shell 
casings, it demanded that he be fired. He was terminated from that job for deliberately 
violating company rules and regulations. In his Answer to the SOR, he stated, “I didn’t 
see the harm in mailing home the shells and paid for that decision with my job.” At the 
                                                          
9 GE 4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
10 GE 2, 4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
11 GE 2, 3, 4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
12 Tr. 32-34; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
13 Tr. 40-48; GE 2, 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 
 
hearing, he indicated that he purchased similar shell casings in the United States at an 
Army-Navy store for $11 apiece. He also indicated that spent shell casings were 
routinely crushed and given to Afghans as scrape metal.14   
 
Applicant admitted that he has made poor decisions in the past and stated that 
he paid for those poor decisions. He also stated that he has shown sound judgment and 
reason for the past several years. At the hearing, he indicated that he attended an eight-
week inpatient alcohol treatment program in about 2002 or 2003 and believed that he 
was diagnosed as an alcohol abuser. He further testified that “alcohol is not a part of my 
life anymore”, but also stated that he occasionally has a beer at dinner with his wife. He 
indicated that the last time he was intoxicated was on the day of the Super Bowl in 
February 2014, but noted that he did not drive on that occasion.15 
 
Applicant worked for defense contractors in Afghanistan from November 2009 to 
June 2011 and from April to October 2013. A Marine Corps lieutenant colonel that 
Applicant supported as a lead mechanic in Afghanistan in 2013 gave Applicant his 
highest recommendation for a security clearance and stated that he would trust him with 
his life and trust him to make sound judgments on behalf of his program and the U.S. 
Government. Applicant’s former employer indicated that he trusted Applicant because 
he proved that he was reliable and efficient in all types of projects. A former coworker 
praised his performance and indicated he was his “go to guy.”16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
14 Tr.25-32, 51-53; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
15 Tr. 43-48; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
16 Tr. 25-26; GE 2; AE A-C. 
 
6 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
 
7 
 
characteristics including that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
 
Applicant was found guilty of at least six alcohol-related offenses, including four 
DUIs, between 1998 and 2008. He committed two probation violations in 2001. He was 
found guilty of assault in 2000 and disorderly conduct (brawling/fighting) in 2006. He 
was terminated from jobs in 2008 and 2011. AG ¶ 16(c) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant has a history of engaging in misconduct that spans from 1998 to 2011. 
Some of his offenses appear to be minor, while others are serious. Many of his offenses 
were alcohol-related. None of his misconduct appeared to have occurred under unique 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. His pattern of misconduct continues to cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) and 17(f) do not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant indicated that he attended an eight-week inpatient alcohol treatment 
program in about 2002 or 2003 and believed that he was diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser. He was later convicted of DUI in 2009. Following his latest DUI conviction, he 
attended a three- or four-day alcohol course. He driver’s license still has restrictions 
(use of an interlock system) on it due to his 2009 DUI conviction. He continues to 
consume alcohol on an occasional basis and indicated that he was last intoxicated in 
February 2014, but did not drive on that occasion. AG ¶ 17(d) and 17(e) do not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s latest alleged misconduct occurred in June 2011, over three years 
ago. During that incident, he knowingly shipped spent shell casings to the United States 
from Afghanistan in violation of existing regulations. In his Answer to the SOR, he 
indicated that he did not see the harm in shipping home the shell casings, which raises 
questions about his judgment and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
8 
 
From the evidence presented, I find that insufficient time has passed to conclude that 
Applicant has reformed and rehabilitated himself and that he will not engage in 
misconduct in the future.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served in the Navy for about five years and received an honorable 
discharge. He has worked as a mechanic for various defense contractors, including 
overseas in dangerous environments. He is a valued employee and well liked by former 
supervisors and coworkers. Nevertheless, he has engaged in a pattern of misconduct 
that continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Despite the presence of some mitigation, questions remain about his 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about his 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
9 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
