 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03874 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 1, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
March 4, 2015, scheduling the hearing for March 30, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 7, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since February 2014. He is applying for a security clearance. He 
has two years of college, but he did not earn a degree. He has never married, and he 
has no children.1 
 
 Applicant was injured at work on two occasions. He was paid workers’ 
compensation, but there was a dispute over the payment of medical bills. He initiated a 
lawsuit, which resulted in a $10,000 settlement. He was unemployed from May 2012 
until he obtained his current job in February 2014. He was unable to pay all his bills, and 
a number of accounts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts with balances totaling about $25,200. 
The debts are addressed in the table below. 
 
SOR AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
1.a Bank $14,604 Bank issued an IRS Form 1099-C 
(Cancellation of Debt) in September 
2014, which cancelled the debt. 
Tr. at 31-33; 
Response to 
SOR; AE F. 
1.b Auto loan $5,481 Deficiency on loan after vehicle was 
repossessed. Per agreement, 
paying $20 per month since 
December 2014. 
Tr. at 33-35; 
Response to 
SOR; AE A, G.
1.c Medical debt $3,316 Paid December 2014. Tr. at 35; 
Response to 
SOR; AE B. 
1.d Collection 
company/bank 
$930 
 
Paid July 2014. Tr. at 35-36; 
Response to 
SOR; AE D, G.
1.e Collection 
company/medical 
debt 
$528 Contacted collection company. No 
record of account. Debt not listed 
on most recent credit report. 
Tr. at 36-37; 
Response to 
SOR; GE 3; 
AE G. 
1.f Collection 
company/medical 
debt 
$255 Paid November 2014. Tr. at 37-38; 
Response to 
SOR; AE C, D.
                                                          
1 Tr. at 38-39; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 23-29; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
1.g Collection 
company/medical 
debt 
$44 Paid October 2014. Tr. at 37-38; 
Response to 
SOR; AE E. 
1.h Collection 
company/medical 
debt 
$43 Paid November 2014. Tr. at 37-38; 
Response to 
SOR; AE D. 
 
 In summary, Applicant paid five debts; the creditor forgave one debt; he 
successfully disputed owing one debt; and he has been making monthly payments 
since December 2014 on the last debt. 
 
 Applicant stated that with his current employment, his finances are back on track. 
He has not received formal financial counseling. He is aware that the IRS Form 1099-C 
can have tax consequences, and he is prepared to address them. He credibly testified 
that he will continue to pay the remaining debt.3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 30-32, 39-40; AE G. 
 
4 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his financial obligations. The above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant was injured at work, and he was unemployed for a substantial period. 
Of the eight debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant paid five debts; the creditor forgave 
one debt; he successfully disputed owing one debt; and he has been making monthly 
payments since December 2014 on the last debt. He credibly testified that he will 
continue with the payment plan until the debt is paid. 
 
 I find that Applicant’s financial problems were caused by conditions that were 
beyond his control. He acted responsibly and made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. 
There are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under 
control. They occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), 
and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet completely applicable because Applicant 
is still in the process of paying his last debt. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the disputed 
debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
