FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: A Judge can find an applicant has engaged in Criminal conduct even if criminal
charges were dropped or dismissed.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-00520.a1
DATE: 11/09/2007
DATE: November 9, 2007
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-00520
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 7, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and
The Judge found in favor of Applicant with respect to SOR paragraphs 1.k, l.1, 1.r, 2.a, 2.c, and 2.d.  Those1
favorable findings are not at issue on appeal.
2
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992,
as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 30, 2007, Administrative Judge
Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant submitted a timely appeal
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  1
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s unfavorable security
clearance decision under Guidelines J and E is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse clearance decision under Guideline J should be
reversed because: (a) a number of the criminal charges against him were dated and many had been
dismissed; (b) a number of the incidents had resulted from marital or interpersonal difficulties that
were no longer present; (c) the most recent incident, a 2004 conviction for Reckless Driving, was
not serious; and (d) he had subsequently demonstrated rehabilitation under the whole person factors.
Similarly, he argues that the Judge’s adverse clearance decision under Guideline E should be
reversed because the 2001 incident for misappropriation of time and allowing another person to enter
hours in direct violation of company rules and policies was a dated, isolated incident, also mitigated
under the whole person factors.  Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
A Judge can find an applicant has engaged in criminal conduct even if the criminal charges
against the applicant were dropped or dismissed.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-11906 at 3 (App. Bd.
Jul. 19, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-21761 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 28, 2005).  The ultimate state court
dispositions of Applicant’s criminal incident did not preclude the Judge from making findings
adverse to the Applicant.  Moreover, it was reasonable for the Judge to consider the significance of
Applicant’s pattern of conduct as a whole, rather than analyzing each separate criminal or personal
conduct incident in a piecemeal fashion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12648 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct.
20, 2006) citing Raffone v. Adams, 468 F. 2d 860 (2  Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events maynd
have a significance that is missing when each event is viewed in isolation).  Considering the record
as a whole, the Judge’s material findings with respect to Applicant’s conduct of security concern
reflect a reasonable interpretation of the record evidence. 
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.   The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions requires the exercise
of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740
at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel
the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to
weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable
evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or
an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the
Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.
The charges against Applicant included Indecent Exposure, Domestic Assault, Disturbing the Peace, Reckless2
Driving, Concealed Weapon, Brandishing a Firearm, Assault, Annoying Phone Calls, Worthless Check, Communicating
a Threat, Stalking, Violation of Probation, and Trespassing.
Decision at 8.3
3
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a lengthy and serious history of criminal and
personal misconduct.  That history included 14 criminal incidents between 1990 and 2004.   In her2
decision, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the length and
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
mitigating conditions and whole person factors.  She specifically considered such mitigating
evidence as Applicant’s military service, his candid disclosures about his past conduct, the dismissal
of cases, his remorse, and “his current professional successes and aspirations, and enthusiasm for his
new family” in reaching her decision.   She found in favor of Applicant with respect to some of the3
SOR allegations.  However, the Judge reasonably explained why the evidence which the Applicant
had presented in mitigation under Guidelines J and E was insufficient to overcome the government’s
security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  Given the record that was before her,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guidelines J and E is not arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan  
Michael Y. Ra’annan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
