FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline E
DIGEST: In this case the weight of the evidence that runs contrary to the Judge’s finding of
falsification is sufficient to render that finding unsustainable.  However the Judge’s unfavorable
decision under Guideline G is sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-18809.a1
DATE: 11/20/2007
DATE: November 20, 2007
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-18809
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
R. Burl McCoy, Esq.
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 26, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
2
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 24, 2007, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
With regard to Guideline E, Applicant argues that the government did not prove that
Applicant falsified his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) by deliberately failing to disclose a
September 2004  mental evaluation at a state hospital. The Board agrees that the Judge’s finding that
Applicant falsified his SF 86 was error.  The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of fact
is limited to determining if they are supported by substantial record evidence–such relevant evidence
as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3. 1.32.1.  In this case, the weight of the record
evidence that runs contrary to the Judge’s finding of falsification is of sufficient magnitude to render
that finding unsustainable.
Applicant had a domestic dispute with his wife in September 2004.  During that incident,
according to his wife, Applicant talked about hurting himself.  Applicant’s wife called the police.
The police obtained a mental detention warrant and proceeded to Applicant’s residence.  Upon
arrival at the residence, an officer informed Applicant that he possessed a court order stating that
Applicant had to go to a local hospital for a mental evaluation.  Applicant, who was expecting the
arrival of his parents from out of town, asked the officer, “could we do it later?”  The officer replied
in the negative and Applicant went with the police without being handcuffed.  Once at the hospital,
Applicant spent 15 minutes with a physician.  They discussed Applicant’s marital problems and the
doctor recommended marriage counseling.  They discussed an anti-depressant that Applicant was
taking at the time and the doctor suggested to Applicant that he might want to double the dose and
get follow-up therapy.  The doctor then told Applicant that he was fine and to go home.  The police
took Applicant home without further incident and told him to have a nice day.
Question 21 of the SF 86 asked, “In the last 7 years, have you consulted with a mental health
professional (psychiatrist, psychologist, counselor, etc.) or have you consulted with another health
care provider about a mental health related condition?”  Applicant answered “yes” and provided the
dates, location, and the name of the therapist/doctor for a regimen of mental health treatment that
took place between January and February 2005 (he also listed this treatment when answering
Question 25 relating to alcohol treatment).  In the “Additional Comments” section of the SF 86,
Applicant also listed a voluntary (not mandated or court-instructed) alcohol rehabilitation treatment
program he participated in between June 7 and June 12, 2004.
The record evidence indicates, therefore, that Applicant freely revealed two other interactions
of significant duration he had with mental health professionals.  On the facts of this case, these
disclosures, standing alone, significantly undercut any notion that Applicant had a motive to conceal
his mental health history from the government.  These interactions were initiated by the voluntary
actions of Applicant (the 2005 regimen had been suggested to him by health care providers who were
3
aware of his problems with alcohol–the submission to the June 2004 treatment was purely voluntary
on Applicant’s part).  By contrast, the September 2004 incident was an involuntary interaction that
followed a domestic incident, involved the police, and was of very short duration (Applicant spent
approximately 15 minutes with a mental health professional who spent a significant part of that time
discussing Applicant’s marital problems).  Applicant testified at the hearing that at the time he
completed Question 21 on the SF 86, it never dawned on him that the September 2004 incident
should be listed.  This expression of his state of mind at the time he answered Question 21 is strongly
supported by the disclosures he made on the SF 86 and by other record evidence.
Viewed objectively, Question 21 arguably encompasses the type of interaction that took place
in September 2004.  However, it is not a precise fit.  The question speaks in terms of “consultations”
with mental health professionals.  Being taken involuntarily by the police after a domestic incident
to a court-ordered emergency mental health referral that lasted only a few minutes might not qualify
as a mental health consultation in the minds of many.  The fact that the scenario presented by this
case is less than clearly contemplated by the question is a significant factor to be considered when
evaluating Applicant’s state of mind.  Indeed, Applicant’s other experiences with mental health
professionals, which he readily listed on his SF 86, differed markedly in circumstance from his brief
encounter in September 2004.
Applicant’s explanations as to why he did not list the September 2004 incident are consistent
and express a recurring theme.  Applicant reveals that although it was his understanding that he had
not been arrested, he was taken involuntarily to the hospital by the police.  His statements, taken as
a whole, indicate that he viewed the episode as a law enforcement incident as opposed to an instance
of mental health treatment.  In his answer to the SOR on the falsification allegation, he did not admit
the allegation, and, by way of explanation, he indicated that he did not think he had been arrested.
During his hearing testimony, when offering an explanation as to why he did not include the
September 2004 incident on the SF 86, Applicant stated, “I was very forthcoming from beginning
to end with it as far as arrests and any other issues with the law.  There was no reason for me not to
have included that if I had known I was arrested.”  This focus on the September 2004 incident as
primarily a law enforcement matter continued during questioning of the Applicant by the Judge.
With reference to Question 21, the Judge asked, “. . . why didn’t you think that it [the incident with
the police] was a consultation with a mental health professional?”  Applicant answered, “Your
Honor, it just did not dawn on me.  I don’t know why.  But if the arrest–I didn’t know I was arrested,
and I’m not sure I actually was.  May be it’s a generic form that the county uses for a mental health
pickup.”  After stating to Applicant that he didn’t think whether Applicant was or was not arrested
was pertinent to the question, the Judge asked him, “If you walked in voluntarily and talked to this
guy for 15 minutes and walked out voluntarily, would you have disclosed it then?” Applicant
answered, “Absolutely.”  Applicant’s unwavering focus on the law enforcement component of the
incident, along with its involuntary nature provides strong evidence that his state of mind was such
that it honestly never occurred to him that the September 2004 incident fit the question.            
Given the totality of the circumstantial evidence of Applicant’s state of mind, the Judge’s
finding that Applicant stated he did not include the incident on the SF 86 because “it slipped his
mind” is not an accurate characterization of the evidence.  Additionally, the Judge’s conclusion that
Applicant “had no persuasive explanation why he did not disclose it when it occurred in the midst
of his other rehabilitation programs and later DUI arrest” fails to take into consideration significant
record evidence such as that discussed in preceding paragraphs.  The record, considered as a whole,
“The individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions1
taken to overcome his problems, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use
(if an alcohol abuser)” Directive ¶ E2.23(b).
4
does not provide a reasonable basis for the Judge’s finding of falsification.  However, this error is
ultimately harmless in that the Judge’s findings and conclusions under Guideline G are sustainable.
With regard to Guideline G, Applicant argues that the Judge should have found Applicant’s
conduct mitigated.  Applicant cites two Hearing Office decisions in other cases he considers similar
to his in which the Hearing Office Judges granted clearances.  Applicant argues that the Judge should
have applied Mitigating Condition (MC) 23(b).  1
 Applicant’s reliance on the two other Hearing Office decisions is misplaced.  Hearing Office
decisions in other cases constitute authority, but are not binding on the Board or on Hearing Office
Judges in other cases.  They are not indicative of error on the part of Hearing Office Judges in other
decisions.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-15003 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2005). 
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not
turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 05-05439 at 2 (App. Bd. May 29, 2007).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance.  As the trier of
fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence
outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge properly considered the security concerns raised by Applicant’s
alcohol consumption.  He reasonably weighed the mitigating evidence against the seriousness of the
disqualifying conduct.  The Judge considered the possible application of relevant mitigating
conditions and explained why their application was not warranted.  He cited such factors as
Applicant’s abuse of alcohol until 2005, a diagnosis of alcohol dependence, his continued drinking
after a December 2004 DUI arrest and after his participation in alcohol rehabilitation programs in
2004 and 2005, his removal from the 2004 outpatient program when he came to a session with
alcohol on his breath, his conflicting statements about his completion of the AA 12-step program,
and his lack of clarity about when he became abstinent.  These factors, upon which the Judge’s
conclusion that the mitigating factors did not apply is based, are supported by substantial record
evidence.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).  Given the record that was before him,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline G is sustainable.
5
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
 
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin           
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
