KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness determination
rests with the Applicant.  There is a rebuttable presumption that quasi-judicial officials are
unbiased and impartial.  A party seeking to rebut that presumption has a heavy burden on appeal. 
The Adjudicative Guidelines apply to all adjudications and other determinations made under
DOD Directive 5220.6.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-25545.a1
DATE: 11/02/2007
DATE: November 2, 2007
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Trustworthiness Determination
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-25545
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) proposed to deny or revoke access to
automated information systems in ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions for Applicant.  On February 1,
2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested the case be decided on the written record.  On May 31, 2007, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness
determination.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Administrative Judge’s decision
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  
In his appeal brief, Applicant explains the causes of his financial situation and his attempts
to improve it.  Applicant argues that the Judge should have found that his financial situation was
mitigated.  He alleges bias on the part of the Judge, and he  cites a factual error on the part of the
Judge.  Applicant states that because of a comment by someone in the security office, he misjudged
the seriousness of the trustworthiness determination process and therefore did not hire an attorney
or submit documentary evidence.  He believes that some financial information he submitted to an
interviewer may not have reached the interviewer.  Applicant notes that the Judge’s decision does
not mention an interviewer’s report.  He nevertheless believes that the interviewer’s report may have
influenced the Judge’s decision, and he believes that he should have been able to review the report
and rebut its contents.  Applicant also points out that he has no access to classified information.  In
light of the above, Applicant requests remand of his case to the Judge.
As stated above, Applicant’s appeal brief contains an explanation of the source of his
financial difficulties and his attempts to improve his financial record.  To the extent that the
explanation contains information not presented before the Judge reviewed the record, it cannot be
considered on appeal, since the Board is not allowed to consider new evidence.  See Directive ¶
E3.1.29.
In his response to the government’s SOR, Applicant admitted the alleged debts.  His
admissions established the government’s case.  The burden then shifted to Applicant to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts he admitted.  The ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain
a favorable trustworthiness determination rested with Applicant.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  Applicant
provided some information about the origin of his financial difficulties in his responses to the SOR
and to the file of relevant material (FORM).  In her decision, the Judge referred to the information
Applicant provided.  The Judge stated she was not able to conclude that Applicant’s financial
situation was mitigated because Applicant provided neither sufficient information nor corroboration
for his assertions.  Applicant contends that the Judge did not give sufficient weight to Applicant’s
mitigating evidence.  As the trier of fact, the Judge had to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide
whether the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case
No. 06-13629 at 3 (Sep. 4, 2007).
Applicant’s assertion of factual error as to the age of Applicant’s debts is not entirely clear.
Even if we accept Applicant’s argument on this point, the error would be harmless.  Considering the
decision as a whole, it is unlikely that clarification of the point in question would lead to a different
result.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-29143 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2005).
   
With regard to Applicant’s allegation of bias, there is a rebuttable presumption that quasi-
judicial officials are unbiased and impartial, and a party seeking to rebut that presumption has a
heavy burden on appeal.  When the Board considers a claim of bias, the standard is not whether the
appealing party personally believed that the Judge was biased.  Rather, the standard is whether the
record contains any indication that the Judge acted in a manner that would lead a disinterested person
to question the fairness or impartiality of the judge.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-12361 at 3 (App.
Bd. Oct. 31, 2005).  In this case, Applicant offers no explanation for his claim of bias other than the
Judge’s failure to apply mitigating factors as he believes they should be applied.  The Board finds
no indication of bias.
Applicant received explanations of DOHA’s procedures and a copy of the Directive.  He was
advised that an unfavorable decision could result in loss of his job and that he could hire an attorney
if he wanted one.  Applicant states that an employee in the Defense Manpower Data Center security
office told him that she had “never seen anything come of these.”  If Applicant chose, as he suggests,
to limit his responses based on that comment, he cannot ascribe error to the Judge for his failure to
participate fully.
Applicant refers to contact he had with an interviewer.  He states that he slipped information
under the interviewer’s door and is not sure whether the interviewer received the information.
Although the Judge’s decision does not reference a report from the interviewer, Applicant believes
the Judge may have been negatively influenced by such a report and argues that he should have been
allowed to read the report and rebut its contents.  Applicant requested that his case be determined
on the written record.  Therefore, the Judge based her trustworthiness decision on the FORM and
Applicant’s response to it.  The FORM does not contain an interviewer’s report.  Applicant was
given the opportunity to respond to the FORM before it was delivered to the Judge, and he did
submit a response.  Any information Applicant wanted the Judge to consider, he should have
submitted as part of his response.  Applicant’s arguments about  an interviewer’s report are
speculative and without merit.
Finally, Applicant points out that he has no access to classified information.  In accordance
with the memorandum of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense dated August 30, 2006, the
Adjudicative Guidelines “apply to all adjudications and other determinations made under DoD
Directive 5220.6.”
None of Applicant’s arguments constitutes harmful error.  The Judge’s unfavorable
trustworthiness determination is sustainable.  
   
ORDER
The determination of the Judge denying Applicant access to automated information systems
in ADP I/II/III sensitivity positions is AFFIRMED.
      
Signed: Jean E. Smallin    
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields    
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody     
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
