KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge does not relate her own findings regarding the totalitarian nature of the
People’s Republic of China and its intelligence gathering efforts to the issue of whether it is
likely that Applicant could be placed in a position to choose between the PRC and the United
States.  The Judge does not address the evidence of the PRC’s hostility to Applicant’s family in
China and the heightened concern that his parents and in-laws could come to the attention of the
government.  The Judge’s conclusion that neither Applicant nor his parents are likely to be
vulnerable to foreign exploitation has no rational basis in the record evidence.  There is record
evidence that Applicant has close ties to his parents and in-laws, undermining the application of
Guideline 8(b).  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 06-24575.a1
DATE: 11/09/2007
DATE: November 9, 2007
In Re:
---------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-24575
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On January 16, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On May 31, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Jacqueline T.
Williams granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel filed a timely
appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in her
application of the Guideline B mitigating conditions; and whether the Judge’s whole person analysis
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding error we reverse.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant was born in the People’s
Republic of China (PRC), emigrated to the U.S. in 1982, and received an advanced degree from a
U.S. university in 1988.  He became a U.S. citizen in 1996.  He is married and has two children, both
of whom were born in the U.S.  His bank accounts and retirement account are in the U.S.
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of the PRC.  Both are in their 80s and retired.
Both are in poor health.  Applicant speaks to his parents “about once a week.”  He and his brother
supplement their parents’ income as needed.  They purchased an apartment in the PRC for his
parents.  He has visited the PRC five times since 1999 to visit them.  Applicant’s in-laws are citizens
and residents of the PRC.  They are also residents of the U.S., and divide their time between the two
countries.  Applicant speaks to his in-laws about once a month.  
The PRC is a totalitarian regime “with foreign policy goals antithetical to the U.S.”  It targets
the U.S. for intelligence purposes “and operates against its own citizens in the U.S.”  
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”
Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility
of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative
agency’s findings from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give
deference to the Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Department Counsel has
not explicitly challenged the Judge’s findings of fact.  To the extent that challenges are implicit in
the allegations of error we will address them below.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
Directive ¶ E2.8(a), (b).1
3
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.”   Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish any
appropriate mitigating conditions.  See Directive  ¶  E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at
3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).  
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are arbitrary or capricious, the Board
will review the Judge's decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails
to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of
judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision
that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion.  In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are contrary to law,
the Board will consider whether they are contrary to provisions of Executive Order 10865, the
Directive, or other applicable federal law.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2,
2006).
Department Counsel has challenged the Judge’s favorable application of two Foreign
Influence Mitigating Conditions (FIMC), 8(a) and (b).   FIMC 8(a) is as follows:1
[T]he nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are
such that it is unlikely the individual  will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and
the interests of the U.S.
Department Counsel contends that the Judge failed to analyze Applicant’s case in light of the
nature of the PRC and in light of Applicant’s family’s having been targeted in the past by the PRC
government.  The Board finds merit in this argument.  In her Conclusions section, the Judge does
not relate her own findings about the totalitarian nature of the PRC and its intelligence gathering
efforts against the U.S. to the issue of whether it is likely that Applicant could be placed in a position
to choose between the interests of the PRC and of the United States.  More telling, the Judge does
not address Applicant’s testimony concerning PRC hostility to his family.  This testimony establishes
4
that, when Applicant was a child, PRC officials entered his family home in an attempt to find “anti
revolutionary evidence.” Tr. at 27.  The testimony is compelling and underscores the fact that, at
least in the past, Applicant’s family had been persecuted by the government.  Insofar as this
mitigating condition focuses upon the “position or activities” of foreign relatives or associates,
Applicant’s testimony heightens concern that his parents and in-laws could come to the attention of
the PRC government and thereby become a means whereby he is forced to choose between the
interests of the PRC and of the U.S.  The Judge’s conclusion that neither Applicant’s parents nor his
in-laws “are likely to be vulnerable to foreign exploitation” has no rational basis in the record
evidence.  Decision at 6.  Indeed, the statement by the Judge is conclusory, without any explanation
or elaboration in support.  Neither is it sustainable in the face of record evidence of Applicant’s close
family ties; the history of the PRC’s hostility to Applicant’s family; the PRC’s history of human
rights violations; and its hostility to the interests of the U.S.  The Judge’s favorable application of
FIMC8(a) is error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03279 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Sep. 20, 2007).   
Turning to FIMC 8(b), this mitigating condition reads as follows: 
[T]here is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.
Under the facts of this case, the crucial issue posed by this mitigating condition is whether
Applicant has such deep and longstanding ties to the U.S. that he would not act against this country’s
interests should the occasion arise.  The Board takes note of Applicant’s testimony to the effect that
he has little sympathy for the government of the PRC.  Furthermore, common sense might suggest
that a person who has lived voluntarily in the U.S. for a considerable period of time is dedicated to
this country.  However, in evaluating this mitigating condition, the Board believes that it is crucial
to balance the ties at stake and to consider record evidence that detracts from the notion that
Applicant’s ties to the United States are paramount.  Without impugning Applicant’s patriotism, it
is nevertheless necessary to consider the fact that Applicant is close to his parents, communicates
with them weekly and provides for them economically as the need arises, demonstrating loyalty and
responsibility for their well-being.  His frequent communication with his in-laws indicates that he
is close to them as well.  These relatives live in a nation that views the U.S. as a primary intelligence
target, that abuses human rights, and that has in the past targeted Applicant’s parents for persecution.
Therefore, as noted above, the record raises a serious question as to whether Applicant’s parents
could come to the attention of the PRC and thereby become a means through which he would be
faced with a conflict between their interests and those of this country.  The Board has repeatedly held
that when the foreign power in question is hostile to the U.S. and its citizens, Applicant is faced with
a “very heavy burden” to demonstrate that neither he nor his foreign family members are subject to
influence by the foreign power.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-09053 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2006.)
Given the record in this case, we conclude that the Judge’s analysis of the mitigating conditions is
error. 
We have considered the Judge’s whole person analysis.  To a large extent it summarizes the
discussion which came before it.  The Judge states that Applicant has strong ties to the U.S. and
concludes that he “can be trusted to resolve any conflict of interest . . . in favor of the U.S.”  Decision
5
at 7.  For the reasons set forth above, we conclude that this analysis fails to take into account
significant aspects of the case, including the position of Applicant’s parents in the PRC and his
devotion to them.  Admittedly, Applicant has testified that he would not act against the U.S. if faced
with the choice.  However, an Applicant’s stated intention as to what he would do in the future is
of relatively little weight, given the record in this case.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09053 at (App. Bd.
Mar. 29, 2006) (“An applicant’s stated intention about what he or she might do in the future under
some hypothetical set of circumstances is merely a statement of intention that is not entitle to much
weight, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past
under similar circumstances.”) After considering the Judge’s decision, the briefs, and the record
evidence, we conclude that the Judge has committed harmful error and that the record does not
support a favorable decision.
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is REVERSED.
  
Signed: Jeffery D. Billett         
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
 
