KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge found that Applicant has two brothers and a sister in Iran.  Applicant has a
property interest in Iran.  Until the hearing, Applicant was unwilling to surrender his Iranian
passport, although he did destroy it in the course of the hearing..  Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 06-23479.a1
DATE: 11/28/2007
DATE: November 28, 2007
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23479
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Leif H. Hendrickson, Personal Representative
Applicant was naturalized a U.S. citizen in 1996.  Government Exhibit 1.  1
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On December 22, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July 23, 2007, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Christopher Graham denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact are
supported by substantial evidence; and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following sustainable findings of fact: Applicant came to the United
States in 1973 at the age of 19.   He attended college in the U.S.  He owns real property in this1
country as well as bank accounts and a 401(k) account.  He has two brothers and a sister who are
citizens and residents of Iran.  His older brother is a business man, and his other brother suffers from
Down’s syndrome.  Applicant’s sister is a homemaker who has two children, one of whom lives in
the U.S.  He speaks to his sister about once a month and to his brother twice a month.  
Applicant owns an interest in an Iranian condominium worth about $200,000.  He has held
an Iranian passport which, at the time of the SOR, he was unwilling to surrender, although he
destroyed it during the course of the hearing.
Iran is an authoritarian regime that violates human rights and is an active supporter of
terrorism.  It is increasingly involved in supplying militant groups opposed to the U.S. in Iraq.  It is
capable of producing biological and chemical weapons.  
In light of these findings, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had failed to meet his burden
of persuasion as to the application of pertinent mitigating conditions is sustainable.  See Directive
¶¶  E2.8(a), (c).  See also Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of
national security’”); Directive  ¶  E3.1.15. (“The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses
and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven
by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable
security clearance decision.”)  Therefore, we conclude that the Judge’s decision is neither arbitrary,
capricious, nor contrary to law.  See Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
3
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                 
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                  
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                    
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
