DATE:  November 30, 2007
In Re:
------------------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23179
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MATTHEW E. MALONE
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by her financial problems, which include
more than $17,000 in past due or delinquent debt accrued since 2003. Her failure to timely act to pay
or resolve her debts and her ongoing mismanagement of her personal finances undermined her
claims her debts resulted from circumstances beyond her control and that her finances will improve
in the future. Clearance is denied.
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending official
revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after
September 1, 2006.
 Applicant testified he was unemployed for most of the next year, but her SF 86 (Gx. 1) shows she returned3
to work  as a binder in February 1998.
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On March 23, 2005, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) to request
a security clearance needed for her current employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing
the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly1
consistent with the national interest to give Applicant a security clearance. On July 20, 2007, DOHA
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging she owed more than $20,976 for 11
delinquent credit obligations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.k). The SOR allegations raise security concerns
addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines  under Guideline F (financial considerations).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to
me on September 11, 2007, and I convened a hearing on October 11, 2007, at which the parties
appeared as scheduled. Without objection, I admitted seven exhibits offered by the government (Gx.
1 - 7). Applicant testified in her own behalf, and offered four exhibits, which were admitted without
objection as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - D. On November 11, 2007, Applicant submitted an
additional unsolicited exhibit. Despite the fact the record was closed, Department Counsel waived
objections to its admissibility. It is included in the record as Ax. E. DOHA received the transcript
(Tr.) on October 19, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.d, 1.j and 1.k.
Her admissions are incorporated herein as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript,
and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 49 years old and works as an electronics technician for a large defense
contractor. She has held her current job since July 2004, but was previously employed by the same
company as a fabricator/assembler from 1990 until she was laid off in December 1997. Thereafter,
she was unemployed for the next three months.  From February 1998 until returning to her current3
employer in 2004, she worked in a variety of jobs, but was unemployed at times for a total of about
12 months. Her husband was also laid off from his job in late 1997 and was unemployed for about
a year. He was also unemployed for about the first six months of 2006.
Since about 2001, Applicant has experienced financial problems due to her over-reliance on
and mismanagement of her personal credit. Before March 2007, she carried five delinquent Capitol
One credit card accounts totaling $3,291. She has paid or otherwise resolved four of those accounts
Answer to SOR; Gx. 4; Gx. 5. 4
 Gx. 6; Tr., 74 - 75.5
 Tr., 90 - 91.6
 Tr., 55.7
 Tr., 72.8
 Tr., 69 - 70, 80 - 81, 97 - 98.9
 Ax. C.10
3
using a $5,000 loan she took from her 401(k) account in February 2007. She tried to get a loan from
her credit union for the same purpose but was turned down, and still owes $1,236 for the fifth
Capitol One account. Applicant also owes $9,847 for a delinquent Discover credit card account,
$1,762 for a delinquent Providian credit card, and $806 for a delinquent Sears credit card.  Applicant4
also failed to pay three medical bills totaling $4,031. These accounts were generated when Applicant
underwent knee surgery in 1999 or 2000, and have been in collection as far back as 2001.
Applicant asserts the Sears account was her mother’s responsibility, but acknowledged she
co-signed on the account because her mother is on a fixed income. The Discover card was opened
jointly with her husband about five years before they were married. Applicant has blamed the high
balance on that account on her husband’s excessive spending.  Applicant also testified she had5
allowed her adult children to obtain now-delinquent credit accounts using her name.6
Applicant and her husband live in her mother’s house rent free in exchange for paying the
utilities.  Applicant brings home about $2,100 in monthly income after deductions. Her husband7
brings home about $1,200 each month.  When she was interviewed by a government investigator in8
April 2006, Applicant estimated she and her husband (who was not working at the time) had less
than $100 remaining each month after expenses, which did not include any debt payments. At her
hearing, she estimated they now have about $200 remaining monthly.
In February 2006, Applicant and her husband entered into a three-year lease of a new SUV
for which they pay $880 each month, plus another $400 each month for insurance. This is the third
successive car lease they have executed, each one more expensive than the other. Because her
husband was unemployed when they executed the lease, Applicant assumed full responsibility for
the payments.9
Since February 2007, Applicant has used the services of three different credit counseling and
repayment companies. She hoped they would consolidate her debts for her and present her with a
payment plan. Although she paid monthly fees to the first two companies, neither actually negotiated
any repayment of her debts or arranged for a debt consolidation loan.  After the hearing, Applicant10
engaged a third company, which has arranged a repayment plan to resolve the $17,682 she still owes
 Ax. E.11
 Ax. B.12
 Directive. 6.3.13
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are:(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness14
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).15
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.16
4
in 48 months. However, for the next five months, her monthly payment of $212 will go to the
company’s fees rather than pay her debts.11
Applicant is well-respected at work. She has received several letters of appreciation for her
work, and has been recognized for her volunteer activities as well.12
POLICIES AND BURDEN OF PROOF
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense determination
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and consideration of the
pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines.  Decisions must13
also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or14
absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against
an applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to
classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties at
hearing require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed in Revised
Adjudicative Guideline F (financial considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to have access to classified15
information. The government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on which
it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant.
Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the
government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary16
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The government, therefore, has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement, reliability and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).17
 Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 18.18
 “a history of not meeting financial obligations;” 19
 “indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness20
or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;”
 “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;”21
 “consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant22
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;”
 “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of23
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances;”
5
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.17
CONCLUSIONS
Financial Consideration. Under Guideline F, “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual
who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.”  The18
government presented sufficient information to support the allegations of delinquent debt in the
SOR. Available information shows Applicant still owes more than $17,000 of the nearly $21,000
in delinquent debt she has accrued since 2001. The record further shows she has misused personal
credit and continues to overspend despite being aware of the government’s concerns about her
finances. Further, she has allowed others to use her personal information to get credit without any
plan for repayment. The record requires consideration of Guideline F disqualifying conditions
19(a),  19(b),  and 19(c),  and 19(e).19 20 21 22
In light of Applicant’s claim that her debts were caused by her lay-off in 1997, the record also
requires consideration of Guideline F mitigating condition 20(b).  However, the financial effects23
of her lay-off have been eclipsed by the passage of time and Applicant’s continued employment over
most of the 10 intervening years. This mitigating condition also requires Applicant show she acted
reasonably in response to the unforseen events that may have caused her financial problems. She has
not done so. Her ongoing misuse of personal credit, and her poor financial decision making, most
recently illustrated by her 2006 vehicle leasing agreement which leaves her with little remaining cash
each month, make 20(b) unavailable to her. Because the record does not support any of the other
Guideline F mitigating conditions, Applicant has failed to mitigate the Guideline F security concerns.
 See footnote 14, supra.24
 See footnote 17, supra.25
 See footnote 13, supra.26
6
Whole Person. I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record
before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in Section 2(a) of the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines.  Despite the positive information about her on-the-job performance and24
her volunteer activities, Applicant has not present information sufficient to find she is not likely to
repeat the poor financial conduct that has characterized much of her adult life. To her credit, she has
attempted to get professional help to resolve her debts, but her failure to show she has corrected the
circumstances underlying her poor financial condition further buttresses the government’s doubts
about her suitability for a clearance. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the national security.25
A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information before me shows the Applicant26
has not yet overcome the government’s reasonable doubts about his ability to protect classified
information and to exercise the requisite good judgment and discretion expected of one who holds
a security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings regarding each SOR allegation are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.d: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e - 1.I: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j - 1.k: Against the Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant. Clearance is
denied.
Matthew E. Malone
Administrative Judge
