FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Board reviews a Judge’s decision in its entirety, not just isolated sentences, to
discern what the Judge found and concluded.  Absent unusual circumstances as errors in the
synopsis of a Judge’s decision are unlikely to be harmful.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-23384.a1
DATE: 11/23/2007
DATE: November 23, 2007
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-23384
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 29, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
The Judge found in favor of Applicant with respect to SOR paragraphs 1.a and 3a.  Those favorable findings1
are not at issue on appeal.
2
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July
11, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge erred as to her findings;
whether the Judge erred by concluding that the security concerns raised under Guidelines F and J had
not been mitigated.1
(1) Applicant argues that the Judge erred with respect to two of her findings: (a) in the
synopsis the Judge stated that $13,000 in delinquent debt had been incurred, when only $7,844 had
been incurred, and (b) in the decision she stated Applicant had approximately $45,000 in car loans
and about $1,000 in monthly payments, instead of $38,000 in car loans and $788 in monthly
payments.
The Board reviews a Judge’s decision in its entirety, not just isolated sentences, to discern
what the Judge found and concluded.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-30587 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 15,
2005).  Absent unusual circumstances, any flaws or errors in the synopsis of a Judge’s decision are
not likely to be harmful.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-23336 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 10, 2004).  In this
case, the delinquent debts in question were accurately discussed in the body of the Judge’s decision,
so any error in the synopsis would be harmless.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 4 (App. Bd.
Nov. 14, 2006).  With respect to the amount of Applicant’s car loans and monthly payments, even
if each of the challenged findings were changed to reflect Applicant’s interpretation of the record
evidence, it would not have undermined the Judge’s ultimate conclusions.  Therefore, any such error
would be, at most, harmless.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-00949 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2007);
ISCR Case No. 05-08459 at 2, n. 1 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 2006).
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).  The Board does not review a case de novo.  Applicant has not met his burden of
demonstrating that the Judge’s material findings as to Applicant’s conduct of security concern do
not reflect a reasonable or plausible interpretation of the record evidence.  Considering the record
evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by substantial
evidence and are sustainable.
 
3
(2) Applicant also argues that the Judge’s adverse decision should be reversed because the
Judge did not give sufficient weight to Applicant’s mitigating evidence which showed that: (a)
Applicant’s indebtedness was not excessive; (b) the disqualifying conduct was isolated and not
recent; (c) there were clear indications that the problem was being resolved or under control; and (d)
Applicant had initiated a good faith effort to repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve the
debts.  In support of his argument, Applicant cites to other DOHA Hearing Office decisions,
including one by the same Judge, in which applicants in ostensibly similar circumstances had been
granted a clearance or trustworthiness designation.  Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate error
on the part of the Judge.
The Board gives due consideration to the Hearing Office cases which Applicant has cited in
his appeal brief.  However, the decision in another Hearing Office case is not legally binding
precedent on Hearing Office Judges or the Board, even if an applicant can establish close factual
similarities between the cases.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-04004 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 31, 2006). 
Therefore, the Judge was not legally obligated to reconcile her decisions in this case with Hearing
Office decisions in other ostensibly similar cases.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-24752 at 3 (App. Bd.
Jul. 31, 2006).  Under the Directive, the Judges was required to use a whole person analysis, which
evaluated the totality of the individual circumstances of Applicant’s case, in reaching her
determination as to his security eligibility.  
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and
whole-person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the
particular facts of a case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus,
the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable
security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and
decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An
applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a
different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a lengthy and serious history of not meeting
financial obligations.  That history included failure to file his federal tax returns, and to pay those
taxes, for two years.  At the time of the hearing, Applicant was still subject to a tax lien and was still
in the process of paying off his back taxes.  In light of the foregoing, the Judge could reasonably
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were still ongoing.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-07747
at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2007).  The Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant
against the length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible
application of relevant mitigating conditions and whole person factors.  The Judge found in favor
of Applicant with respect to several of the factual allegations.  However, the Judge reasonably
explained why the evidence which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to
overcome all of the government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.
Applicant is, at most, offering a plausible alternative interpretation of the record evidence.  The
favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 03-14873 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 28,
2006).  Given the record that was before her, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance
4
decision under Guidelines F and J is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan   
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E, Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
