DATE: November 13, 2007
In re:
--------------------------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-01415
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MARC E. CURRY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant’s 2004 and 2005 assault charges led to a criminal conduct security concern. Both
incidents stemmed from domestic issues involving either his wife or his wife’s ex-husband. For the
past two years, Applicant has attended marital and anger management counseling. Also, he has
resolved the issues that caused the confrontation with his wife’s ex-husband. He has mitigated the
security concern. Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Tr. 22.1
Exhibit B.2
Exhibit C.3
Exhibit E.4
See generally, Exhibits H through L.5
Tr. 23.6
Tr. 41, Exhibit 2, Police Report, dated September 17, 2004.7
Tr. 42.8
2
On May 7, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) explaining why it was not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue a security clearance. This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated
February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as amended. He
answered the SOR on May 16, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on August 22, 2007. On October 1, 2007, DOHA issued a
notice of hearing scheduling it for October 24, 2007.  During the hearing, I received three
government exhibits, 14 Applicant exhibits, and the testimony of two Applicant witnesses. DOHA
received the transcript on November 2, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, and I have incorporated them into the findings of
fact. In addition, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 39-year-old married man with two teenage children from a prior marriage and
three stepchildren. Two of the stepchildren are 14-year-old twins and the youngest is nine. His
children live with his first wife, and his stepchildren live with him. He is active in the community,
coaching youth sports and attending practices for each of his five children. He is currently attending
college, and anticipates earning a bachelor’s degree in business administration in December 2008.1
For the past 11 years, Applicant has worked as a security administrator. Coworkers describe
him as “ambitious and hardworking,”  a “man of dignity,”  and “extremely competent.”  He has2 3 4
received several awards over the years for outstanding performance.5
Applicant has an anger management problem.  On September 17, 2004, he was arrested and6
charged with assault on a family member after he head-butted his wife, and dragged her across the
floor by her hair during an argument.  In May 2005, he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 127
months deferred probation. The court imposed no requirements on him other than to report monthly.8
He completed probation without incident.
Tr. 32.9
Tr. 61 - Wife’s Testimony.10
Tr. 33.11
Tr. 33-34.12
Id. He had attended counseling approximately a year earlier for assistance with unrelated issues involving his13
ex-wife and visitation with his children.
Tr. 45.14
Tr. 56 - Wife’s Testimony.15
Exhibit A.16
Tr. 47.17
Tr. 50.18
Tr. 51.19
Tr. 58-59.20
Tr. 59.21
3
On March 12, 2005, while the first charge was pending, Applicant was arrested and charged
with assault after an altercation with his wife’s ex-husband. Before the altercation, they had engaged
in “several run-ins and disagreements over the phone.”  The disagreements related to the ex-9
husband’s lack of steady child support payments and inconsistent visitations with his children.10
Also, the ex-husband had earlier challenged him to a fight at a neighborhood gym.  Because of their11
animosity, Applicant’s wife arranged for pick-up and visitation with the ex-husband’s children to
occur at places other than Applicant’s home. On this particular occasion, however, the ex-husband
came to Applicant’s house to pick up the children. They exchanged words, and Applicant punched
him in the mouth.  The ex-husband filed a criminal complaint, leading to Applicant’s arrest. The12
offense was not prosecuted. 
After these incidents, Applicant voluntarily began marital and anger management counseling
with a licensed, professional counselor.  Initially, he attended approximately once per week.  For13 14
the past year, he has attended approximately once every two to three weeks. Approximately 20
sessions have been joint.  According to his counselor, he “has made a great deal of progress in15
working on these issues which is evidenced by improvement in both his behaviors and interpersonal
relationships.”  Specifically, he has learned techniques for preventing disagreements with his wife16
from escalating into heated confrontations.  Also, he and the ex-husband’s relationship has17
improved. The ex-husband is “more than welcome” to visit his children in Applicant’s home, and18
has done so four or five times over the past two years without incident.19
According to Applicant’s wife, he is less argumentative, and “thinks before he speaks” when
they have disagreements.  Arguments no longer “drag out.”20 21
Tr. .24.22
Id.23
See generally, Directive, Sec. 2.3, Sec. 2.5.3, Sec. 3.2, and Sec. 4.2.24
4
Applicant is “ashamed of” his past problems with controlling his anger.  He attributes it in22
part to being raised in a household with a violent, physically abusive father. “More than anything,
[he] want[s] to break this cycle” and does not want it to be passed on to his children.23
POLICIES
The adjudicative guidelines, as revised December 29, 2005, and implemented September 1,
2006, apply to the analysis of this case. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, they are divided into those that may be considered in deciding whether to deny or revoke
an individual’s eligibility for access to classified information (disqualifying conditions) and those
that may be considered in deciding whether to grant an individual’s eligibility for access to classified
information (mitigating conditions).
Because the entire process is a scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept,” all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, should be considered in making a meaningful decision. Specifically these are: (1) the
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2)the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the age of the
applicant; (5) the extent to which the participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Since the protection of national security is the paramount consideration, the final decision
in each case must be reached by applying the standard that the issuance of the clearance is “clearly
consistent with the national interest.”  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions24
that are based on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government is responsible for presenting evidence to establish facts in the SOR that
have been controverted. The applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by the Government, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.
CONCLUSIONS
Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness, [and] by its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶30.25
A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.26
There is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without27
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
5
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”  Here, Applicant’s two arrests trigger the application25
of Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Condition 31(a).26
Applicant has voluntarily attended counseling for two years. The counselor noted that he is
making significant progress. He has resolved his dispute with his wife’s ex-husband, and has
improved his spousal relationship by being more willing to compromise and less confrontational.
His testimony projected remorse at his past transgressions, and he appeared sincerely committed to
preventing any future episodes from occurring. Also, he is a good employee and is active in the
community. I conclude there is ample evidence of successful rehabilitation. Criminal Conduct
Mitigating Condition 32(d)  applies.27
Whole Person Concept
Applicant’s 2004 assault of his wife was brutal. The assault of his wife’s ex-husband less
than nine months later clearly established a pattern of his anger management problems. The 2005
incident was mitigated somewhat by the ex-husband’s mutual hostility toward Applicant, and the
ex-husband’s callous attitude displayed toward his children’s well-being. Moreover, these two
episodes represent the only times Applicant has ever been charged criminally.
At the hearing, Applicant expressed contrition and provided introspective testimony
regarding the origins of his anger management issues. Also, he testified persuasively about the
lessons he has learned through the counseling. His testimony was supported by his wife’s testimony.
Evaluating this case in the context of the whole person concept, I conclude Applicant has mitigated
the security concern. Clearance is granted.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Paragraph 1 – Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is
granted.
6
Marc E. Curry
Administrative Judge
