 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as1
amended and modified (Directive).
DATE:  November 20, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-07246
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
HENRY LAZZARO
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts she failed to disclose in a security clearance
application she submitted. Clearance is denied.  
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On July 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  The SOR, which is in essence the1
2
administrative complaint, alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations),
Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline J (criminal conduct). Applicant submitted an undated
response to the SOR that was notarized on August 27, 2007. She admitted all allegations contained
in the SOR except subparagraphs 1.a-1.f, 1.h-1i, 1.l-1.p, 1.v, 1.x-1.z, 1.bb-1.ee, 1.gg, 1.ii, 1.mm-
1.oo, 1.qq-1.tt, 1.vv-1.ww, 1.aaa-1.ccc, and 3.a-3.c, which she denied, and subparagraph 1.ddd,
which she did not respond to at all. Applicant requested a clearance decision based on the written
record without a hearing.
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 5, 2007,
that was mailed to Applicant that same date. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on
September 17, 2007, and did not submit an objection or response to the FORM within the 30-day
time period provided to her. The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant’s partial admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 38 years old, has two children, ages nine and six, and has been married since
May 1997. She attended college from August 1990 until May 1993. The FORM does not indicate
whether she received a degree. She has been employed as a photo imaging specialist by a defense
contractor since February 2002. She was employed in a similar capacity by a different defense
contractor from January 1994 until February 2002. The FORM indicates she has held a secret
security clearance since approximately May 1997, and there is no indication any prior action has
been initiated to revoke, suspend, or downgrade that clearance.
The SOR alleges 55 debts totaling well over $30,000.00 that have been submitted for
collection, charged off, were past due, and/or resulted in liens or judgments being entered against
Applicant. While she denies most of the debts without explanation, and submitted some evidence
that several debts have been paid (those alleged in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d and 1.e), Applicant
admitted in her response to the SOR her liability for 20 debts, totaling more than $20,000.00. 
The accounts Applicant admits to include such items as numerous bad checks written for
such items as pizzas, an automobile repossession, and multiple revolving charge accounts. Applicant
provided no explanation for why she accumulated so many delinquent debts, no plan to resolve any
of the admitted delinquent debts, and no reason to expect she will display financial responsibility in
the future. 
Applicant admits, as alleged in the SOR, to being arrested and charged with passing bogus
checks in July 1993 and December 2003. She admitted in the security clearance application
contained in the FORM that she paid a fine and made restitution for a bogus check charge in
November 2004. There is no information in the FORM to indicate this charge is or is not related to
either of the charges alleged in the FORM.  
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application November 2006, in which she answered
“No” to questions asking if she had any property repossessed within the previous seven years, had
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
3
any liens placed against her property with the last seven years, had any judgments entered against
her in the last seven years, was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any debts, and if she had
been more than 180 days delinquent on any debts in the preceding seven years. All of those answers
were false. Applicant admitted in her response to the SOR that at the time she submitted the security
clearance application she “then knew and sought to conceal” that she was currently more than 90
days delinquent on any debts, and she had been more than 180 days delinquent on any debts in the
preceding seven years. 
Applicant stated in her response to the SOR that she voluntarily returned the vehicle that was
alleged to having been repossessed and was unaware of the lien as explanations for her inaccurate
responses to the security clearance questions asking about those events. She did not provide any
explanation as to why she answered no in response to the security clearance application question
asking about judgments being entered against her and then denied the SOR allegation relating
thereto.   
 
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a person’s
eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each clearance decision must be
a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the
Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever
a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline
F, pertaining to financial considerations, Guideline J, pertaining to criminal conduct, and Guideline
E, pertaining to personal conduct, with their respective disqualifying and mitigating conditions, are
most relevant in this case.   
BURDEN OF PROOF
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an applicant.  The government has2
the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of proof in a security clearance case is3
something less than a preponderance of evidence , although the government is required to present4
substantial evidence to meet its burden of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
4
less than a preponderance of the evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden6
shifts to an applicant to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the
case against her.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a7
favorable clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard indicates that9
security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”   Any reasonable10
doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information must be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.      11
CONCLUSIONS
Under Guideline F, a security concern exists when a person has significant unpaid debts.
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal
acts to generate funds.
As alleged in the SOR and evidenced by Applicant’s credit reports, Applicant allowed
numerous accounts, totaling more than $30,000.00, to become past due, charged off as bad debts,
submitted for collection, and/or result in liens and judgments being filed against her. All but three
accounts remain unsatisfied. Disqualifying Conditions 19(a): Inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts and 19(c): A history of not meeting financial obligations apply.
There is no evidence in the FORM to support the allegation alleged in subparagraph 1.ddd.
Applicant submitted evidence to support finding she has paid the debts alleged in subparagraphs 1.a,
1.d and 1.e. However, she submitted no evidence other than her unexplained denials to indicate any
payments have been made on any of the other listed accounts, that any of the accounts are not
properly alleged in the SOR, that she has made any effort to resolve any of those accounts, or that
she has any plan to resolve any of the accounts. Accordingly, I have considered all Guideline F
mitigating conditions and none apply.
5
Criminal conduct under Guideline J is a security concern because criminal conduct creates
doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, criminal
conduct calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.
Applicant was charged with bogus checks in 1993 and 2003. The FORM does not provide
any further information about the 1993 charge. The SOR allegation to which Applicant admitted
alleges Applicant pled not guilty to that charge and it was dismissed. While Applicant admitted in
the security clearance application she submitted that she was fined and required to pay restitution
for a bogus check charge in 2004, there is no evidence sufficient to connect that admission to either
of the SOR allegations. As a result, there  is insufficient evidence in the FORM to establish that the
two charges alleged create a security clearance concern. 
Applicant admits she deliberately provided false information in response to two questions
asking about her financial status when she submitted a security clearance application in November
2006. As discussed below, I also find she deliberately provided false information in response to a
third question asking about her financial status in that application. The false answers she gave in the
security clearance application constitute an offense under 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Disqualifying conditions
31(a): a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted
apply in this case. I have considered all mitigating conditions under Guideline J and none apply. 
Personal conduct under Guideline E is always a security concern because it asks the central
question if a person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly
safeguard classified information. 
Applicant admitted to deliberately providing false answers to questions inquiring about debts
that were more than 90 and 180 days delinquent in the security clearance application she submitted.
Although she denied she deliberately provided a false answer to the question inquiring about
judgments, she failed to provide any explanation for why she answered the question as she did.
Considering the sheer number of judgments entered against her, that unexplained denial is not
believable. However, her explanations for answering the questions concerning repossessions and
liens do adequately explain her reasons for answering those questions incorrectly.
Disqualifying condition 16(a):  deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities applies. I have
considered all mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and none apply.
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense assessment
of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information. Indeed, the “whole
person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of their acts and omissions. Each
case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and
applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful analysis. Having done so, I conclude that
Applicant has failed to present sufficient evidence of refutation, extenuation, and mitigation to
overcome the case against her. Accordingly, Guideline F, Guideline J and Guideline E are decided
against Applicant.  
6
FORMAL FINDINGS
SOR ¶ 1-Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs a, d & e: For Applicant
Subparagraphs b & c Against Applicant
Subparagraphs f-ccc: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ddd: For Applicant
SOR ¶ 2-Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs a & b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: Against Applicant
SOR ¶ 1-Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs a & b: For Applicant
Subparagraphs c - e: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
