 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        DATE: November 28, 2007
 
 
  
 ) 
In re: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 07-06200 
 SSN: ----------- )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 ) 
 
 
 
 
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
 
 
 
APPEARANCES 
 
FOR GOVERNMENT 
Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
FOR APPLICANT 
Pro Se 
 
 
SYNOPSIS 
 
Applicant has a history of failing to meet her financial obligations dating back to the late 
1990s. As of the date of her hearing, she had 20 accounts owing $33,626, which had been 
delinquent for many years. Her evidence is insufficient to show that she is in control of her 
finances, is not overextended, and has a track record of financial responsibility. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE 
 
On July 10, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant 
a statement of seasons (SOR) alleging facts and security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR informed Applicant that based on available information DOHA 
adjudicators could not make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her access to classified information and submitted the case to an 
administrative judge for a security determination.1 On August 8, 2007, Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a hearing.  
 
The case was assigned to me on October 2, 2007. On October 4, 2007, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing on October 24, 2007. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The government presented 13 exhibits, marked GE 1-13, to support the SOR. 
Applicant testified on her own behalf and presented no other evidence. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on November 2, 2007. 
 
 
PROCEDURAL ISSUES 
 
On September 27, 2007, the Government moved to amend the SOR by adding two 
allegations under Guideline F.2 Applicant objected to the amendment, and I denied the motion 
(Tr. 14-18, 111). 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
  
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b, g, h, l, t, u, v, w, x, y, aa, bb, cc, and dd with 
explanations. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, c, d, e, f, i, j, k, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, and z. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, 
including Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
  
 Applicant is a 41-year-old administrative data analyst working for a defense contractor. 
She has a high school education (Tr. 5). She married her spouse in June 1998 and they were 
divorced in August 2006. She has two sons, ages 16, and 24 (Tr. 47). She does not receive 
support for her 16-year-old son, because his father passed away (Tr. 113). 
 
Applicant has been continuously employed from 1997 to the day of the hearing, except 
during a one-month period around March-April 2006 when she was unemployed (Tr. 116).3 In 
                                                          
1  See Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960, as 
amended, and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992) (Directive), as amended, modified, and revised. On August 30, 2006, the 
Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum directing application of revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) to all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive and Department of Defense 
(DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January 1987, as amended, in which 
the SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
2  The Government’s motion to amend the SOR was marked as Appellate Exhibit 1 and made part of the 
record.  
                                                                                                                                          
 
3
                                                                                                                                                                                          
February 2003, Applicant was hired by another Government agency and submitted a security 
clearance application (GE 2).4 In August 2003 and in 2004, she was confronted about her 
financial problems and asked to resolve them. She failed to do so. In February 2006, she was 
fired due to her unresolved credit issues (Tr. 106-107). 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and included the 
review of five credit bureau reports (CBR) dating from April 2003 to September 2007.5 
Applicant stated her financial problems started around the late 1990s because she was 
unemployed and/or underemployed.  
 
At her hearing, Applicant explained she has been using her credit cards to pay for her 
day-to-day living expenses, and for buying presents for her kids. She used her credit and opened 
accounts knowing she would not be able to repay the charges. Applicant claimed she has not 
been able to pay most of her delinquent debts because she has never earned enough to pay for her 
day-to-day living expenses and her old debts. She stated her willingness to pay her delinquent 
debts as soon as she earns enough money to do so. She also intends to file for bankruptcy 
protection to resolve her bad debts. Two weeks before her hearing, Applicant made inquiries 
about how to file for bankruptcy. However, as of the hearing day, she had not filed for 
bankruptcy protection (Tr. 50).  
  
The SOR alleges 29 delinquent/charged off accounts. Applicant averred, and the 
Government conceded, that the following SOR allegations were duplicated (originated from the 
same debt, but were in collection by subsequent creditors and/or debt collectors): ¶1.a and 1.s; 
1.b and 1.o and 1.p; 1.g and 1.cc; and 1.h and 1.k.  
 
The debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.u, 1.v, and 1.w, totalling approximately $10,000, were for 
student loans that Applicant took during the mid-1980s. She consolidated the three student loan 
debts pursuant to a payment plan around 2004. However, Applicant has defaulted twice on her 
payment arrangements due to lack of funds. On the last occasion, two of her checks were 
returned for lack of funds and the creditor placed the account on default. Sometime before her 
hearing, she started making payments again. The account will be removed from its default status 
when she pays $1,000.  
 
 As of the hearing date, Applicant had 20 delinquent/charged off debts, totaling 
approximately $33,626, that are supported by the Government’s evidence. Applicant confirmed 
most of the debts are her debts, and that they are still outstanding because of her lack of income. 
She denied some of her debts (¶¶ 1.a, f, and q) because they were removed from her latest CBR. 
Applicant admitted, however, she did not pay the debts. Applicant paid the debts alleged in SOR 
 
 
3  GE 3 (Applicant’s Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing, certified on Sep. 7, 2006 and 
Dec. 15, 2006). 
 
4  GE 2 (Applicant’s Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P). 
 
5  GE 5 through GE 10. 
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
4
¶ 1.i, 1.d (the same debt was alleged under 1.e), and 1.m.6 She claimed she paid SOR ¶ 1.c; 
however, she presented no evidence to corroborate her claim.  
 
Applicant claimed that around October-December 2006, she wrote letters to all of her 
creditors asking them to allow her to enter into payment arrangements. She claimed none of the 
creditors responded to her letters. When asked for copies of her letters, she responded she had 
them in her computer at work. She also claimed that twice previously she attempted to 
consolidate her debts with two different financial counseling/consolidation services. She 
presented no evidence to corroborate her claims. Applicant was allowed additional time to 
submit information post-hearing to support her claims. She failed to do so. Applicant presented 
little evidence of efforts taken to pay or otherwise resolve her debts since the day she acquired 
them.  
 
Applicant claimed mitigating circumstances that prevented her from paying her debts, 
i.e., periods of unemployment, underemployment, and lack of child support. She presented no 
evidence, other than her testimony, to corroborate her claims. Applicant presented no evidence of 
any measures she has taken to avoid future financial difficulties. She claimed she did not seek 
financial counseling because she does not have the resources to do so. At her hearing, Applicant 
admitted that her financial problems were the result of her financial mismanagement (Tr. 119). 
 
 
POLICIES 
 
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines which must be considered in evaluating 
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Foremost are the Disqualifying and 
Mitigating conditions under each adjudicative guideline applicable to the facts and circumstances 
of the case. However, the guidelines are not viewed as inflexible ironclad rules of law. The 
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative of a 
conclusion for or against an Applicant. Each decision must also reflect a fair and impartial 
common sense consideration of the factors listed in Section 6.3 of the Directive,7 and the whole 
person concept.8 Having considered the record evidence as a whole, I conclude Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) is the applicable relevant adjudicative guideline. 
                                                          
6  GEs 7-10. 
 
7  Directive, Section 6.3. “Each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial common sense 
determination based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information and the pertinent criteria and 
adjudication policy . . .” 
 
8  Directive ¶ 2(a). “The adjudication process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
whole person concept. Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
should be considered in reaching a determination. . . .” The whole person concept includes the consideration of the 
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; the frequency and recency of the conduct; the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; the motivation for the conduct; the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and 
the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. . .” 
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
5
BURDEN OF PROOF 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information.9 The government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. To meet its burden, the government must establish a prima facie case by substantial 
evidence.10 The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the 
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant carries the 
ultimate burden of persuasion.11  
 
 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship 
with the government based on trust and confidence. The government, therefore, has a compelling 
interest to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness 
of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the 
national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security.12 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), the government’s concern is that an 
Applicant’s failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at 
risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to meet her financial obligations dating back to the late 
1990s. Since then, she has accumulated at least 20 delinquent/charged off debts and/or 
judgments totaling approximately $33,626. The majority of Applicant’s delinquent accounts 
could be considered small debts (for less than $1,000); however, they have been delinquent for 
many years. In 2003 and 2004, Applicant was confronted about her financial problems by her 
then employer. Applicant failed to resolve her financial problems and was fired from her 
employment. As of the day of her hearing, Applicant still had substantially the same debts that 
caused her to be fired. She presented little evidence to show she has been diligent taking action 
to resolve her debts. Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) ¶ 19(a): inability 
                                                          
9  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
10  ISCR Case No. 98-0761 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 27, 1999) (Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but 
less than a preponderance of the evidence); ISCR Case No. 02-12199 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 3, 2006) (Substantial 
evidence is such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of 
all the contrary evidence in the record); Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
11  Egan, supra n.9, at 528, 531. 
 
12  See id; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                                                                                                          
 
6
or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations; apply in this case.  
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,13 I conclude that none of the mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant presented little evidence of efforts taken to contact creditors, or to 
resolve any of the debts since she acquired them. Nor is there any evidence that she has 
participated in any financial counseling. I specifically considered Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) Guidelines ¶ 20(b): The conditions that resulted in the financial 
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances, and conclude it applies, but only to a limited extent.  
 
Applicant’s uncorroborated testimony fails to establish mitigating factors that may be 
considered as circumstances beyond her control contributing to her inability to pay her debts. 
She was unemployed for one month, underemployed, and she may have received sporadic child 
support. These claims demonstrate circumstances beyond her control; however, Applicant’s 
evidence is not sufficient to show she has dealt responsibly with her financial obligations. She 
presented little evidence to show she dealt responsibly with her financial obligations even after 
confronted by her prior employer about her financial problems. She presented little evidence of 
paid debts, settlements, documented negotiations, payment plans, budgets, and of financial 
assistance/counseling received. Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence 
preclude a finding that she has established a track record of financial responsibility, or that she 
has taken control of his financial situation. Based on the available evidence, her financial 
problems are likely to continue. Moreover, her financial problems are recent, not isolated, and 
ongoing.  
 
 I have carefully weighed all evidence, and I applied the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions as listed under the applicable adjudicative guidelines. I applied the whole person 
concept. I specifically considered Applicant’s age, education, maturity, her years working for a 
defense contractor, and her demeanor and testimony. Considering the totality of Applicant’s 
circumstances, she demonstrated a lack of judgment and trustworthiness in the handling of her 
financial affairs. She has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by her overall behavior.  
 
 
FORMAL FINDINGS 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
    
   Subparagraphs 1.a, b, c, f, g, j, h,   Against Applicant 
    j, n, q, r, z, l, t, u, v, w, x, y, aa, bb, and dd 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.d, e, i, k, m, o, p, s, cc  For Applicant 
                                                          
13  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. 
Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as a whole. 
                                                                                                                                          
 
7
 
 
DECISION 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Juan J. Rivera 
Administrative Judge 
