DATE:  November 29, 2007
In re:
------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-08671
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MICHAEL H. LEONARD
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 39-year-old man who immigrated to the U.S. from Afghanistan in 1998. He
obtained U.S. citizenship in 2005. After becoming a U.S. citizen, he worked as a contract linguist
for about 18 months in Afghanistan where he served in harm’s way with members of the U.S. armed
forces. He is married to a U.S. citizen who is also an Afghan native. They have three young sons who
are native-born U.S. citizens. Although he has family ties to Afghanistan, his most significant
contacts and ties are to the U.S. Applicant has mitigated any potential foreign influence security
concern. Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
 Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2,1
1992, as amended (Directive).
 See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (December
29, 2005). 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7 (department counsel may request a hearing within 20 days of receipt of an3
applicant’s answer to an SOR). 
2
This is a security clearance case. Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny
or revoke his eligibility for a security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD
Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons1
(SOR) to Applicant on September 16, 2007. The SOR—which is equivalent to an administrative
complaint—details the factual basis for the action and alleges a security concern under Guideline B
for foreign influence based on Applicant’s family ties or connections to Afghanistan. 
In addition to the Directive, this case is brought under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by
the President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense
Department, effective September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision or2
amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the effective date.
On September 29, 2007, Applicant replied to the SOR and requested a decision without a
hearing. Department counsel timely requested a hearing on October 12, 2007.  The hearing took3
place as scheduled on November 7, 2007, and the transcript was received on November 26, 2007.
   
FINDINGS OF FACT
Under Guideline B, the SOR alleges that Applicant may be subject to foreign influence due
to his family ties or connections to Afghanistan. Applicant admits the factual allegations in SOR
subparagraphs 1.a–1.e. In addition, the following facts are established.
Applicant is a 39-year-old linguist employed by a language-related services company. He has
worked for the company since October 2005. He is fluent in Pashto and Dari, which is the Afghan
dialect of Farsi (Persian). He immigrated to the U.S. in 1998 via his marriage to a U.S. citizen (and
an Afghan native). He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2005. He is a first-time applicant for a
security clearance, although he held an interim security clearance without  problems until this action
was commenced. He is currently in an unpaid status with his company until this action is resolved.
Applicant has immediate family members who are now living in Kabul, Afghanistan. His
mother and father are both retired. Applicant sends his parents about $150 monthly to assist them
in their retirement. His father previously worked as a driver. His five younger brothers live with their
parents. None of his brothers work for the government of Afghanistan, and all of his family members
are opposed to the Taliban. His sister is a lawful resident alien living in the U.S., and she is married
3
to a U.S. citizen. She is employed cleaning offices. Applicant has a close family, but his contact is
limited to speaking with his parents on the telephone. He sometimes speaks to a brother when he
calls his parents. He calls his parents once or twice a month and for certain holidays.  
Applicant was born in Kabul in 1968. He was raised in Kabul and completed his secondary
education there. In approximately in 1990, Applicant, and his family of five brothers, one sister, and
mother and father, relocated from Kabul to another area of the country that they believed was safer.
The family’s move was motivated due to concern about the Taliban.  
In approximately 1991–1992, Applicant and his family moved to Pakistan. Applicant worked
selling produce at a local market. In about 1995, Applicant saw, but did not meet, his future wife
when she had traveled from the U.S. to Pakistan to visit family. She had previously immigrated to
the U.S. and obtained U.S. citizenship in 1994. After her return to the U.S., Applicant approached
her eldest brother (her father was deceased) and requested permission to marry in keeping with
Afghan custom and tradition. The brother agreed to talk with his sister about the proposal. After
several months, the brother informed Applicant that his sister would travel to Pakistan in 1996 and
she would decide if she would marry Applicant. She arrived in 1996 and met Applicant in
accordance with Afghan custom and tradition. She accepted the proposal, and in due course she and
Applicant married in October 1996. 
Applicant’s wife returned to the U.S. after the marriage ceremony and she submitted the
necessary paperwork for Applicant’s immigration to the U.S. He arrived in the U.S. in January 1998.
They have three sons, ages 6, 7, and 8, all of whom are native-born U.S. citizens. Applicant’s sons
attend public school. 
He has been gainfully employed since at least September 1998, sometimes working two jobs.
In about March 2005, Applicant left one job because his wife accepted a six-month contract as a
linguist in Afghanistan. During this period, Applicant was the primary care giver for their children.
His wife served as a linguist for a medical team that traveled throughout the country.
After his wife returned, and after becoming a U.S. citizen in September 2005, Applicant
accepted a linguist position and traveled to Afghanistan on official travel orders in about October
2005 (Exhibit A). As his family had returned to Kabul in light of the overthrow of the Taliban,
Applicant sought permission from his site manager to visit his family. The site manager, in turn,
sought approval from the Army who approved his request. Applicant visited his family for one day
in October 2005. A subsequent request from Applicant was not approved by the Army, and
Applicant honored that decision. 
Applicant served as a linguist in Afghanistan for a total of 18 months in three six-month
periods as follows: October 2005–April 2006, May 2006–October 2006, and December 2006–June
2007. In between, he returned to the U.S. to see his wife and children. Applicant served with military
intelligence and special forces elements of the U.S. Army (Exhibits B and D). Several soldiers have
submitted character references on behalf of Applicant, and they describe Applicant as a dedicated
and valuable team member (Exhibit B). The most significant letter was written by a special forces
officer and detachment commander who had this, in part, to say about Applicant:
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a4
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plain that thereth
is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.5
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ 3.2. 6
4
[Applicant] accompanied the detachment on several operations in the Kandahar
Province. His skills assisted the Commander in the employment of Afghan forces
while in a very intense battle against the Taliban that lasted 2 days, 2 nights, and took
the lives of 5 friendlies and wounded one. During the battle [Applicant] displayed the
courage and loyalty to the United States that goes beyond his call of duty. He was the
person who passed information about the enemy situation and impending attack in
order to prepare a defense that saved many lives.
*  *  *
He is a strong hearted man with compassion for what he does. He takes pride in his
work and requires little supervision. [Applicant] is a person whom our detachment
had entrusted and we were not let down. [Applicant] displays extreme loyalty to the
American forces and our goals for Afghanistan (Exhibit B at 5). 
Neither Applicant nor his spouse has any financial interests in Afghanistan. Their financial
interests are all in the U.S. and consist of a home (with a mortgage), a bank account with several
thousand dollars, vehicles, and personal property. 
Administrative notice is taken of the certain facts about Afghanistan as described in the
government’s written request (Exhibit 2). Seven of the eight source documents for the request are
reports by the U.S. Department of State, and the eighth is from the Director of National Intelligence.
In general terms, the request describes Afghanistan’s history since it became an independent nation
in 1919, the U.S. Government’s relationship with and concerns about Afghanistan, and the current
geopolitical situation in Afghanistan. For example, in a recent travel warning, the State Department
warns against travel to Afghanistan by U.S. citizens due to ongoing threats to kidnap or assassinate
U.S. citizens and the inability of Afghan authorities to maintain order and ensure safety. In addition,
the Taliban continue to seek to undermine the democratically elected government and use terrorism
against Afghans, U.S., and NATO personnel. 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW AND POLICIES
No one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in Department4
of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an5
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret
information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes any existing security6
clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level and retention of any existing
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ 3.2. 7
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.11
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 12
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).13
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.14
5
security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether7
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of
protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for access
to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting evidence to establish facts8
alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An applicant is responsible for presenting evidence9
to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an10
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan,11
the Supreme Court said that the burden of proof is less than the preponderance of the evidence.  The12
agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are
reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.13
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access
to classified information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access
to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that the applicant has not met the strict14
guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for a security clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 5–6 (setting forth the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 15
 Revised Guidelines at p. 5. 16
 Revised Guidelines at p. 5. 17
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8,18
2001).
 Revised Guidelines at p. 6. 19
6
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,  a security concern may arise due to foreign15
contacts and interests “if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that
is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”  There are16
two disqualifying conditions  that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this17
case:
DC 1. [C]ontact with a foreign family member, business, or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a foreign country if that
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion; and 
DC 2. [C]onnections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create
a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group,
or country by providing that information. 
Of course, the mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not—as a
matter of law—disqualifying under Guideline B. But if only one relative lives in a foreign country
and an applicant has contact with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential
for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.18
Here, the two disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant has contacts with and
connections to his immediate family members in Afghanistan. He comes from a large and close
family, most of whom live in Afghanistan. He has regular telephonic contact with his parents and
sometimes his brothers. He sought and obtained permission to visit his family in October 2005
during his first work assignment in Afghanistan. These circumstances create the potential for a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of
his ties to immediate family members, primarily his parents, in Afghanistan. Also, the circumstance
of his financial support to his parents is relevant because it indicates the strength of his family ties.
The $150 monthly payments, however, are not enough to constitute a substantial business, financial,
or property interest in a foreign country and the fifth disqualifying condition under the guideline does
not apply. 
Four of the six mitigating conditions  under the guideline may apply to the facts and19
circumstances of this case:
 See Exhibit 2 (setting forth the U.S. Government’s concerns about Afghanistan and the geopolitical situation20
in Afghanistan).  
7
MC 1.  [T]he nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization,
or government and the interests of the U.S.;
MC 2.  [T]here is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties
in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in
favor of the U.S. interest; 
MC 3.  [C]ontact or communications with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation; and 
MC 4. [T]he foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or are
approved by the cognizant security authority. 
The first and third MC do not apply because Applicant’s relationships with his immediate family
members in Afghanistan are of sufficient magnitude or strength to negate these two MCs. He has
regular contact with his parents and traveled to see them when he was in Afghanistan in 2005. In the
post-9/11 world, there is at least a remote or slight possibility that dangerous elements (e.g., the
Taliban)  within Afghanistan could attempt to use his family members to coerce or pressure20
Applicant.
But Applicant did establish that the second MC applies in his favor. The record evidence
supports a conclusion that Applicant has a depth of loyalty to the U.S., so that he can be expected
to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interest. He demonstrated his depth of his commitment
to the U.S. by serving 18 months, at times coming in harm’s way, assisting the U.S. armed forces
in Afghanistan. Indeed, according to the special forces detachment commander, Applicant’s
performance of duty on one particular occasion could be described as heroic. In addition, his spouse
served as a linguist with the U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan. Suffice it to say, they are few
households in the U.S. where both spouses have volunteered to work in a combat zone. 
Also, Applicant established that the fourth MC applies to his travel to Afghanistan and
visiting his family in October 2005. First, Applicant traveled to that country on official governmental
orders (Exhibit A). Other than the three trips to Afghanistan via official orders, Applicant has not
traveled there on his own. Second, he visited his family only after he received approval through his
site manager and from the Army. His second request to visit was denied, and he accepted that
decision. Given these circumstances, Applicant is entitled to mitigation under MC 4. 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 5.21
8
To sum up under the whole-person concept, this is not a case of “divided loyalties”  with21
an applicant who has one foot in the U.S. and one foot in his native country. On the contrary, the
evidence shows Applicant has both feet planted in the U.S. and that his most significant contacts and
ties are to the U.S. For example, both he and his wife are U.S. citizens, their three sons are native-
born U.S. citizens, and his employment and financial interests are in the U.S. His service on behalf
of the U.S. in a combat zone is further evidence of the strength of his ties to the U.S. This
circumstance and the favorable character letter from the special forces commander deserve
substantial weight. Given all these circumstances, the record evidence supports a conclusion that
Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential foreign influence or pressure by either coercive
or non-coercive means in favor of the U.S. interest. 
After weighing the record evidence as a whole, Applicant has explained, extenuated, or
mitigated the foreign influence security concern. And Applicant has overcome the case against him
and satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. Accordingly,
Guideline B is decided for Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
SOR ¶ 1–Guideline B: For Applicant
Subparagraphs a–e: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue eligibility for a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge
  
