Required by Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, as amended and
1
modified—most recently in August 2006 (Directive).
DATE:  November 28, 2007
In Re:
-------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-02253
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Ray T. Blank, Jr., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant’s deliberate falsifications on his July 2004 clearance application, and the drug
abuse history he concealed, render him unsuitable for a security clearance. Clearance denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Applicant challenges the 19 July 2007 Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Statement of Reasons (SOR) recommending denial or revocation of his clearance because of drug
involvement and personal conduct.  He answered the SOR 21 August 2007, and requested a hearing.1
Applicant similarly falsified an employment application and defeated a pre-employment drug screen for his
2
previous employer, as well as a prospective employer he interviewed with but did not go to work for.
These two clearance applications, and the results of the subject interview, are not in the hearing record,
3
and, for that reason, there are no SOR allegations based on these facts. I include these facts both as evidence of
Applicant’s poor credibility, and as a necessary portion of the narrative to place the SOR allegations in context.
2
DOHA assigned the case to me 2 October 2007, and I convened a hearing 2 November 2007. DOHA
received the transcript (Tr.) 13 November 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. Accordingly, I incorporate his admissions as
findings of fact. He is a 43-year-old senior professional staffer, employed by a defense contractor
since August 2001. He seeks to retain the security clearance he obtained fraudulently in 2001.
When Applicant applied for a job with his current employer, he falsified his employment
application by denying any history of illegal drug use. He passed a company pre-employment drug
screen—which he knew was required—by abstaining from marijuana use far enough in advance of
the test to test negative.  Shortly after going to work for this employer, Applicant applied for an2
industrial security clearance. He deliberately concealed his drug use by answering “no” to questions
designed to elicit any illegal drug use. Based on his false answers, Applicant was granted an interim
secret clearance, and ultimately his permanent secret clearance. In 2002, Applicant applied for a
clearance upgrade to top secret. Again he answered “no” to questions designed to elicit his illegal
drug use, and again he obtained first his interim top secret, then his permanent top secret (November
2002), clearances. His background investigation for top secret access required a subject interview,
during which he confirmed his false answers to the drug questions.3
In July 2004, Applicant applied for a clearance upgrade to top secret/special compartment
information (TS/SCI)(G.E. 1) and continued to conceal his drug use by answering “no” to questions
27 (illegal drug use, last seven years), 28 (illegal drug use while possessing a security clearance), and
29 (illegal drug purchases) . In fact, he had used marijuana from 1980 through 2004 on a recreational
basis—the equivalent of an evening cocktail after getting home from work. His heaviest marijuana
use has been since 1986, during which time he estimates he used marijuana approximately 150 times
per year. He also purchased marijuana 50-60 times over the years, spending thousands of dollars. He
used cocaine twice (once with his wife) between 1986 and 1989. Applicant acknowledged that he
falsified his clearance applications because he did not want his employer and the government to
know about his drug abuse history.
As part of the process for obtaining special access, Applicant was scheduled for a lifestyle
polygraph required by another government agency in conjunction with his July 2004 application.
During the pre-examination interview, he disclosed that he had used marijuana, but dissembled on
the recency and frequency of that use. During the post-examination interview, Applicant disclosed
the full extent of his drug use after being confronted by the polygrapher. Applicant underwent a
second polygraph in May 2005, apparently with satisfactory results.
3
Applicant accepts full responsibility for his drug use, and acknowledges the invalidity of his
past rationalizations: that it was no more than the equivalent of an evening cocktail, and the
government could not or should not really be concerned about his level of drug use. He did, however,
understand that drug use was illegal and prohibited by employer and governmental policies.
Applicant states that he has not used any illegal drugs since August 2004, and vows never
to use illegal drugs again. He used marijuana largely in the privacy of his home (in the master
bedroom while his two children, ages 12 and seven were downstairs). However, he also used
marijuana with his wife. She was a sporadic user with Applicant, and used cocaine with him on one
occasion in the late 1980's. She stopped using marijuana some time ago, and vouches (A.E. A) for
his being drug free since September 2004.
Applicant has an excellent work record (A.E. B). His two company character references, both
of whom testified and provided sworn statements (A.E. A), praised the quality of his work, his
trustworthiness, and his integrity. Tellingly, neither of them was aware of the issues in this case. One
of them had given Applicant the option of telling him or not. Applicant opted not. Both witnesses
testified that it was important to be truthful on clearance applications, and they would have serious
issues with an employee who was untruthful.
POLICIES AND BURDEN OF PROOF
The Directive, Enclosure 2 lists adjudicative guidelines to be considered in evaluating an
Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative Judges must assess both
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each adjudicative issue fairly raised by the facts and
circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair and impartial common sense
consideration of the factors listed in Section 6.3. of the Directive. The presence or absence of a
disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or against Applicant. However, specific
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them, as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.
Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative
guidelines are Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government must prove, by something
less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it
establishes a prima facie case against access to classified information. Applicant must then refute,
extenuate, or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the
Applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with the
government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in
ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness of those
who must protect national interests as their own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).
4
¶25.(a) any drug abuse. . .; (c) illegal drug possession, including. . . purchase. . . ; (c) any illegal drug use
5
after being granted a security clearance; 
¶26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that
6
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
¶26.(b). a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as; . . . (3) an appropriate period of
7
abstinence;
However, Applicant’s experimental use of cocaine in the mid-1980s is sufficiently remote to warrant a
8
favorable finding on SOR 1.c.
¶16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel
9
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or] determine
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .;
4
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.4
CONCLUSIONS
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline H,  and Applicant5
failed to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s use and purchase of marijuana for more than 24
years are neither distant in time nor infrequent.  His abstinence from drug use—just over three6
years—is inadequate to demonstrate an intent to refrain from drug use in the future in the context
of this case.   I cannot conclude Applicant is unlikely to use illegal drugs in the future.  Accordingly,7
I resolve Guideline H against Applicant.8
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns. He deliberately concealed his illegal drug use from the
government.  He did so knowing that his illegal drug use was prohibited by both company and9
governmental policies. But for the polygraph examination, he might never have disclosed the truth.
Further, none of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information was
relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant’s falsifications prohibited the government from evaluating
his illegal drug use in a timely fashion, and at a time when such recent drug use would have raised
even more significant security concerns. In addition, the government detrimentally relied on
Applicant’s falsifications in granting his clearances on two separate occasions. Finally, his disclosure
of illegal drug use when confronted during his polygraph was neither prompt nor forthright. Indeed,
for practical purposes, it was forced from him.
Applicant’s Answer clearly establishes that he intended to conceal his illegal drug use from
the government and effect the course of his background investigation, whether he was successful in
effecting the course of his investigation or not. However, in this case his falsifications did influence
the investigation, and he was granted his clearance, on two occasions.
5
Applicant’s failure to disclose his illegal drug use demonstrates a lack of candor required of
cleared personnel. The government has an interest in examining all relevant and material adverse
information about an Applicant before making a clearance decision. The government relies on
applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived
to be prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about
himself provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security violations or other
security concerns in the future, something the government relies on to perform damage assessments
and limit the compromise of classified information. Applicant’s conduct demonstrates he is willing
to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate government interests. I resolve Guideline E and J
against Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph c: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance denied.
___________________
John G. Metz, Jr.
Administrative Judge
