DATE:  November 20, 2007
In re:
-----------------------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case: 07-01759
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ERIN C. HOGAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Security concerns are raised under the drug involvement and personal conduct guidelines
pertaining to Applicant's history of illegal marijuana use, including while holding a security
clearance.  He did not intentionally falsify his answers to interrogatories provided to the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals, on June 7, 2007. He has not met his burden to mitigate the other
security concern raised under personal conduct and the concerns raised under drug involvement.
Clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF CASE
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive1
5220.6, dated January 2,1992, as amended and modified (Directive).
 Item 4.2
 Item 3. 3
 Item 3 (Aside from his admissions, there is nothing in the record evidence pertaining to his marijuana use from4
1985 to 1995). 
 Item 3. 5
 Item 7. 6
2
On July 13, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) stating they were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance.  The SOR, which is in essence the1
administrative complaint, alleges security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and
Guideline E, Personal Conduct of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) issued on December 29,
2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense effective September 1, 2006. 
On August 7, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations.  Applicant elected to have
his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s file of
relevant material (FORM) on September 6, 2007. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on September
12, 2007 and received by him on September 18, 2007.  Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely responded
on October 16, 2007. Department Counsel had no objection to Applicant's response. The case was
assigned to me on November 2, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 41-year-old production manager employed with a defense contractor since July
1995. He is married and has a nine-year-old son.  He admits to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b,2
1.c and 2.a, and  denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b.3
Applicant has a history of illegal drug use.  In his answer to the SOR, he admits to using
marijuana on a monthly basis from 1985 to 1995.   He admits to using marijuana on at least 104
occasions between January 2000 to December 2005.  He admits that his use of marijuana between
January 2000 to December 2005, occurred after he was granted a Confidential security clearance.5
In April 1988, he was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana and hashish for sale, and
fireworks without a permit. He was convicted of the offense of fireworks without a permit and fined
$980.6
On September 8, 2006, Applicant submitted a questionnaire for sensitive positions, Standard
Form 86. In response to question 24a which asked Applicant whether he used any illegal drugs
within the past seven years, he answered, "Yes" and listed that he used marijuana on an estimated
 Item 4. 7
 Item 4, questions 23B and 23D. 8
 Item 5, question 1. 9
 Item 5, question 3. 10
 Item 3. 11
 Item 5, question 2. 12
 Response to FORM, dated October 16, 2007.13
 Response to FORM, Performance Appraisals for the periods October 1998 to October 1999, December 200014
to December 2001, January 2004 to December 2004, November 2004 to November 2005, and November 2005 to
November 2006. 
3
10 occasions between January 2000 to December 2005.  He answered "Yes" in response to question7
23B which asked whether he had ever been arrested for, charged with Firearms/Explosives Charge
and in response to question 23D which asked whether he had ever been arrested or charged with
alcohol or drug offenses. He listed his 1988 arrest and charge for possession of marijuana and
fireworks without a permit.  He also listed a 1990 reckless driving offense.8
On June 7, 2007, Applicant responded to Interrogatories sent by the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals. Question one asked "Have you used any narcotic, depressant, stimulant,
hallucinogen (to include LSD or PCP) and/or any Cannabis (to include marijuana and hashish),
except prescribed by a licensed physician?" Applicant answered, "Yes" and listed that he used
marijuana approximately two times a year from 2000 to December 12, 2005. The average quantity
of marijuana used was 1/2 teaspoon. He does not intend to use marijuana in the future.   Question9
3 asked "When did you start using marijuana?" Applicant answered, "As stated in the questionnaire
dated September 8, 2006, January 2000 estimated."   10
Applicant did not list his marijuana use from 1985 to 1995 in his response to the
interrogatories. He did not list his earlier marijuana use on the interrogatory because he believed that
he only had to go back seven years. He had no intent to falsify his security clearance application.11
Applicant indicated that he purchased marijuana for personal use. On occasion, he would
smoke marijuana with his wife. Other times, he would smoke it alone. He used marijuana to help
him quit smoking tobacco. He stopped using marijuana as the urge to smoke tobacco declined and
also to become a good role model for his son.12
In his response to the FORM, Applicant states that he has worked for his employer for over
20 years. He provided several copies of his performance appraisals and indicated that he had been
promoted four times during his career. He regrets the choices he made in the past. He chose to tell
the truth during this inquiry. He no longer uses marijuana and has no intention of using marijuana
in the future.  The performance appraisals that Applicant submitted were favorable.13 14
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). 15
 Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 24. 16
 Revised AG, dated Augsut 2006, ¶15. 17
 Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 2.18
 Id.19
4
POLICIES
The President has "the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position …
that will give that person access to such information."  In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding15
Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), the President set out guidelines and
procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive branch. 
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security guidelines
contained in the Directive and the revised AGs, effective September 1, 2006.  The revised AGs set
forth personnel security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.  The adjudicative guidelines at issue in this case are: 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement:  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.16
Guideline E - Personal Conduct: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.17
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which could mitigate security concerns pertaining to these adjudicative guidelines, are set forth and
discussed in the conclusions below.
"The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk."   An administrative18
judge must apply the "whole person concept," and consider and carefully weigh the available,
reliable information about the person.   An administrative judge should consider the following19
factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4)
the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7)
the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 Id.20
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14.21
 Directive ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Directive ¶ E.2.2.2; Revised AG, dated August 2006, ¶ 2(b).23
 AG, ¶ 24(b).24
5
(9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  20
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and
mitigating conditions under each guideline. Additionally, each security clearance decision must be
a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the adjudicative process factors listed in ¶ 6.3
of the Directive, and AG ¶ 2(a). 
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR
that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified
information.  Thereafter, the applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain,21
extenuate, or mitigate the facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.  The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.22
“Any doubt as to whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security
will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  23
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special relationship with the
government.  The government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those
individuals to whom it grants access to classified information.  The decision to deny an individual
a security clearance is not a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. It is merely an indication
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for issuing a
clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards. The government
has established a prima facie case for disqualification under Guideline H and Guideline E.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
Applicant's past drug abuse raises a security concern. Drug abuse is defined as "the illegal use
of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction."24
Applicant admits to using marijuana on a monthly basis from August 1985 to 1995.  He used
marijuana approximately ten times between January 2000 to December 2005, after being granted a
security clearance in July 1996. 
6
The following Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions (DI DC) apply to Applicant's case.
DI DC ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse) applies due to his past history of illegal marijuana use. DI DC ¶ 25(c)
(illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia) applies.  Applicant possessed and purchased
marijuana on several occasions.  DI DC ¶ 25(g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a security
clearance) applies.  Applicant admits to using marijuana on several occasions while holding a
security clearance from 2000 to 2005. I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶ 1.b because he was
not found guilty of the offense of the possession of marijuana/hashish offense and the passage of time
since his arrest. Drug involvement concerns remain due to his illegal drug use.
The drug involvement concern can be mitigated. However, I find none of the mitigating
conditions apply.  In Applicant's case, two of the Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions (DI MC)
have the potential to apply.  DI MC ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.  Applicant's drug
use was recent. His decision to use marijuana while holding a security clearance raises questions
about his judgment and reliability.
DI MC ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2)changing or avoiding the environment
where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation) is not applicable. Applicant's more recent use
of marijuana occurred either by himself or with his wife. As such, disassociation from drug-using
associates and contacts does not apply.  Applicant did disclose his drug use on his security clearance
questionnaire. He states that he has no intent to use marijuana because he wants to be a good example
for his son. An appropriate period of abstinence has not been demonstrated. He has not presented
sufficient evidence to mitigate the drug involvement security concern.  I find against Applicant under
Guideline H.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Personal conduct under Guideline E is always a security concern because it asks the central
question if a person's past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly safeguard
classified information.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
With respect to SOR ¶ 2.a which cross alleges SOR ¶ 1.c, regarding his use of marijuana after
being granted a security clearance, a security concern is raised under personal conduct because
Applicant's illegal use of marijuana after being granted a security clearance makes him vulnerable to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 17(e)
(personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect
7
the person's personal professional, or community standing...) applies. While Applicant disclosed his
use of marijuana while holding a security clearance on his security clearance questionnaire, there is
insufficient evidence to fully support the mitigation of this concern. Personal Conduct Mitigating
Condition (PC MC) ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) partially applies because of Applicant's
disclosure of his marijuana use from 2000 to 2005, on his security clearance application. However,
nothing in the record evidence indicates that Applicant disclosed his marijuana use to his employer.
He is still vulnerable to exploitation or manipulation. He may not want to disclose his recent
marijuana use to his employer because it may place his job in jeopardy since illegal drug use is often
a concern in the work place.  Applicant has not presented sufficient evidence to mitigate this concern.
I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶ 2.b which alleges that Applicant deliberately
falsified material facts in his response to interrogatories by failing to disclose that he started using
marijuana in 1985.  Applicant states that he thought he only had to list marijuana use within the past
seven years. I find his explanation credible. I note that he listed a 1988 marijuana offense on his recent
security clearance questionnaire.  If he were trying to mislead the government about his earlier
marijuana use, it is likely that he would not have listed this offense. Aside from his own admissions
in response to the SOR, there is no other evidence of Applicant's marijuana use in 1985 to 1995.  He
had no intent to mislead the government with respect to his earlier marijuana use.  SOR ¶ 2.b is found
for Applicant.   
I considered all the evidence provided and also considered the “whole person” concept in
evaluating Applicant’s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national interests. While Applicant
claims that he no longer intends to use marijuana, his use of marijuana over a five year period after
being granted a security clearance raises questions about his judgment and reliability.  He was in his
mid to late thirties during his 2000 - 2005 marijuana use and cannot blame his marijuana use on
youthful indiscretion. Although he fully disclosed the recent marijuana use on his security clearance
application, a question remains as to his potential for vulnerability and duress absent evidence that
his employer is also aware of his marijuana use. Considering Applicant's history of marijuana use,
not enough time has passed to mitigate the security concerns raised under drug involvement.
Therefore, I am persuaded by the totality of the evidence in this case, that it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
8
Subparagraph 2.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b. For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied.
Erin C. Hogan
Administrative Judge
