KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Five of Applicant’s debts remain unresolved in an amount of $18,037.  He had 29
disciplinary infractions with his employer, and he did not report these on his security clearance
application.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s evidence in mitigation does not meet his
burden of overcoming the security concerns arising from the financial and personal conduct
guidelines is sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 10-00046.a1
DATE: 10/01/2013
DATE: October 1, 2013
In Re:
---------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-00046
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 15, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July 11, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.   
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision.
The Judge found the following: Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in
September 1997.  The petition was dismissed in October 2000 for non-compliance.  Applicant
encountered financial problems after his divorce in march 2007.  His plans to start anew were
negatively affected when he had a car accident in 2007.  He suspended paying his creditors until he
was fully adjusted to his new lifestyle.  His debt consisted of credit card debt.  When he completed
credit card applications, Applicant intended to pay the bills.  However, financial issues would
invariably arise to prevent Applicant from paying his creditors.  In 2010, Applicant enrolled in a
debt payment plan to resolve 11 debts.  As of December 2012, four debts had been settled and five
debts totaling $11,042 were still unresolved.  In April 2013, these five debts were still unresolved.
Applicant’s total delinquent accounts total approximately $18,037.
Applicant has had 29 disciplinary infractions which were issued throughout his employment
with his current employer.  These included a citation for losing property, repeated failures to notify
of medical appointment or medical leave, and repeated tardiness.  He has additional violations that
occurred after the SOR was issued.  Applicant’s personnel file contains a letter that states that
reprimands, suspensions, or termination are valid for a period of 12 months from the employee’s
date of hire, and cannot be considered after that period has ended.  Therefore, at the end of the 12-
month period, any infractions that occurred during the period become void.  Applicant equated his
company’s disciplinary policy to a juvenile record that is sealed when the person becomes an adult.
Though some of the letters in Applicant’s personnel file cite specific days Applicant was to be
suspended, he indicated he was never suspended from work.
In 2009, Applicant signed and certified a security clearance application.  In response to a
question asking whether he had ever received a warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended,
or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace or for violating a security rule or policy, Applicant
answered “no.”  Initially, he testified that he could supply no reason for answering “no” to the
questions.  Then he explained he did not think he was required to reveal the disciplinary infractions
because of the 12-month rule.  In an interview with an investigator, Applicant admitted he was
reprimanded for losing keys, but denied having any other security violations at his current
employment.  
The Judge concluded: When the SOR was published, Applicant had delinquent debts totaling
more than $18,000 owed to 16 creditors.  He has provided insufficient evidence to confidently
conclude the circumstances leading to the indebtedness will not recur.  Even with savings of $6,000
and a monthly remainder of $1,953, Applicant did not attempt to apply more funds to his debt plan
until two days before the hearing.  Applicant has never received financial counseling and has a
history of credit abuse.  He enrolled in a debt plan, but the fact that he has not aggressively ensured
that all delinquent debts are in the debt plan undercuts his efforts to demonstrate that his debts are
being resolved or under control.  While Applicant may not have received punishment for his
workplace infractions, he was required to answer the security clearance application questions
truthfully.  He should have disclosed the warnings and discipline.  He also deliberately provided
false information in his security interview.  Applicant’s disciplinary infractions between 2002 and
2012 constitute a pattern of rule violations that supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, and unreliability.  Applicant’s evidence in mitigation does not meet
his burden of overcoming the security concerns arising from the financial and personal conduct
guidelines. 
 Applicant asserts that, regarding the falsification allegations, he made some mistakes and
miscalculated some dates.  He states that this caused him to put down wrong answers.  Regarding
financial considerations, Applicant states that he is on course to have all of his creditors paid in two
to three months.  The Board construes these arguments as raising the issue of whether the evidence
reasonably supports the Judge’s adverse security clearance determination.  After a review of the
evidence and the Judge’s decision, we conclude that the Judge’s material findings of security
concern are supported by substantial record evidence or constitute reasonable inferences from the
evidence.  We find no reason to conclude that the Judge did not properly weigh the evidence or that
he failed to consider all the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06622 at 4 (App.
Bd. Jul. 2, 2012).  We have considered the totality of Applicant’s arguments on appeal and find no
error in the Judge’s ultimate conclusions regarding mitigation.    
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody       
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
