 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-06925 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is close to his father, several siblings, and a friend who are citizens and 
residents of Pakistan. He provides financial support to his family living in Pakistan. He 
owns valuable property in Pakistan. Over the last 11 years, he has visited Pakistan 
seven times for 15-20 days on each visit. His most recent visit was in December 2012. 
Foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated, and eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 10, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On December 
13, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to 
him, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) (Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 2). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). The 
SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance, 
and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On January 31, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR. On May 15, 2013, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On June 11, 2013, DOHA assigned the 
case to me. On July 11, 2013, DOHA sent notice of the hearing, setting the hearing on 
July 31, 2013. However, the hearing was held on August 1, 2013. At the hearing, the 
Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received without 
objection. Applicant did not offer any exhibits at the hearing. I held the record open until 
August 16, 2013, to permit Applicant to submit additional evidence. (Tr. 65-66, 70) 
Applicant timely submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were received 
without objection. I received the transcript of the hearing on August 9, 2013. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Pakistan. (Tr. 18; GE 3, AN Request) Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents to show detail and context for those facts. Applicant did not object, and I 
granted Department Counsel’s request.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from Government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.g, and he 
provided mitigating information. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old performance engineer, who seeks employment 
requiring a security clearance. (Tr. 20-24) From June 2010 to his hearing date, he was a 
self-employed engineer working on various Government contracts. (Tr. 25) In 1989, he 
received a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in Pakistan. (Tr. 22) In 1997, 
he earned a master’s degree in computer science in the United States. (Tr. 21-22)  
 
                                            
1
To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, names of other groups or locations. The cited sources contain 
more specific information.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant did not serve in the U.S. or Pakistan militaries. (Tr. 26) Applicant 
married a U.S. born citizen in 1994, and he was divorced in 2011. (Tr. 27, 29, 33) He 
has three children, who are 7, 11, and 17 years old. (Tr. 27-28) His three children were 
born in the United States and live in the United States. (Tr. 28) Applicant’s former 
spouse’s parents and siblings live in the United States. (Tr. 30) Applicant’s only relatives 
in the United States are his three children. (Tr. 30) His former spouse has custody of 
their children. (Tr. 29) His monthly child support is $1,162. (Tr. 35) His former spouse 
lives in a different state from Applicant, and he is able to visit his children every month 
or so usually for four days at a time. (Tr. 31, AE G) He does not own any property in the 
United States. (Tr. 34) He has $7,000 to $10,000 in a 401K account and about $4,000 
in his U.S. bank account. (Tr. 36-37)  
 
Applicant came to the United States in 1994 on a fiancé visa. (Tr. 60) He became 
a U.S. citizen in 1999. (Tr. 28) He has voted in all U.S. elections whenever eligible. (Tr. 
61) He does not participate in any U.S. social organizations. (Tr. 61) 
 
Applicant’s father, sister, and three brothers are citizens and residents of 
Pakistan. (Tr. 48; GE 2 at 241-243; SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) He communicates with his 
father and two brothers on a weekly or bi-weekly basis. (Tr. 51-54) He has numerous 
nieces and nephews living in Pakistan. (Tr. 50-54) None of his relatives are Pakistan 
government employees or closely associated with the Pakistan Government. (Tr. 48-52) 
Applicant has a brother, who is a citizen and resident of the United Kingdom, and 
another brother, who is a citizen and resident of Canada. (Tr. 58; GE 2 at 243-244) 
  
Applicant has a friend that works for the Pakistan Government that he has known 
for more than 30 years. (Tr. 54-55; SOR ¶ 1.g) They were friends in high school. (Tr. 54) 
He told his friend about applying for a U.S. security clearance. (Tr. 55-56) They have 
contact on a bi-monthly basis. (GE 2 at 247) 
 
Applicant traveled to Pakistan in 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2008, 2009, and 
December 2012. (GE 3 at 241, 253) Most of his trips to Pakistan were 15-20 days in 
duration. (Tr. 46-47; GE 3 at 241) Applicant has a Pakistan identification card; however, 
he does not have a Pakistan passport. (Tr. 44-46)  
 
In 2007, Applicant purchased land in Pakistan as an investment for $12,000. 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted documentation that as of August 5, 2013, the 
estimated value of this land was worth $15,500. (Tr. 37-38, AE D; SOR ¶ 1.d) Applicant 
had a Pakistan bank account with about $100 in his account, and post-hearing closed it 
on August 12, 2013. (Tr. 38-39, AE D) He most recently used his Pakistan bank account 
in December 2012 when he visited Pakistan. (Tr. 39) 
 
Applicant sends his family in Pakistan about $400 monthly. (Tr. 41; SOR ¶ 1.c) 
About three years ago, he had an account in Pakistan with about $3,000 in it. (Tr. 42; 
SOR ¶ 1.f) He closed the account in SOR ¶ 1.f, and he transferred whatever funds were 
remaining in that account (about $2,000) to the account in SOR ¶ 1.e. (Tr. 42-43, AE D) 
He spent the money from his account in SOR ¶ 1.f during his most recent visit to 
Pakistan in December 2012. (Tr. 43) 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant submitted ten reference letters that all attest to his good character. (AE 
B, AE F)  
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167 
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an 
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from power 
in Pakistan. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the 
Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
(Kpk), and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Pakistan.  
 
The Taliban, Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT), the Haqqani Network, and al Qaida operate 
in Pakistan, and in some instances elements of the Pakistan Government may be 
covertly aiding these terrorist or anti-U.S. entities. It is likely that in November 2008 LT 
was responsible for the attack in Mumbai, which caused numerous casualties. The 
Haqqani Network attacked the U.S. Embassy in Kabul in September 2011. Pakistan has 
intensified its counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been 
mixed. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Pakistan worsened in 2008, driven in part 
by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous 
Afghanistan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide 
vital sanctuary to al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist 
groups. Al Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Pakistan 
insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests 
in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Pakistan Taliban and other extremists 
groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare 
regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and 
supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide 
attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high-profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistan civilians 
and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The human rights 
situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances 
occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the 
Pakistan Government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor 
politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor 
mail without the requisite court approval, and also monitor phones and electronic 
messages. In addition, Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
expand nuclear weapon stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery 
systems. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United 
States cut-off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Afghanistan-Pakistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained 
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency 
efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The 
United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and 
security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide 
Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning 
in 2005.    
 
On May 1, 2011, U.S. special operation personnel raided a large compound in 
Pakistan and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaida. The raid raised concerns 
that the Pakistan Government had knowingly permitted terrorists, militants, and 
insurgents to find safe havens in Pakistan.    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply. Applicant was born in Pakistan. His father, four 
siblings, and a friend from high school are citizens and residents of Pakistan. He has 
frequent contact with his father, two brothers, and his friend. He provides his family in 
Pakistan $400 monthly for support. He cares about the welfare of his family living in 
Pakistan. Applicant went to Pakistan in 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2008, 2009, and 
December 2012. There are safety issues for people living in Pakistan because of the 
prevalence of terrorists and other lawless elements. Applicant’s family in Pakistan is not 
receiving any special protection from the Pakistan Government. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in a 
dangerous country, such as Pakistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See 
Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Pakistan with the United States, places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his family members living in Pakistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should 
not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the 
United States and a desire to assist family members living in a dangerous country.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
The SOR alleges three financial connections to Pakistan: (1) land valued at least 
$12,000 (SOR ¶ 1.d); (2) a Pakistan bank account with a balance of about $100 (SOR ¶ 
1.e); and (3) an account with about a $3,000 balance (SOR ¶ 1.f). The latter two 
concerns are mitigated because the account with $100 is too insubstantial to raise a 
security concern and was recently closed, and the account with $3,000 is closed.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Pakistan has a significant problem with 
terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with family members living in Pakistan creates a 
potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist family members in Pakistan by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant’s contacts with his family living in Pakistan. She has raised the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, 
and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
his father, two brothers, and a friend, who are living in Pakistan. Applicant provides 
$400 monthly to support his family living in Pakistan. His loyalty and connections to his 
family living in Pakistan is a positive character trait. However, for security clearance 
purposes, those same connections negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), 
and Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his 
relationships with his relatives who are Pakistan citizens] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. Applicant moved to the United States in 1994, 19 
years ago, when he was 30 years old, and he is now 50 years old. He has three 
children, who are U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. He has affection for his 
children, pays a substantial amount for their support, and visits them frequently, even 
though they live in a different state. He earned a master’s degree in the United States. 
When he took an oath and swore allegiance to the United States in 1999, as part of his 
naturalization as a U.S. citizen, he manifested his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the 
United States over all other countries.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family living in Pakistan. 
He frequently communicates with his family living in Pakistan. There is no evidence, 
however, that terrorists, criminals, the Pakistan Government, or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family to coerce Applicant 
for classified or sensitive information.2 As such, there is a reduced possibility that 
Applicant or his family living in Pakistan would be specifically selected as targets for 
improper coercion or exploitation. Of course, the primary risk to his family living in 
Pakistan is from terrorists and other lawless elements and not the Pakistan 
Government. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
                                            
2
There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in Pakistan. 
Applicant and his family in Pakistan will become potential targets of terrorists because 
of Applicant’s support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant and his family from 
lawless elements in Pakistan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Pakistan. Applicant is not required 
to report his contacts with family members living in Pakistan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because Applicant has a substantial investment 
in Pakistan, and he sends $400 monthly to his family living in Pakistan. He did not 
describe substantially greater assets in the United States, such as houses, bank 
accounts, 401(k) accounts, and his employment.  
  
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family living in Pakistan are significant. He is 
close to his father and four siblings. He has a substantial investment in Pakistan. He 
financially supports his family living in Pakistan. He has a friend who works for the 
Pakistan Government. Over the last 11 years, he has visited Pakistan seven times for 
durations of 15-20 days for each visit. His most recent visit was in December 2012. 
These connections raise an unmitigated foreign influence security concern under 
Guideline B.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are less 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. There is no evidence that 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed 
any security violations. When he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance 
to the United States. His three children were born in the United States and reside in the 
United States. He pays considerable child support for his children and frequently visits 
his children. He was awarded a master’s degree in the United States, and there is no 
evidence raising questions about his loyalty, trustworthiness, or reliability.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Pakistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.3 Pakistan is a dangerous place because of 
violence from terrorists and other lawless elements. Terrorists continue to threaten the 
Pakistan Government, the interests of the United States, and those who cooperate and 
assist the United States. The Pakistan Governments does not fully comply with the rule 
of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. The United States and Pakistan 
Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. Pakistan and the United States have 
close relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s family 
living in Pakistan that warrant greater weight than his connections to the United States.  
Applicant’s father, four siblings, and a friend, who works for the Pakistan Government, 
are citizens and residents of Pakistan. He frequently communicates with his father, two 
siblings, and friend living in Pakistan. He provides financial support for his family living 
in Pakistan. Over the last 11 years, he has visited Pakistan seven times for 15-20 days 
for each visit. His most recent visit was in December 2012. He has a Pakistan 
identification card. He has a valuable investment property in Pakistan. His close 
connections to his family and friend in Pakistan make him more vulnerable as a target of 
coercion by lawless elements in Pakistan. His family and friend in Pakistan will be at a 
greater risk if his clearance is granted.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not carried 
his burden and foreign influence concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
                                            
3
 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
