 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-06138 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his past history of 
alcohol abuse and intentional falsification of his security clearance applications. Three 
years ago, Applicant consumed alcohol and committed a serious criminal offense while 
under the effects of an alcohol-induced blackout. Although he has taken some positive 
steps to overcome his alcohol issues, he did not establish that a similar situation is 
unlikely to recur. Applicant also deliberately falsified two separate security clearance 
applications regarding the extent of his past drug use. He did so in order to secure a 
job. He took responsibility for his conduct at the hearing, but his past dishonesty and 
decision to place his own interests over his security obligations continues to raise 
doubts about his current eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
to establish his eligibility for a security clearance (Answer). 
 
2 
 
 
On May 23, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case and, after coordinating with 
the parties, scheduled the hearing for July 1, 2013.1 At hearing, Government Exhibits 
(Gx.) 1 through 12 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A through S were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and called several character references 
as witnesses. He requested additional time to submit matters post-hearing. I granted his 
request and he submitted Ax. T, which was admitted without objection. The hearing 
transcript (Tr.) was received on July 9, 2013, and the record closed on July 19, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 27, is married and recently became a father. He has an undergraduate 
and a master’s degree in electrical engineering. He has been working full time as a 
federal contractor since 2008. Applicant’s position is contingent upon receiving and 
maintaining a security clearance, which was first granted to him in 2008. (Tr. at 67-70, 
90, 97; Gx. 1 – 3; Ax. N – P) A number of individuals submitted letters attesting to his 
positive work history and good character. (Ax. B – H, Q, T). His performance 
evaluations reveal that he is a good employee. (Ax. I – M) 
 
Applicant began drinking alcohol and using marijuana in high school. His alcohol 
use increased when he started college in 2004. During his freshman year of college, 
Applicant was cited for drinking alcohol underage and required to complete 40 hours of 
community service. He was then arrested in 2005 for possessing a fake I.D. and 
purchasing alcohol for other underage students. Applicant completed an intensive 
outpatient substance abuse treatment program. He told his substance abuse counselor 
that he had experienced alcohol-induced blackouts. He was diagnosed with alcohol 
abuse without physiological dependence and cannabis abuse. He received a favorable 
prognosis and the alcohol-related charges were eventually dropped. He was advised by 
his attorney that he did not need to list the arrest and criminal charges on future job 
applications. After the criminal matter was resolved, Applicant resumed drinking alcohol 
and using marijuana. He stopped using marijuana in February 2007. He graduated from 
college in 2008, and then began working full time for his current employer. (Tr. at 59-61, 
66, 74-76, 98-99; Gx. 3 – 4, 8; Answer)  
 
 In late 2010, Applicant was on a business trip when he decided to go out for 
drinks with a co-worker. Applicant consumed a substantial amount of alcohol and 
blacked out. When he awoke, Applicant was being treated by medical personnel and 
being placed under arrest for vandalism and battery. Applicant, while in his alcohol-
induced state, stopped someone driving a vehicle, pulled the person out of their car, 
and then physically assaulted them. Applicant entered a no contest plea and was 
placed on probation. He complied with all the terms of his probation, to include receiving 
alcohol counseling, and the criminal charges were eventually dismissed. (Tr. at 25-27, 
39-42, 46-47, 61-64, 86-87, 94-95; Gx. 3, 5 – 6)  
                                                          
1 Prior to the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR. Applicant did not oppose 
and the motion was granted. Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) II and III are the Government’s motion to amend and 
Applicant’s response thereto, respectively. Pen-and-ink changes were made to the original SOR, without 
objection, to reflect the deleted allegations and insert the ISCR case number. (Tr. at 9, 52-57, 101) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s employer issued him a warning letter and placed him on probation for 
six months, during which time he was required to receive alcohol treatment and was 
subject to random testing for alcohol and illegal drugs. Applicant complied with the 
terms of his employer’s probationary period. He received a favorable prognosis from the 
treatment facility, and his alcohol and drug screens were all negative. He was retained 
by his employer, subject to the final disposition of his security clearance review. (Tr. at 
92, Gx. 5, 7, 9 – 11)  
 
Applicant’s former supervisor, who issued the warning letter, and the co-worker, 
who was on the 2010 business trip, both testified at the hearing. They both state that 
Applicant’s criminal conduct was uncharacteristic behavior and that his duty 
performance, before and after the 2010 incident, was exceptional. (Tr. at 19-39) 
Applicant’s current manager concurs with the witnesses’ assessment that the 2010 
incident was an isolated incident. He goes on to state: 
 
Personally, I have also thoroughly review (sic) his entire personnel file, 
and spoken previously to each of [Applicant’s] supervisors. His 
performance since this incident has been flawless. He has clearly learned 
from this and dedicated himself to making changes in his personal life to 
prevent any further problems. 
 
(Ax. R) 
 
Applicant testified that he has not consumed alcohol since the 2010 incident and 
continues to actively participate in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). His AA sponsor testified 
and confirmed Applicant’s commitment to sobriety. (Tr. at 64-65, 90-92, 43-50; Gx. 12) 
At hearing, Applicant submitted a letter of intent never to abuse alcohol again, subject to 
automatic revocation of his clearance. (Ax. A). A month before the hearing, Applicant 
voluntarily submitted his hair for drug testing and it was negative for any illegal drugs. 
(Ax. B) Applicant explained his decision to remain sober as follows: 
 
The reason, I guess, why -- there's books that we read in the AA program 
called, "Living Sober," and one of the chapters that I'd kind of go back to 
all the time is called, "Remembering Your Last Drink." And, the last drink 
put me in [jail], which is not a place anyone wants to be. So, any time, you 
know, a thought comes into my mind, I can go right there and remember 
that I don't want to be back in an orange jumpsuit . . . 
 
(Tr. at 99)  
 
 In 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In response 
to a question regarding whether he had used any illegal drugs, to include marijuana, in 
the past seven years, Applicant disclosed he had used marijuana. However, he claimed 
to have only used marijuana on five occasions between 2004 and 2005. (Gx. 1 at 49-
50) He provided the same response to a similar question on his initial SCA in 2007. (Gx. 
2 at 49-50) On both SCAs, Applicant certified that the answers he provided in response 
 
4 
 
 
to the questions on the SCAs were “true, complete, and correct to the best of my 
knowledge and belief” subject to criminal penalty under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 (Gx. 1; Gx. 2)  
 
Applicant used marijuana far more extensively and for a longer period of time 
than he claimed on his 2007 and 2011 SCAs. In 2005, he admitted to his substance 
abuse counselor that he generally used marijuana on a weekly to monthly basis, and at 
times on a daily basis. He used marijuana from 2002 to February 2007. He stopped 
using marijuana four months before submitting his initial SCA in 2007. (Tr. at 74-76; Gx. 
2; Gx. 8, Chemical Use History)   
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant states that his listing of February 2005 on 
his SCAs as the date he last used marijuana was a mistake. (Answer) In responding to 
the amended SOR, Applicant claimed that the omission was a result of not being able to 
recall “specific dates or the number of times that [he] had experimented with marijuana, 
due to the significant passage of time.” (Hx. III) (emphasis added). Applicant did not 
explain his inconsistent explanations for omitting the full extent of his drug use on his 
SCAs. He also did not explain why he could not recall, when he submitted his initial 
SCA just four months after he stopped using marijuana, that he had used marijuana far 
more extensively than five times over a one year period. 
 
 At hearing, Applicant admitted he falsified his SCAs when he failed to disclose 
the full extent of his past drug use. He admitted that he minimized the number of times 
he used marijuana on his initial SCA because he was concerned that if he provided a 
truthful response he would not get the job with his current employer. (Tr. at 75, 79) 
Applicant then admitted he falsified his response to the amended SOR allegations, 
because he “didn’t feel that the use of marijuana was a reflection on [his] capability to 
keeping the national interest or secrets safe.” (Tr. at 93) He went on to state that he 
falsified his response to the amended SOR because “I wanted this, and I wanted to 
show that I was trustworthy, and I felt that that would make me seem more trustworthy.” 
(Tr. at 93-94) 
 
 Applicant also did not disclose his 2005 alcohol-related charges for possessing a 
fake I.D. and providing alcohol to minors on his initial SCA. He omitted this information 
based on the advice he received from his former attorney. Applicant did, however, 
disclose the substance abuse treatment he received following the 2005 charges. He 
also voluntarily discussed the arrest and charges with a security investigator who 
conducted his initial background interview in 2008. He listed the 2005 alcohol-related 
arrest and charges on his current SCA. (Tr. at 59-61, 66, 76-79; Gx. 1 at 49; Gx. 2 at 
35, 37; Gx. 3 Hx. III) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
 
5 
 
 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.2  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.3 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
                                                          
2 See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises 
regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
maintenance of a security clearance.”) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
3 See generally Kaplan v. Conyers, et al., 2013 U.S. App. LEXIS 17278 at ** 23-24, 40-51 (Fed. 
Cir. Aug. 20, 2013) (federal courts will generally defer to the predictive judgments made by executive 
branch officials responsible for determining the eligibility of an applicant for a security clearance).  
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s admission at hearing that he falsified his SCAs by minimizing the 
extent of his past drug use in order to obtain a position with his current employer directly 
implicates the above concern. It also establishes disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a): 
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.”4 
 
 AG ¶ 17 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the personal 
conduct security concern. After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find that none 
apply. Applicant decided to deliberately falsify his SCAs for his own personal benefit. He 
falsified his 2011 SCA after having worked as a defense contractor and held a security 
clearance for several years. By that point, he was no longer a recent college graduate 
and should have been fully cognizant of the significance of falsifying a SCA. Applicant 
then compounded these falsifications by submitting false and misleading responses to 
the initial and amended SOR. Although his decision to admit his wrongdoing at hearing 
speaks positively as to his potential to regain his eligibility in the future, it is too soon 
and his falsifications are far too serious and extensive to resolve the doubts raised by 
his past conduct in his favor. Consequently, Applicant’s dishonesty and decision to 
place his own interests ahead of his security obligations continue to raise doubts about 
his current reliability and trustworthiness.5  
 
                                                          
4 The SOR also alleges Applicant falsified his initial SCA by omitting his 2005 alcohol-related 
arrest. Applicant omitted this information based on the advice of counsel. He then volunteered and fully 
discussed the matter during his initial security clearance interview in 2008. AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(b). 
Accordingly, I find in Applicant’s favor as to SOR ¶ 2.e.  
 
5 The Government cross-alleged Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse under the personal conduct 
guideline. As more fully explained below, Applicant’s past alcohol problems continue to raise a concern 
about his overall judgment, either considered on its own or in combination with his dishonesty. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 06-21537 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 21, 2008) (Government may allege security 
significant conduct under more than one guideline). 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The concern regarding excessive alcohol consumption is articulated at AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant’s long history of alcohol abuse, which culminated in 2010 with 
Applicant committing a serious criminal offense while on a business trip that left him 
unable to complete his assigned work duties, raises this concern. It also triggers 
application of the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized treatment 
program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an 
alcohol rehabilitation program.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the excessive 
alcohol consumption concern:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant last consumed alcohol nearly three years ago. He recently completed 
an alcohol treatment program. Even after the conditions imposed on him by his 
employer and a civilian court were lifted, Applicant continues to participate in AA. All 
these matters tend to suggest that Applicant has finally overcome his long running 
problems with alcohol and support a finding in favor of the mitigating conditions noted 
above. However, it has been less than three years since Applicant committed a serious 
criminal offense while under the effects of an alcoholic blackout. This incident occurred 
about five years after Applicant told a substance abuse counselor that he had suffered 
alcohol-induced blackouts in the past and was diagnosed with alcohol abuse. 
Applicant’s testimony as to his commitment to a life of sobriety was poignant and 
appeared heartfelt. Yet, his relapse after completing the substance rehabilitation 
program in 2005 and past dishonesty leave me to question whether his testimony and 
the other evidence of sobriety were sincere. After carefully weighing all the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, I find that Applicant did not meet his burden of persuasion. 
His past alcohol issues continue to raise a concern about his overall judgment and the 
likelihood that he may relapse. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).6 I specifically considered Applicant’s work performance, 
character references, and the steps he has taken to overcome his past behavior. 
However, the seriousness and extent of Applicant’s past conduct cannot be ascribed to 
a mere isolated incident by a young individual, who on a business trip overindulged. 
Applicant chose to lie on his initial application to secure a security clearance, which he 
needed as a condition of his employment. He chose to lie again on his most recent 
application, in order to keep his job. He then submitted two separate notarized 
statements in response to the present allegations, where he again lied in order to keep 
his clearance. Applicant’s falsifications are serious criminal offenses and, in conjunction 
                                                          
6 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 
with his commission of a battery while under the effects of a self-induced alcoholic 
blackout, constitute a pattern of serious criminal conduct.  
 
 Furthermore, Applicant’s deceitful conduct over the past six years demonstrates 
that he is willing to place his own interests above his security obligations, not the least 
of which is to provide full and frank responses on a security clearance application and 
during the ensuing security clearance process. At the same time, I recognize that 
Applicant’s decision to admit at hearing that he falsified his applications and responses 
to the SOR constitutes a significant mitigating factor and speaks favorably to his future 
potential eligibility. However, at this point, Applicant’s past conduct leaves me with 
doubts about his continued eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:         Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   2.e:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
