 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06895 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, 34, was born in Sierra Leone and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2006. Her mother is a citizen and resident of Sierra Leone. Her father and sister are 
naturalized U.S. citizens residing in Sierra Leone. One of her immediate family 
members is a high-level government official in Sierra Leone. She failed to demonstrate 
that her contacts in Sierra Leone do not pose a security risk, and that she would not be 
placed in a position of having to choose between loyalty to the United States and her 
connections to foreign family members. She failed to mitigate the foreign influence 
security concerns raised. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 17, 2011. 
On July 27, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence).1 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 8, 2012, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on June 3, 2013, scheduling a 
hearing for July 3, 2013. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 
3. GE 1 and 2 were admitted without objection. GE 3 was made part of the record, and 
considered for administrative notice purposes, but it was not admitted. Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted three exhibits (AE 1 
through 3), which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 12, 2013. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of certain facts 
concerning the government of the Republic of Sierra Leone. She provided source 
documents (official U.S. Government publications) to show detail and context for those 
facts. Applicant did not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, 
including her testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old senior consultant working for a large government 
contractor. Applicant and her parents were born in Sierra Leone. At age nine, Applicant, 
her sister (born in England), and her parents immigrated to the United States. She was 
raised and educated in the United States. She attended elementary school, high school, 
and college in the United States. She earned a master’s degree in business 
administration from a U.S. university in May 2006.  
 
Applicant’s father is a dual citizen of Sierra Leone and the United States. After 
retiring from his job in the United States, Applicant’s father moved back to Sierra Leone 
where he resides. He travels frequently to the United States where he lives for periods 
of time. Applicant’s sister is a naturalized U.S. citizen residing in Sierra Leone. She 
moved back to Sierra Leone three years ago to attend law school in that country. 
Applicant does not know whether her sister intends to live permanently in Sierra Leone 
or to return to live in the United States. Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of 
Sierra Leone, and a registered alien in the United States. 
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has an immediate family member that worked for the Sierra Leone 
government during prior government administrations. The immediate family member is 
a personal friend of Sierra Leone’s president, and is currently serving in a high-level 
government position.  
 
Applicant visited her parents in Sierra Leone in 2010 and 2011. These are the 
only two times she has visited Sierra Leone since she immigrated to the United States. 
Applicant’s parents visit her in the United States on a yearly basis. They also provide 
Applicant and her daughter with gifts and money during special occasions. Applicant’s 
aunt (a U.S. naturalized citizen and resident), her sister, and mother are aware that 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application. 
 
Applicant married her spouse in July 2004, and they were divorced in July 2009. 
She has a six-year-old daughter of this marriage. She has been working for government 
contractors since 2007. She was hired by her current employer, a government 
contractor servicing different government agencies, in March 2010. This is her first 
security clearance application. 
 
Applicant presented the testimony of a West Point graduate who served on 
active duty in the U.S. Army for 28 years. After his retirement, he established his own 
company and provides consulting services to different U.S. agencies. He has known 
Applicant since 2005, when she started working for him. He later mentored and trained 
Applicant in her professional career. He believes Applicant is exceptionally open-
minded. In his opinion, Applicant has a high degree of loyalty to the United States, her 
family, her child, and her coworkers.  
 
He does not believe Applicant is a security risk. Even though Applicant is close to 
her mother, when her mother decided to go back to Sierra Leone, Applicant elected to 
stay and make her life in the United States. He is not aware of any instance where 
Applicant’s mother had placed any pressure on Applicant to go back to Sierra Leone. 
Applicant has talked to her reference about the possibility of going back to Sierra Leone 
for professional development purposes. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Sierra Leone is a constitutional 
republic with a directly elected president and a unicameral legislature. The United 
States and Sierra Leone have had diplomatic relations since Sierra Leone’s 
independence from Great Britain in 1961. Between 1991 and 2002, Sierra Leone was 
involved in a civil war that destroyed infrastructure and stymied political, social, and 
economic development. 
 
Sierra Leone is one of the most stable counties in its region and contributes 
significantly to United Nations peacekeeping operations. The United States is among 
the largest bilateral donors providing financial assistance to Sierra Leone. The Sierra 
Leone government passed one of Africa’s toughest anti-corruption laws, made high-
profile arrests, and secured convictions in a majority of its prosecutions. 
Notwithstanding, the country continues to grapple with entrenched corruption, poor 
 
4 
 
 
health conditions, weak governmental institutions, high unemployment, slow economic 
growth, abject poverty, and inadequate social services. The country has major human 
rights problems.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 
5 
 
 
  The government’s concern under AG ¶ 6 is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.2  
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and/or 
obligation with her parents. Her mother is a resident and citizen of Sierra Leone. Her 
father is a dual Sierra Leone and U.S. citizen, residing in Sierra Leone. Her sister is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen residing in Sierra Leone. Applicant has an immediate family 
member who is a high-level government official in Sierra Leone. The extent of her close 
relationship with her immediate relatives is demonstrated by her frequent contacts with 
them. Applicant and her daughter received presents from her parents. She visited Sierra 
Leone in 2010-2011, and her parents’ frequently traveled to the United States to visit 
with Applicant.  
 
                                            
2  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
6 
 
 
These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that Sierra Leone agents, criminals, or terrorists 
operating in Sierra Leone may exploit the opportunity to obtain sensitive or classified 
information about the United States. With its negative human rights record and its 
government corruption, it is conceivable that Applicant or her family members could be 
subject to coercion.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. As previously indicated, the burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that the above mitigating conditions partially apply, but do not fully mitigate the 
security concern. Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that it is unlikely she 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual or nation and the interests of the United States.  
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Sierra Leone’s form of government.3 The nature of a nation’s government, 
its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
                                            
 3 The focus is not the country or its people, but its rulers and the nature of the government they 
impose. This approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each country in accordance with the level 
of security concern or threat it presents to the United States.  
 
 
7 
 
 
assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. There is no 
evidence to show that Sierra Leone’s government has conducted or has the capability 
of conducting any intelligence collection operations against the United States. 
 
 The relationship of Sierra Leone with the United States places a significant 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her relationships with her 
immediate family members living in Sierra Leone do not pose a security risk. Applicant 
should not be placed in a position where she might be forced to choose between loyalty 
to the United States and a desire to assist her immediate relatives living in Sierra Leone 
who may be coerced by terrorists, criminals, or governmental entities in that country.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives, terrorists, or criminals from 
Sierra Leone seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, her parents, sister, or other relatives living in Sierra Leone. However, we 
cannot rule out such a possibility in the future. This places the burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that her contacts in Sierra Leone do not pose a security risk, 
and she is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and her connections to family members. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationship with her family members living in 
Sierra Leone. Applicant left Sierra Leone at age nine. She immigrated to the United 
States with her parents and sister. She remained in the United States when her mother 
and father returned to Sierra Leone. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2006. 
 
Applicant has made the United States her home since 1988. She was raised and 
educated in the United States, and has been a productive U.S. citizen. She elected to 
remain in the United States when her mother returned to Sierra Leone. She is raising 
her six-year-old daughter as an American citizen. Applicant has established strong 
connections to the United States. The available evidence does not establish whether all 
of Applicant’s financial and property interests are in the United States. Nor does it 
 
8 
 
 
establish whether her parents have significant financial and property interests in Sierra 
Leone that Applicant may one day inherit. 
 
The record evidence fails to support a determination that Applicant’s ties and 
sense of obligation to the United State are sufficiently strong that she could be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States, even under 
circumstances detrimental to her parents and other relatives in Sierra Leone.4  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-
person analysis. Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s favorable evidence is 
insufficient to demonstrate that her contacts in Sierra Leone do not pose a security risk, 
and that she would not be placed in a position of having to choose between loyalty to 
the United States and her connections to foreign family members. On balance, and 
considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline B 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 14, 2006). 
