KEYWORD: Guideline M; Guideline D; Guideline E
DIGEST: The unusual and extensive technical problems with the video-teleconference
equipment during the hearing were sufficiently disruptive to have deprived Applicant of his right
to a hearing as contemplated by the Directive.  Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 11-09056.a1
DATE: 10/23/2013
DATE: October 23, 2013
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-09056
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 15, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems),
1The Judge made formal findings in favor of Applicant under Guideline D and the underlying Guideline  D
allegation that was cross-referenced under Guideline E.  Those findings are not at issue on appeal.
2
Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On August
16, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Robert E. Coacher denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1     
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether extensive technical problems
with the video teleconference equipment experienced during the hearing resulted in a denial of
Applicant’s right to a hearing under the Directive; (2) whether the Judge based his decision on
evidence that was improperly admitted off the record; and (3) whether the Judge’s analysis under
the whole-person concept was erroneous.  For the following reasons, the Board remands the Judge’s
decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant is 42 years old.  Between 2006 and 2009, Applicant accessed
the wireless networks of others on several occasions.  On some occasions he connected to these
networks through no affirmative action on his part.  By default his computer would pick up the
network of others.  There were other occasions, during the same time frame, when Applicant
actively penetrated other people’s wireless networks by using “tools” to discover the passwords for
the network.  Once penetrated, he would access the network and check his e-mail and browse the
internet.  He did not have permission to access these networks.  He stated that his reason for
accessing these networks was out of curiosity.  He admitted that what he did could be considered
“hacking.”
In February 2011, Applicant filled out his security clearance application and was asked
whether he had ever “illegally or without proper authorization entered into any information
technology system.”  He answered “no” to this question.  When asked why he did not list this
information on his application, he stated that he did not recall the incidents when he was completing
the application.  This response is not credible inasmuch as the specific topic of Applicant’s accessing
of other peoples’ accounts and his using tools to determine their passwords was addressed in an
investigation conducted by another government agency (AGA) in 2010.  Applicant also admitted
his computer activities when answering interrogatories sent to him by the Government and during
his hearing testimony.    
The Judge concluded:  Although Applicant’s actions in “hacking” into other people’s
wireless network occurred from 2006 to 2009, the reason he gave for doing so (i.e., he was curious
to see if he could do it) “shows a lack of good judgment and casts doubt on his reliability and good
judgment.”  Applicant’s reliance on forgetfulness as an excuse for not answering the question about
unauthorized access to computer systems is not credible.  His untruthful answer casts doubt on his
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  A consideration of the whole record, including his
military service, leads to the conclusion that Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the
security concerns.
2The Judge did not indicate the duration of the problem.  Also, he did not indicate whether it was the audio or
video portion of the transmission that had frozen.
3Applicant does not specify whether this was another instance of the frozen image problem, or whether he lost
the video transmission altogether.  
3
Applicant argues that the entire hearing should have been put off because of unusual,
extensive technical problems with the video-teleconference (VTC) equipment and transmission.  The
Board construes this assertion as a claim by Applicant that the recurrent and lengthy technical
problems with the VTC transmission denied him a hearing as provided for in the Directive.
Applicant’s claim has merit.
Applicant’s hearing was conducted by VTC, with the Judge, Department Counsel, and the
court reporter in one location, and Applicant in another.  The principal technical problem
experienced at the hearing was the “freezing” of the video image of the Judge and Department
Counsel on the video monitor used by Applicant.  The transmission of the images of the Judge and
Department Counsel froze into a single, still image on Applicant’s end approximately five times
during the course of the hearing.  Although precise time lapses are impossible to determine from the
hearing transcript, some of the periods where Applicant experienced a frozen image appear to have
been of significant length.
The problem was first encountered by Applicant on page 14 of the transcript and continuing
through page 15, lasting roughly the duration of Department Counsel’s opening statement.  The
Judge stopped the proceedings and went off the record until such time as normal video transmission
could be restored.  Applicant noted a second “freezing” of the image on page 31 of the transcript
which took place during Applicant’s testimony in his case in chief.  The frozen image remained until
page 33 of the transcript, where it apparently self-corrected.  On page 37 of the transcript the Judge
reported that the transmission from the Applicant had frozen, but it had come back.2 At the same
time, Applicant told the Judge that he had “completely lost” the video and the equipment “was
asking” to please wait on the video.3  A technician stationed with Applicant informed the hearing
participants that he would have to “dial back in.”  The Judge went off the record a second time so
that this could be accomplished.  The Judge went back on the record and Applicant’s video image
of the proceedings froze again on page 38 of the transcript.  At that point the Judge indicated his
desire to keep going.  Applicant indicated on page 44 that the video image was still frozen.
Thereupon, the loss of a normal video transmission confused Applicant during a pause where the
Judge was reading a document.  Applicant thought he had lost the audio transmission.  On page 50,
Applicant indicated that he had completely lost the video again.  There is no indication from the
transcript as to whether a normal image had been restored between pages 44 and 50.  From page 50
until the end of the hearing at page 76, there is no indication that normal video transmission had
been restored.  Applicant made a comment that he had momentarily lost audio transmission on page
55 of the transcript. 
The transcript indicates that there were multiple disruptions in the flow of the hearing owing
to technical difficulties with the video transmission and, to a lesser degree, the audio transmission.
4Applicant indicated that he had lost normal video transmission on page 50 of the transcript.  From that point
until the hearing concluded on page 76 of the transcript, there is no indication (a statement from any of the hearing
participants) that normal video transmission was restored.  On pages 55-56 of the transcript, the Judge told Applicant,
“there’s silence on this end, just so you know.”  In reply, Applicant stated, “Yes, sir. I can actually hear papers rustling,
so that does help.”  These references to audio clues strongly indicate that the video frozen image problem continued until
at least page 56 of the transcript.    
4
At least one of the comments on the record concerning problems with the audio transmission may
have been the result of confusion on the part of Applicant brought on by the fact that he was unable
to observe the Judge and Department Counsel as they were speaking.  Hence, pauses were
apparently interpreted by Applicant as a loss in audio transmission.  While it appears that the
transmission of Applicant’s image to the Judge and Department Counsel was not significantly
affected by the ongoing technical problems, Applicant was required to respond to questions and to
narrate testimony to a frozen image for significant portion of the proceedings.  Although it is
difficult to determine what effect the problems had on Applicant’s ability to present his case, it is
clear that the extensive transmission issues were disruptive and that Applicant was confused at times
as to what was going on (interpreting pauses as a possible breakdown in audio transmission).  The
Board concludes that because of the numerous, ongoing problems with the VTC transmission, the
fact that they significantly disrupted the progress of the hearing, and the fact that they continued
unabated throughout much of the course of the hearing, Applicant was deprived of his right to a
hearing as contemplated by the Directive.  This conclusion is bolstered by the fact that the transcript
does not clearly indicate the duration of the some of the periods where Applicant experienced the
frozen image.  It is possible that very large portions of the hearing were affected by the video
transmission problem.4       
The Board concludes that the appropriate resolution to what can properly be characterized
as unusual and major problems with the VTC transmission during the course of the hearing is to
remand the case to the Judge for a new hearing and decision.  Given this posture, the Board need
not address the other issues raised by Applicant.
5
Order
The decision of the Judge is REMANDED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
