 
 1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 11-13627 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant smoked marijuana on two occasions after being granted a security 
clearance. He realizes the seriousness of his lapses of good judgment, and he intends no 
future illegal drug involvement. Clearance granted. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On January 24, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and explained why it was unable 
to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance. The DOD CAF took action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 2 
Applicant submitted a pro se, undated response to the SOR allegations. He did not 
indicate whether he wanted a hearing.
1
 On August 15, 2013, Department Counsel 
indicated that the Government was ready to proceed to a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On August 22, 2013, the 
case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. On August 
29, 2013, counsel for Applicant entered his appearance, and I issued a notice scheduling a 
hearing for September 25, 2013. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) and 15 
Applicant exhibits (AEs A-O) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and 
his former supervisor testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received by DOHA on 
October 4, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana on two 
occasions: once in May 2008 and once in September 2010 (SOR 1.a), while holding a 
DOD Secret clearance granted in August 2001 (SOR 1.b). Applicant admitted the 
allegations, expressing embarrassment and shame for his lapses in judgment. He denied 
any intent of future drug abuse. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old college graduate. Shortly after he earned a Bachelor of 
Science degree cum laude in May 2004 (AE A.), he began working as a full-time systems 
engineer for his current employer, a defense contractor. Applicant holds a DOD Secret 
clearance that was initially granted to him around August 2001.
2
 His clearance went 
inactive until 2004, when he began his full-time employment. (GE 1; Tr. 26-27.) 
 
 Applicant did not use any illegal drugs in high school or college. Around May 2008, 
Applicant went camping with some friends.
3
 A “friend of a friend” brought some marijuana. 
Primarily out of curiosity but also feeling some peer pressure, Applicant took three to five 
puffs from a marijuana pipe passed to him around a campfire. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 28.) He 
hesitated before he smoked it because of his security clearance. (Tr. 40.) 
                                                 
1 
In his undated response to the SOR allegations, Applicant referenced a prior response. It is unclear whether 
he filed a previous answer in which he requested a hearing or whether he was referring to his interrogatory 
responses, which were submitted in evidence as Government exhibits. Applicant did not object to a hearing. 
 
2 
Applicant gave a date for his security clearance as May 2001 on his security clearance application. (GE 1.) 
The DOD CAF alleged, and Applicant admitted, that he was granted a Secret clearance on August 22, 2001. 
(Answer.) At his hearing, he testified that his clearance was granted in 2000. (Tr. 27.) No evidence was 
presented confirming the exact date of the clearance grant, although presumably the DOD CAF would have 
access to the information. 
 
3  
When he was interviewed by an OPM investigator in September 2011, Applicant named four persons when 
asked about others involved in his marijuana use. (GE 3.) Two of these persons were listed as personal 
references on his security clearance application. (GE 1.) 
 
 3 
 Around September 2010, Applicant’s house was robbed. Two weeks later, he and 
his then fiancée terminated their relationship, and she moved out of the house. That same 
week, Applicant’s grandmother was admitted to the hospital for the last time. A female 
friend came over to Applicant’s home to lift his spirits. She was accompanied by a friend of 
hers, who brought along some marijuana. Applicant was urged to smoke the drug to 
alleviate symptoms of anxiety and depression that he was experiencing. He hesitated at 
first because he did not want to use illegal drugs. In an acknowledged lapse of judgment, 
he smoked the marijuana in his home on that occasion. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 29.) Applicant did not 
think about his security clearance at that time. (Tr. 40.) 
 
 On August 22, 2011, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). He responded affirmatively to whether he had 
illegally used any controlled substance in the last seven years and to whether he had ever 
illegally used a controlled substance while possessing a security clearance. Applicant 
indicated that he used marijuana on two separate occasions, around May 2008 and 
September 2010, under the following circumstances: 
 
Tried once while camping with friends at a bachelors party, and one other 
time with a group of friends when one friend was visiting from Florida. No 
excuses for either time, and dates are very much estimated because both 
were just a couple of poor decisions that were spur of the moment. (GE 1.) 
 
 On September 19, 2011, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant denied any illegal drug use other 
than what he had reported on his e-QIP. He averred that he smoked the drug for social 
reasons on the two occasions, and that he did not intend any future drug involvement. (GE 
2.) 
 
 When he turned 30 years of age in July 2012, Applicant began reflecting on his life. 
It led him to seek medical treatment for symptoms of anxiety, which he had been 
experiencing for years, and which he felt contributed to his involvement with marijuana. 
Applicant was prescribed medications to alleviate his mental health issues. (AE G.) 
 
 In response to DOD drug interrogatories, Applicant indicated on December 2, 2012, 
that he never had a desire to use illegal drugs. He made some poor decisions out of 
curiosity in isolated situations that were not reflective of his lifestyle or of his usual 
friendships. To his knowledge, no one in his “direct group of friends” used illegal 
substances. Applicant indicated that he no longer socialized with the female friend involved 
in his 2010 drug use, and he denied that he could be pressured to use illegal drugs in the 
future. Applicant expressed regret over his poor decision to smoke marijuana, and he 
offered to take drug tests, starting immediately, to prove the sincerity of his intent not to 
abuse any drug in the future. (GE 3.) 
 
 On September 6, 2013, Applicant executed a statement of intent not to use illegal 
drugs again or to become involved with anyone who uses illegal drugs. He consented to 
automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation. (AE K.) Applicant reiterated 
 
 4 
at his hearing that he does not intend to use any illegal drug in the future. (Tr. 30.) He 
regards his decisions to smoke marijuana as “the two biggest mistakes of [his] life.” (Tr. 
33.) The friend, who was involved in Applicant’s marijuana use in 2010, moved away from 
the area. Applicant no longer associates with her, even when she returns to visit family, 
because he does not condone her current life choices as reported by her brother. (Tr. 38.) 
Applicant does not believe that he would succumb to peer pressure to smoke marijuana in 
the future, primarily because he is being treated for generalized anxiety disorder with good 
effect. (Tr. 33.) Applicant is taking prescription medication and has frequent sessions with 
his physician to check his progress. (Tr. 35.) 
 
 Applicant’s involvement with marijuana did not negatively affect his work 
performance. He has no security violations on his record. (Tr. 34.) Both individually and as 
a member of a team, Applicant has received several achievement awards and other 
recognition from his employer since 2005. (AE E.) During the first half of 2010, Applicant 
was a lead investigator and software developer on a prototype data access and 
visualization tool. Applicant worked with two subcontractors and displayed technical 
acumen, passion for his work, and flexibility, as a member of an integrated team 
encompassing engineers from his company and outside partners. During the second half 
of the year, Applicant served primarily as a technical lead on a team of three to four 
persons. His technically challenging work met with wide acceptance and led, in part, to an 
overall annual assessment of exceeds requirements. (AE D.) In April 2011, Applicant 
transitioned to a new team, where he created new automation tools to expedite processes, 
took control of periphery tools, and worked to generate a set of comprehensive tools used 
in analysis. He earned an overall rating of exceeds requirements in 2011. (AE C.) In 2012, 
Applicant proved to be a key member of a sustainment engineering team for a radar 
program. (AE B.) Applicant is known among his managers and co-workers for his technical 
prowess, teamwork, dedication, and collaboration. (AEs G-J.)  
 
 Continuation of Applicant’s security eligibility is endorsed by his former supervisor, 
who monitored and evaluated his work performance over the last 2.5 years of her 39 years 
with the defense contractor before her recent retirement. Several months ago, Applicant 
informed her that he had violated the obligations of his security clearance by using 
marijuana on two occasions, the first time because of peer pressure and the second time 
because of personal reasons. She never observed him to be under the influence of any 
illegal drug at work. Applicant has advised her that he will not use any illegal drug in the 
future because he values his job with the defense contractor. (Tr. 15-24.) 
 
 Applicant still works in a classified area. His direct managers and the security 
department are aware of the concerns raised about his clearance eligibility because of his 
drug use. Applicant’s employer had wanted him to go on temporary duty to a military base 
to upgrade a radar system during the last week of September 2013. The trip was 
postponed because it conflicted with Applicant’s security clearance hearing. Applicant’s 
employer has another temporary duty assignment planned for him in November 2013. 
Applicant is expected to be a subject matter expert on the integration of a radar system. 
(Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 5 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
 6 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),
4
 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Potentially 
disqualifying condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because of Applicant’s 
marijuana use on separate occasions around May 2008 and September 2010. 
Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia,” is implicated only in that Applicant had physical control of the marijuana 
and pipe on the occasions of his use. There is no evidence that Applicant sought out 
marijuana or possessed it for his future use, for the use of another person, or for sale or 
distribution. AG ¶ 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance,” 
applies because Applicant’s drug involvement occurred while he possessed a security 
clearance. Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance under the Controlled 
Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 812). Under federal law, Schedule I controlled substances are 
those drugs or substances which have a high potential for abuse, no currently accepted 
medical use in treatment in the United States, and lack accepted safety for using the drug 
under medical supervision. Applicant exercised extremely poor judgment in smoking 
marijuana while he held a security clearance. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” is 
satisfied in that his drug abuse was “so infrequent.” Applicant smoked marijuana on only 
two separate occasions, around a campfire in 2008 and then while socializing, albeit in his 
own home, with a friend and her companion, who provided the drug in 2010. 
 
Applicant denies any intent to use any illegal drug in the future. For Applicant to be 
eligible for a security clearance there must be adequate assurances of no future illegal 
drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
                                                 
4
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). 
 
 7 
future,” can be shown by “(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of 
abstinence; or (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation.” Of the four persons named by Applicant as being involved in his illegal drug 
use, two were listed as references on his e-QIP. One of his listed references was the 
female friend with whom he smoked marijuana in 2010. Yet, in December 2012, Applicant 
indicated that the friends with whom he usually socializes are not known by him to use 
illegal drugs. He was no longer associating with the female friend involved in his drug 
abuse in 2010. Applicant’s self-reported drug involvement leads me to accept as credible 
his uncorroborated, but also unrebutted, assertion that he does not now associate with 
anyone known by him to use illegal substances. AG ¶ 26(b)(1) applies. Furthermore, AG 
26(b)(3), “an appropriate period of abstinence,” is established by his drug-free lifestyle over 
the past three years accompanied by his commitment to avoid any future drug use. 
Applicant has executed a signed statement acknowledging the automatic revocation of his 
security clearance for any future drug involvement, which is required under AG ¶ 26(b)(4). 
 
Applicant did not set out to violate DOD policy contravening illegal drug use. His 
drug abuse appears to have been an aberration in his otherwise law-abiding lifestyle. Even 
so, he placed his continued security worthiness in doubt by failing to give appropriate 
consideration to his security responsibilities. Consideration of his security obligations led 
him to hesitate only momentarily before succumbing to curiosity and social pressure in 
2008. His clearance was not even a consideration in his decision to smoke marijuana in 
2010. However, Applicant understands that even limited, situational abuse is not justifiable. 
He regrets his serious lapses of good judgment and does not intend to repeat them. 
Concerns that he might use an illegal drug to deal with symptoms of anxiety are mitigated 
by his ongoing treatment under medical direction for this mental health issue. The drug 
involvement concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
5
 Applicant smoked marijuana on a camping trip in 2008 and in his home in 2010. On 
both occasions, he was given the drug by others, but he was also an adult and longtime 
clearance holder with sensitive duties for a defense contractor. At the same time, his 
exposure to illegal drugs was limited and not indicative of his lifestyle generally. His record 
of dedicated contributions to his employer, and his self-report about his drug involvement, 
                                                 
5
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 8 
weigh in his favor under the whole-person concept. With his direct managers and the 
security department aware that his security eligibility has been called into question, 
Applicant is not likely to jeopardize the job that he values by using any illegal drug in the 
future. Based on all the facts and circumstances, I conclude that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
