 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 11-13286 
                                                                      )     
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On August 8, 2011, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 10, 2013, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated April 28, 2013, and he 
requested that his case be determined on the written record. The Government compiled 
 
2 
 
 
its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 18, 2013.1 The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 9. By letter dated July 22, 2013, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on 
July 31, 2013. His response was due on August 30, 2013. Applicant did not submit any 
information within the required time period, and he did not ask for an extension of time. 
On September 24, 2013, the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
denied both allegations. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government. 
The record evidence includes Applicant’s answer to the SOR; his August 8, 2011, e-
QIP; a summary of Applicant’s personal subject interview, prepared by an authorized 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management;2 Applicant’s credit reports 
of March 28, 2013, and August 30, 2011; and e-mail correspondence. Absent any 
objections, all Items in the FORM are entered as evidence in this case. (See Items 4 
through 9.) 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old, married, and employed by a government contractor as 
an electrical foreman. He has been married three times. He was married to his first wife 
from 1983 to 1988. He was married to his second wife from 1996 until 2008. In 2009, he 
married his third wife. He listed no children on his 2011 e-QIP. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 He has worked for his current employer since 2003. In 2004, he submitted a 
security clearance application, but he reported his investigation was not completed 
because his second wife, with whom he had co-owned a company, would not release 
information about a delinquent debt the company owed. He now seeks a security 
clearance. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
   
 The SOR alleges that Applicant owes two delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $19,688. They include a $3,479 delinquent account in collection status to 
an apartment complex for unpaid rent (SOR ¶ 1.a.) and a $16,209 credit card debt in 
                                            
1
 At page 5, the FORM incorrectly references allegations 1.a. through 1.f. The discussion, however, 
references only allegations 1.a and 1.b., as found in the SOR. 
 
2
 As a part of his investigation for a security clearance, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on September 14, 2011. He did not 
authenticate the summary, which was provided to him as Item 6 of the FORM. Moreover, Applicant did 
not file a response to the FORM, correcting or revising the information in the investigator’s summary, nor 
did he, pursuant to ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive, object to its admissibility. (Item 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
charged-off status (SOR ¶ 1.b.). Applicant’s delinquent accounts are listed on his credit 
reports of March 2013 and August 2011. (Item 1; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
  In his answer, Applicant denied the debt at SOR ¶ 1.a. In 2005, Applicant and 
his second wife were living in an apartment and decided to separate and divorce. He 
asserts that he requested that the apartment manager remove his name from the lease 
and put his wife’s name only on the lease. He then moved to other quarters. Two 
months later, when his wife defaulted on her lease payments and was evicted, the 
apartment manager sought payment from Applicant. Applicant denies responsibility for 
the debt, which he claimed in his personal subject interview he became aware of in 
2010. He asserts he has attempted to negotiate a settlement with the creditor and has 
offered to pay up to $2,000 on the debt. He reports that the creditor seeks full payment 
of the debt from him, an action which he opines is unfair. Applicant provided no 
documentation to corroborate his assertions that that he had no responsibility under the 
lease. He failed to provide documentation showing settlement negotiations with the 
creditor. The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. remains unsatisfied. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.)  
 
 In his answer, Applicant acknowledged that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. 
represented his credit card debt. He stated he was financially damaged when a 
hurricane in 2005 affected the area where he lived and caused him to have increased 
expenses, which he charged on his credit card account. He denied responsibility for the 
debt and stated that he was contacted by an individual representing himself as a 
collections attorney working on behalf of the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.b. According 
to Applicant, the individual offered to settle the debt for $3,300. Applicant asserted that 
he accepted the settlement offer and paid the individual $3,300 in 2010. Later, Applicant 
determined that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. did not reflect his settlement payments. 
He stated that he contacted the creditor, who denied an affiliation with the collections 
attorney. Applicant then concluded the individual who represented himself as a 
settlement attorney for the creditor had acted fraudulently. Applicant stated that he filed 
a complaint with the judicial system in the collections attorney’s home state. (Item 4; 
Item 5; Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant provided two documents from the individual identified as the settlement 
attorney for the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. The first document was illegible. The second 
document referenced a debt of $4,741 to another creditor and acknowledged receipt 
from Applicant of $3,300 in satisfaction of the debt. Applicant did not provide copies of 
documents he filed with the creditor and other responsible officials alleging fraud. The 
debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. remains unpaid. (Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant failed to provide information on his net monthly income, monthly living 
expenses, and current debts. He also failed to provide information on his savings and 
other assets. The record does not reflect that Applicant has had financial counseling. 
 
 
 
   
 
4 
 
 
                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
                Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
Applicant denied responsibility for the two debts, totaling approximately $19,688, 
alleged in the SOR. Both debts alleged on the SOR appear on Applicant’s two credit 
reports. In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), DOHA’s Appeal 
Board explained: “It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can 
normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden shifts to 
applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for the debt or that 
matters in mitigation apply.” (Internal citation omitted). 
  
Applicant has been aware of these debts since at least 2010, but he has failed to 
demonstrate that he has paid them or negotiated payment plans with his creditors. This 
evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
 
6 
 
 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. He denies responsibility for a 
debt resulting from his former wife’s failure to pay a lease. While he declares he was no 
longer on the lease with her, and requested that the lease manager remove his name 
from the lease, Applicant failed to provide documentation corroborating his declarations. 
 
Applicant acknowledges a delinquent credit card debt of over $16,000, and 
argues that he was a victim of fraud when he agreed to settle the debt for $3,300. 
However, he fails to establish that he was a victim of fraud, which would be a condition 
beyond his control. The documentation he provided fails to show that he is no longer 
responsible for the debt alleged at ¶ 1.b. in the SOR. He has been steadily employed 
with his current employer since 2003. He failed to provide information on his current net 
monthly income, expenses, and resources available for paying his delinquent debts. 
The record does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling or that his 
finances are under control. 
 
 DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option . . . in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition.] 
 
 
7 
 
 
(ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-
9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
Applicant’s two debts remain unsatisfied and current. His failure to address his 
delinquencies reflects a lack of good faith in resolving his obligations to his creditors. I 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply in mitigation in 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. His 
financial delinquencies are significant and have existed for several years. While he 
denied the debts, he failed to provide documentation to corroborate his denials. He has 
been steadily employed since 2003. His failure to accept responsibility for his debts and 
to resolve them raises concerns about his trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, and 
ability to protect classified information. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.:                Against Applicant 
 
                                                  Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
