 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14035 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 5, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 16 and 26, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 19, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
20, 2013, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on September 10, 2013. The 
 
2 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibit (AE) A into evidence, which was admitted 
without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant submitted AE B through D, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 25, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.i, and 1.k. He 
denied ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f – 1.h, 1.i, and 1.l – 1.n. The admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. For the last eight 
years he has worked in information technology for his current employer. He is a high 
school graduate and has taken some college courses. He is married and has two 
children, the oldest of which has autism. He has no military experience. He does not 
currently hold a security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts by Applicant. The total for all the debt is 
about $90,719. The debts were listed in credit reports from June 2011, January 2013, 
and March 2013.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began with the downturned economy in about 
2009. In 2007 and 2008, he earned about $250,000 and $225,000 respectively. Then in 
2009, his earnings were reduced to about $142,000. Additionally, he had a part-time job 
that went away in March 2009. He also expended about $30,000 to start a business out 
of his home that never really took off. His autistic child required special schooling that 
resulted in tuition fees of about $36,000 over a three-year period. They have relocated 
and this child is now in a public school. Also in 2009, Applicant was required by his 
employer to relocate to another state. This resulted in additional expenses from the 
move.3 
 
 Applicant testified that because his job required frequent travel away from home, 
his wife was primarily responsible for paying the family bills. At some point, he found out 
that she was not paying their bills. He discovered this about the same time his income 
was reduced in 2009. However, he did not take financial control away from his wife until 
September 2013. He and his wife are now estranged, but are still residing in the same 
residence because they cannot afford to do otherwise. In early February 2013, 
Applicant sought out the services of a debt consolidation service (DCS). The DCS put 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 22-24; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 4-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 25, 71, 74; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
forward a plan to consolidate about $59,000 worth of debt whereby Applicant would 
make monthly payments of about $510 for 84 months. Most of the larger debts listed in 
the SOR would have been incorporated into this plan. The agreement between 
Applicant and the DCS was never executed. Applicant testified that the DCS dropped 
him from consideration. He claims to have contacted several other debt companies, 
although he did not enter into agreements with any of them. Applicant also had a home 
foreclosed resulting in a deficiency of about $14,000, which he paid.4 
 
 The debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a - 1.b, 1.e, 1.i, and 1.k are four delinquent credit card 
accounts and one personal loan from the same creditor ($5,961; $5,856; $18,671; 
$$1,293; and $10,328). Applicant was sued by the creditor for non-payment on three of 
these accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.i). A stipulation was reached between the 
parties in August 2010, whereby Applicant would make monthly payments of $60 each 
on the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and $30 monthly payments on the debt listed 
in SOR ¶ 1.i. He documented the payments he made on the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.i (AE B-D)5, but failed to produce any documentation showing his payments 
toward the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a. He did not provide documentation concerning the 
status of the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.e or 1.k. Those debts, along with the debt listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.a, are unresolved.6  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a delinquent credit card debt that he could no 
longer afford to pay after his income was reduced ($20,116). He acknowledged the 
debt, stated he plans to pay it, but has not made any effort to do so. This debt is 
unresolved.7 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d is a delinquent account of which Applicant claims 
no knowledge ($848). He has not formally disputed this account. This account was a 
joint account opened in July 2004, whose last activity was in March 2009, and was 
closed in March 2010. The debt appears on all three credit reports. This debt is 
unresolved.8 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g are two delinquent consumer accounts 
($18,413; $8,118). Applicant listed the debt at ¶ 1.g on his security clearance 
application as a collection account arising from a homeowners’ association debt and he 
admitted this debt in his security clearance interview. He also listed an account number. 
The debt at ¶ 1.f was listed as a charged-off account on all three credit reports. The 
account number associated with this debt is different than that of the debt at ¶ 1.g. Both 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 28, 34, 50-53, 70; GE 3. 
 
5 Note: AE B and C show payments for the same debt as reflected by the same Ledger Card 
number: (EN 261688) on the documents. 
 
6 Tr. at 35-38, 46-49, 67; GE 2, 4-6; AE B-D. 
 
7 Tr. at 59; GE 2, 4-6. 
 
8 Tr. at 60-61; GE 2, 4-6. 
 
 
4 
 
accounts were listed by the DCS when it was compiling Applicant’s debts for the 
purpose of formulating a payment plan. Applicant disputed these debts in his hearing 
testimony, but did not provide documentation to support his dispute. These debts are 
unresolved.9   
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h is a delinquent utility account ($52). Applicant 
acknowledged this debt during his security clearance interview. It was also listed by the 
DCS when it compiled Applicant’s debts. His hearing testimony disputed this debt, but 
he provided no documentation to support his dispute. This debt is unresolved.10 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j is a consumer debt ($820). Applicant denied this 
debt, testifying that it was for cable equipment that he had returned to the company. He 
did not formally dispute this account or provide supporting documentation supporting his 
dispute. This debt was listed by the DCS when it compiled his debts. It was also 
included in the earliest credit report. This debt is unresolved.11 
  
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m are delinquent medical debts ($44; 
$60). Applicant acknowledged these debts in his security clearance interview. He 
provided a self-made spreadsheet indicating that he paid both accounts, but he did not 
provide receipts, cancelled checks, or bank statements verifying payment of these 
accounts. One account was disputed on a credit report (SOR ¶ 1.m), although the basis 
of the dispute is not indicated. These debts are unresolved.12 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.n is a consumer debt ($139). Applicant denied this 
debt in his testimony. He did not formally dispute this account or provide supporting 
documentation supporting his dispute. This debt was listed by the DCS when it 
compiled his debts. It was also included in the earliest credit report. This debt is 
unresolved.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 62; GE 1, 2, 4-6. 
 
10 Tr. at 64; GE 2-3, 6. 
 
11 Tr. at 65-66; GE 3, 6. 
 
12 Tr. at 67-68; GE 3, 5-6. 
 
13 Tr. at 69; GE 2, 6. 
 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
6 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant had a number of factors affect his finances over the last few years. His 
annual income was reduced substantially, he was required to relocate by his employer, 
and his wife did not keep up with paying the family bills when he was traveling. These 
were factors beyond his control. He contacted a DCS to assist him with his debts and 
establish a reasonable debt payment plan, but was unable to execute this arrangement. 
 
7 
 
He also established a payment plan as a settlement to a civil lawsuit involving three 
credit card debts. This shows some amount of responsible action by Applicant. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 There is evidence of financial counseling. Applicant’s contact with a DCS 
satisfied this criterion. Additionally, his regular monthly payments towards the debts 
listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.i constitute a good-faith effort to pay those debts. However, 
the remaining debts are not covered by a good-faith effort, or otherwise resolved. Both 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply. 
 
 Applicant provided no documentation to support the disputed debts. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply. 
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s financial situation was 
affected by his reduced annual pay, his job relocation and his wife’s neglect in paying 
the family bills. However, I also considered that despite his payments on two accounts, 
the remaining accounts remain unaddressed. His past financial track record reflects a 
troublesome financial history that causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph:   1.a:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.b:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.c – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.j – 1.n:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
