 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-10861 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brian E. Kaveney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 24, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, as amended (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
  
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
2 
 
 
 
On February 23, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR. On June 7, 2013, 
Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On June 
21, 2013, the case was assigned to me. On July 9, 2013, DOHA issued a hearing 
notice, setting the hearing for July 31, 2013. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were 
admitted without objection, except for GE 9. GE 9 was admitted despite objection by 
Applicant’s counsel. (Tr. 18-20.) Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through R, 
which were admitted without objection, except for AE N. AE N was admitted despite 
objection by Department Counsel. (Tr. 27-30, 33-36, 169.) Applicant called three 
witnesses and he testified on his behalf. I held the record open until August 8, 2013, to 
afford Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documents. He did not submit any 
additional documents. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 12, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted in part and denied in part SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c with 
explanations. He denied SOR ¶ 1.d with explanations. After a thorough review of the 
record, I make the following findings of fact.1 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old director of business operations for a defense 
contractor. He has continuously worked for that company or a derivative of that 
company since July 1985. Applicant began his employment as an entry-level college 
employee and worked his way up to senior management. (Tr. 38-39, GE 1, AE A.) He 
has successfully held a secret security clearance “over 20 years” and currently holds an 
interim top secret clearance. (Tr. 51, 77.)  
 
There is no evidence to suggest, and the Government does not allege, that 
Applicant has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
Nor does the record evidence show that Applicant has ever failed to follow the rules and 
regulations required to protect classified information. He seeks a top secret clearance to 
comply with work-related project requirements. If he fails to obtain a top secret 
clearance, he will be unable to continue working in his current capacity. (GE 1, Tr. 77, 
82, 162-163, 166.)  
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor of science degree in 1984, and a master of 
science degree in business in 1991. (GE 1, AE A, Tr. 83.) He has also completed 
numerous professional and work-related courses. He married in June 1989, and has 
two sons ages, 16 and 14. (GE 1, Tr. 50.)  
 
                                                          
1
Applicant’s counsel noted that page 2 of the SOR contained a sentence fragment that was 
identical to language contained in SOR ¶ 1.c. I view this as a typographical error with no security 
significance as it pertains to the Applicant. (Tr. 61-62.) 
 
3 
 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant’s problems with alcohol stem from an April 2005 driving while under the 
influence (DUI) arrest that occurred on a company-sponsored trip. After attending happy 
hour, dinner, and a show, Applicant was returning to his hotel in a rental car when he 
was pulled over and arrested for DUI.  Applicant was charged with (1) DUI extreme or 
more .15 blood alcohol content (BAC) or more; (2) DUI liquor; and (3) DUI BAC .8 or 
more. He retained counsel and pled guilty to misdemeanor DUI. He was sentenced to 
12 months of unsupervised probation, 10 days of jail, with 9 days jail suspended upon 
successful completion of alcohol evaluation and treatment, and attendance at a 
Mother’s Against Drunk Driving (MADD)-certified victim impact panel. Applicant 
successfully completed all of his court-ordered requirements. (Tr. 51-53, 84-91, SOR ¶ 
1.a, SOR answer, AE R.) 
 
Applicant attended a treatment center (TC) where he completed his alcohol 
evaluation and treatment. The TC prepared a June 2006 substance abuse evaluation, 
as well as a discharge summary in September 2006. Those reports formed part of the 
basis of SOR ¶ 1.b, which alleged that Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol 
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker, an employee of that TC. The allegation 
stated that “[Applicant was] recommended to abstain from alcohol consumption and to 
continue to attend weekly self-help meetings.” The SOR allegation further stated that 
from June 2006 to September 2006, Applicant attended outpatient alcohol treatment at 
the TC. In his SOR answer, Applicant concurred with the allegation that he was 
evaluated at the TC. He added that he was provided a certificate of completion, having 
successfully completed the program, but nothing else was provided to him by the TC. 
He claims he was not advised to abstain from alcohol consumption for the rest of his life 
or to continue weekly meetings. (SOR ¶ 1.b, SOR answer, GE 9, AE R.)  
 
Applicant’s counsel challenged the accuracy and sufficiency of SOR ¶ 1.b on two 
grounds. First, that the June 2006 TC diagnosis was rendered by a registered clinical 
social worker (LCSW) intern (emphasis added) versus a registered clinical social worker 
as required by the Directive; and second, that Applicant was not advised by the TC as 
alleged to abstain from alcohol consumption for the rest of his life or advised to continue 
weekly self-help meetings. Applicant’s counsel further noted that when the LCSW was 
asked in September 2012 whether Applicant has a condition that could impair his 
judgment, reliability, or ability to properly safeguard classified national security 
information, she responded, “I don’t feel comfortable enough making a recommendation 
as to his ability to properly safeguard classified national security information.” See GE 4, 
SF-86-2 dated September 25, 2012. (Tr. 12-15, 19-23, 26-27, 36, GE 4, GE 9, AE R.)   
 
The September 2006 discharge summary bears the sole signature of the 
registered clinical social worker intern, as noted by Applicant’s counsel. However, the 
June 2006 substance abuse evaluation bears the signature of the intern (emphasis 
added) and the signature of a primary counselor and evaluator with a master of social 
work degree (MSW). It is unclear from the documents how significant of a role the MSW 
played in evaluating the Applicant. (GE 9, AE R.) 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant testified that the first time he saw his September 2006 discharge 
summary was in February 2013. Unable to recall receiving or being able to locate a 
copy of the discharge summary, Applicant contacted the attorney who represented him 
for his April 2005 DUI. That summary mirrors the language alleged in the SOR -- a 
discharge diagnosis of alcohol dependence - 303.90 in remission; with a fair prognosis, 
as long as he followed the aftercare recommendations; and a recommendation to 
continue to abstain from all mind-altering substances, continue to attend weekly self-
help meetings, and return to group as needed or desired. (Tr. 55-57.) 
 
Applicant’s DUI attorney provided a February 2013 affidavit stating that 
Applicant’s only court-ordered requirement was to successfully complete his treatment 
program, which he did. In no way was Applicant required to maintain a lifetime 
abstinence of alcohol nor was such a requirement part of his probation. Applicant’s 
attorney stated that had Applicant asked him if he was obligated to follow that 
“recommendation,” he would have advised him no. Applicant’s attorney added that the 
TC’s discharge summary was provided directly to him and Applicant was not listed as a 
recipient of the document. In 25 years of practicing law and DUI defense, Applicant’s 
attorney had never heard of anyone being required to abstain from alcohol for life. 
Applicant testified that he was never told by the LCSW that he was alcohol dependent 
or that he was to abstain from alcohol. Applicant’s DUI attorney corroborated Applicant’s 
assertion advising that the first time Applicant would have seen TC’s report was in 
February 2013. (Tr. 57-64, 92-98, GE 9, AE D, AE R.) 
 
The third SOR allegation states that Applicant received an alcohol evaluation in 
September 2012 from the same LCSW, who evaluated him in 2006. Applicant was 
again diagnosed with alcohol dependence. The LCSW recommended that he attend 
outpatient alcohol treatment, and gave him a poor prognosis without attending an 
outpatient treatment program. Applicant responded in his SOR answer that he agreed 
that he received an alcohol evaluation, but had no idea why he was diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent. (SOR ¶ 1.c, SOR answer, GE 5.) 
 
Applicant sought the 2012 alcohol evaluation at the Government’s request to 
upgrade or renew his security clearance. Based on what he believed was a positive 
experience with TC’s 2006 treatment program, pressed for time, and unaware of the 
previous adverse LCSW report, he requested an alcohol evaluation from the same 
LCSW. At the beginning of his interview with LCSW, she asked Applicant if he had a 
drink since 2006 and he said he had. She immediately informed him that he “failed” for 
having had any alcohol since his treatment program. LCSW did not provide Applicant 
with a diagnosis at the conclusion of that session nor did she provide him with a follow-
up report as he requested. LCSW is the chief executive officer of the TC. (Tr. 64-69, 98-
106, GE 5.) 
 
When Applicant completed an October 2012 DOHA interrogatory, he certified 
that his April 2011 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) summary of interview was 
accurate. The interview states, “He is intoxicated 1 time a year.” Applicant defined 
intoxication as “. . . when he is slurring his speech.” He testified that he maybe drinks a 
 
5 
 
 
couple of times during the week and maybe on weekends, but never exceeds one to 
two glasses of wine. His reference to being intoxicated once a year referred to his 
annual 4th of July party at his house. However, he clarified that statement in his October 
2012 interrogatories stating, “It has been 3 or 4 years since intoxication.” Applicant 
testified that he has not driven while intoxicated since his April 2005 DUI, and to be 
more specific, he does not drink and drive under any circumstances since his DUI. He 
fully understands and appreciates the Government’s concerns regarding the abuse of 
alcohol as it pertains to maintaining a security clearance. (Tr. 69-79, 88-89.) 
 
The last SOR allegation states that Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to the 
point of intoxication, from about 1980 to at least September 2012. As noted, Applicant 
credibly testified that he was never informed of a requirement to abstain from alcohol. 
Applicant denied consuming alcohol to the point of intoxication as alleged. He admitted 
consuming a glass of wine, but not to the point of intoxication. He described the night of 
his 2005 DUI as an unusual event, the only one of its kind in his lifetime. Applicant 
added that the LCSW would have no way of knowing the last time he was intoxicated 
because the subject was not part of his limited evaluation during his September 2012 
alcohol evaluation. (SOR ¶ 1.d, SOR answer, 61-63, 106-108.)  
 
Applicant’s counsel called as an expert witness the medical director (MD) of a 
clinic, who is a board certified physician in the field of addiction medicine. MD submitted 
a six-page resume that documented her extensive education, experience, writings, 
accomplishments, and awards. Without objection, I determined that MD was qualified to 
testify as an expert witness in the field of addiction medicine. MD’s clinic has over 22 
sites in four counties and as medical director, MD, supervises all of the physicians, 
nurse practitioners, physician assistants, nurses, and support staff.  (Tr. 118-123, AE K, 
AE M.) 
 
MD performed a comprehensive substance use evaluation on Applicant in March 
2013. As part of her evaluation, she reviewed LCSW’s 2006 and 2012 evaluations. MD 
explained that to meet the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM 
IV) criteria for alcohol dependence, three diagnostic criteria must be met. MD noted that 
LCSW only referred to one of those criteria – interferes with social or occupational 
functions. In MD’s opinion, Applicant’s DUI did not meet the DSM IV criteria, but even if 
it did, the DSM IV requires more than one criterion to meet the diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence. Multiple factors are involved and the factors identified by LCSW in her 
2006 evaluation do not alone qualify for a diagnosis of alcohol dependence. (Tr. 123-
126, GE 9.) 
 
MD noted that LCSW was an intern at the time she made her diagnosis and 
questioned her credentials and experience to make such a diagnosis at that point in her 
career. MD stated that LCSW did not have enough criteria to render a diagnosis of 
alcohol dependent. She quoted the DSM IV in her testimony and provided persuasive 
testimony that Applicant was not alcohol dependent and that he had been misdiagnosed 
by LCSW. MD found it “very puzzling” that LCSW would not “feel comfortable” making a 
recommendation as to Applicant’s ability to properly safeguard classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
She stated that if she had diagnosed a patient two times as being alcohol dependent, 
she would have answered the question in the affirmative. MD stated that an isolated 
incident of a seven-year old DUI with no other alcohol-related incidents while drinking 
should have resulted in an amended diagnosis, not a second diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence. MD concluded that LCSW’s diagnosis that Applicant was alcohol 
dependent was not supported by the information in her report. MD thoroughly explained 
her findings and opinions during her testimony, as well as in a March 2013 
Comprehensive Substance Use Evaluation. She stated that Applicant is capable of not 
drinking and had he had been told that he could not drink in 2006, he would have 
stopped drinking. (Tr. 126-140, GE 4, GE 9,  AE L.) 
 
MD stated that Applicant’s alcohol consumption is within normal limits and that 
he does not have a condition that could impair his judgment, reliability or ability to 
properly safeguard classified information. Department Counsel cross-examined MD 
regarding her opinions and conclusions, but nothing was developed that undercut her 
testimony during direct examination. (Tr. 140-154.) 
 
A clinical psychologist (Ph.D.), with extensive qualifications and experience in the 
area of drug and alcohol abuse, also submitted a thorough report on Applicant’s behalf. 
He concurred with MD’s testimony regarding LCSW’s 2006 and 2012 evaluations. Ph.D. 
stated that LCSW’s opinions that Applicant’s alcohol use interfered with his social or 
occupational functioning, that Applicant was alcohol dependent, and that Applicant’s 
prognosis was poor without further treatment for alcohol dependence were not 
supported by the data. (AE N.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant called two witnesses, who testified to his character and job 
performance as well his on and off-duty conduct. The first witness (W1) holds a senior 
management position in the area of facilities management within Applicant’s company 
and has held a security clearance for 20 years. W1 has known Applicant “nearly 20 
years” as a neighbor and fellow employee. Their families socialized frequently 
throughout the years and W1’s daughter babysat for the Applicant’s two sons. In W1’s 
years of observing Applicant in social settings, he has only seen him consume “one or 
two glasses of wine or beer, nothing more.” W1 has never seen Applicant “tipsy from 
alcohol, let alone anything related to (being) intoxicated.” W1 has never observed 
Applicant engaged in behavior that would impair his judgment, reliability, or ability to 
safeguard classified information. W1 also submitted a favorable reference letter on 
Applicant’s behalf. He strongly recommended Applicant for continued access to 
classified information. (Tr. 109-117, AE I.) 
 
 The second witness (W2) also holds a senior management position as director of 
security services within Applicant’s company. As such, he is in charge of investigations, 
counterintelligence, and workplace violations involving 15,000 security clearances and 
120 classified programs in 50 worldwide locations. W2 has worked for the company 29 
years and holds a top secret clearance with SCI access. During his tenure, his company 
 
7 
 
 
has won 15 high-level and coveted DOD awards for sustained excellence and 
achievement for their security program. W2 has worked with Applicant for at “least 10 
years” and found him to be a strong supporter of funding security programs within the 
company. Applicant is one of the top performers within the company’s senior leadership 
and is held in the highest regard.  W2 sees Applicant daily and has never observed or 
noted any indicators that would suggest that he has a problem with alcohol. Since 
Applicant self-reported his April 2005 DUI, that DUI has been favorably adjudicated nine 
times in subsequent security clearance background checks. W2 strongly recommended 
Applicant for continued access to classified information. (Tr. 155-168, AE P.) 
 
 Applicant documented 28 years of sustained superior performance through his 
performance reviews. He has also been the recipient of numerous work-related awards 
and is actively involved in his sons’ sports and scouting activities. In addition to the 
character witnesses who testified on his behalf, Applicant also submitted several 
compelling and favorable reference letters. (AE B - AE C, AE E – AE H, AE Q.) 
 
Having observed Applicant’s demeanor closely, I found his testimony to be 
credible. At his hearing, Applicant promptly answered all the questions asked. He was 
frank, candid, and forthcoming in his answers and explained his answers without 
hesitation. He readily admitted his April 2005 lapse in judgment in getting a DUI and 
expressed sincere remorse.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
8 
 
 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
  
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G (alcohol consumption), the Government’s concern is that 
excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
The Government established its case, in part, under Guideline G through 
Applicant’s limited admissions and evidence presented. Applicant had one alcohol-
related arrest in 2005. However, as noted, his 2006 and 2002 alcohol evaluations 
proved to be problematic as well as the allegation that he drank to the point of 
intoxication from 1980 to 2012.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of one alcohol consumption 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as 
driving while under the influence,” applies as a result of Applicant’s 2005 alcohol-related 
arrest. Based on the other problematic SOR allegations, two other potential alcohol 
consumption disqualifying conditions were raised: AG ¶ 22(c): “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;” and AG ¶ 22(e): 
“evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker 
who is staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.” For reasons discussed 
below, these latter two disqualifying conditions do not apply because the proffered 
evidence does not support the underlying factual allegations. Applicant successfully 
refuted the underlying facts that gave rise to his being diagnosed as alcohol dependent 
in 2006 and 2012 as well as consuming alcohol to the point of intoxication from 1980 to 
2012. Accordingly, no further discussion is warranted for SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d.   
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of two 
alcohol consumption mitigating conditions is appropriate with regard to Applicant’s 2005 
DUI charge: 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 AG ¶ 23(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program; apply.  
Applicant was misdiagnosed by LCSW in 2006 and 2012 as being alcohol 
dependent. He fully embraced and cooperated with his 2006 treatment plan and 
provided documentation of successful completion of the program. After his 2005 DUI 
arrest, he has not driven a vehicle after consuming alcohol, and has demonstrated 
responsible alcohol consumption. I accept as persuasive MD’s expert testimony and 
evaluation as well as the evaluation provided by Ph.D. Applicant’s most recent alcohol-
related arrest was eight years ago. Furthermore, there are no documented alcohol-
related incidents of any sort for the past eight years.  
Applicant presented credible evidence of actions taken to overcome his 2005 
DUI, has established that he is not alcohol dependent, and during the infrequent times 
he consumes alcohol, he does so responsibly. He is remorseful for his behavior and has 
 
10 
 
 
initiated changes in his lifestyle. His performance appraisals, certificates of 
achievement, awards, and the statements from senior company representatives show 
Applicant’s work behavior has not been indicative of his having an alcohol problem. He 
is a valuable employee, who is reliable, dependable, and professional. His sobriety and 
responsible use of alcohol is supported by senior company officials, who know him 
personally and professionally, and by his own credible testimony and evidence 
presented. At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged the problems misuse of alcohol has 
caused him, demonstrated remorse, and a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle 
changes consistent with responsible use of alcohol.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I am incorporating the comments under alcohol consumption. However, several 
additional comments are appropriate. I was particularly impressed with Applicant’s 
demeanor during his hearing and the apparent affect this process has had on him. 
Applicant has been willing to do whatever is necessary to recover from his 2005 DUI 
arrest. The process has been costly for him, not only financially, but also personally and 
professionally. Applicant has dedicated his entire adult working life, 28 years, to the 
defense industry. He has risen from the ranks of an entry-level employee to senior 
management with extensive responsibility. He demonstrated the correct attitude and 
commitment to responsible alcohol consumption. In sum, I find Applicant has presented 
sufficient evidence of rehabilitation.  
 
Also noteworthy is Applicant’s past behavior, which serves as a reliable indicator 
of future behavior. In particular, he has successfully held a security clearance for the 
past 28 years. He has not had an alcohol-related incident for eight years. He has been 
cooperative throughout this process and recognizes the gravity of these proceedings. 
 
11 
 
 
He is married, an involved father with his two sons, a home owner, a responsible and 
contributing citizen, and a very valued and trusted employee.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole-person factors” and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
