KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Even though Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, the
government produced documentary evidence of them.  The Judge’s findings of fact were based
on substantial evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11–14570.a1
DATE: 10/23/2013
DATE: October 23, 2013
In Re:
------------.
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-14570
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 18, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
2
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On August 20, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge James F. Duffy denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  He has worked for this employer since 2010 and
has held a security clearance since 2009 without incident.
From 2007 to 2009, Applicant lived with a woman who was unemployed.  Applicant
supported her, taking out a credit card in her name and letting her use it.  He traveled often, and she
used the card while he was gone.  In 2010, Applicant was furloughed from his job for 70 days.  He
collected unemployment during this period.  He did not realize that income taxes were not being
deducted from his unemployment compensation, and he found that he owed back taxes.  Applicant
has resolved this debt to the IRS.  His SOR listed five debts, three of which formed the basis for the
Judge’s adverse decision.  The largest debt, in the amount of over $13,000, was incurred by his
girlfriend.  For the three debts at issue here, Applicant entered into payment agreements and made
the first payments on each a few days prior to the hearing.  
When interviewed about his debts in 2011, Applicant stated that he had not paid them
because he had not been receiving steady work.  He advised that he intended to pay them.  In an
answer to a DOHA interrogatory in February 2013, Applicant stated that he had not made payments
and that he had undertaken no contact with creditors due to his having been working overseas.
When asked at the hearing why he had only recently begun making payments, he stated that he had
been traveling “nonstop” for the past 12 months and that debt repayment had not been high on his
list of priorities.  Decision at 3.  He stated that he had financial resources set aside, but that he had
not gotten in contact with his creditors.  He stated that, with his job on the line, he had to use these
funds to pay his debts.  Although he has never received financial counseling, Applicant stated that
he was receiving financial advice from his mother.  Applicant’s personal financial statement,
included with Government Exhibit 4, Answers to Interrogatories, shows a negative net monthly
remainder of $403.
Applicant’s employer values him for work ethic and trustworthiness.  
The Judge’s Analysis
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts[.]”  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations[.]”  
3“[I]ntentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other
responsible approaches”  ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009) (internal citation omitted)
3
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial circumstances raised disqualifying conditions
19(a)1 and (c).2  He further concluded that Applicant has failed to meet his burden of persuasion as
to mitigation regarding three of the debts alleged in the SOR, clearing Applicant of the other two.
He characterized Applicant’s debts as ongoing, some of them having been delinquent for four to six
years.  Although his furlough was a circumstance beyond his control, the Judge concluded that
Applicant had not acted responsibly in regard to his debts.  The Judge stated that Applicant’s reasons
for having delayed addressing his debts were not consistent and that Applicant’s procrastination
failed to demonstrate reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgement.  Insofar as Applicant began
making payments on the debts at issue here only because his security clearance was in jeopardy, the
Judge stated that he was not convinced that Applicant would continue with payments in the future.
He said that Applicant had failed to show a meaningful track record of payment.3  In the whole-
person analysis, the Judge acknowledged Applicant’s evidence that he is a good employee.
However, he stated that Applicant had presented insufficient evidence that his debt problem is being
resolved or is under control.  The Judge stated that Applicant had failed to demonstrate that his
conduct in regard to his debts was responsible and prudent.  
 Discussion     
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that his circumstances raised security
concerns.  When an applicant controverts a SOR allegation, the Government bears the burden of
producing substantial evidence of the allegation.  Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence
as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.32.1. See ISCR Case No. 11-00046 at 2
(App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2012).  In the case before us, Applicant admitted the debts in his response to the
SOR.  Accordingly, they were not controverted, and the Government bore no burden of production.
Nevertheless, the Government presented evidence in the form of Applicant’s answers to pertinent
questions in his security clearance application; credit reports; and Applicant’s answers to DOHA
interrogatories.  These documents, when read in conjunction with Applicant’s hearing testimony and
SOR admissions, support the Judge’s findings that Applicant had five debts totaling nearly $18,000
that had been delinquent for several years.  This evidence is sufficient to raise a concern that
Applicant has been unwilling to pay his debts and that he has a history of failing to pay his debts,
thereby shifting the burden of persuasion as to mitigation to Applicant.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  We
find no error in the Judge’s application of the disqualifying conditions.   
Applicant cites evidence that he was previously awarded a security clearance, despite the
presence at that time of some financial problems.  However, the Government is not precluded from
making an adverse clearance decision despite prior favorable ones, and a good security record is not
4
a bar to an unfavorable decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-23613 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2013).
Each case must be decided on its own merits.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  In this case, evidence
that Applicant has carried a substantial amount delinquent debt for several years and only recently
began addressing it supports the Judge’s adverse decision.  Indeed, the time that has elapsed since
Applicant’s last clearance approval, during which he failed to address his significant debt load, is
an aggravating circumstance present in the record before us which was, by definition, absent from
the previous one.  Although Applicant’s good security record and his prior favorable adjudication
were matters the Judge was bound to consider, along with all the other evidence in the record,
Applicant has failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-05685 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2013).
Applicant describes his interactions with the Department Counsel prior to and during the
hearing, characterizing them as amicable.  He stated that the hearing was “relatively clean, cut and
dry” and that nothing in the hearing “came off as suspicious.”  Appeal Brief at 1.  He stated that he
was surprised, therefore, at the adverse decision.  He points to nothing in the hearing, or in his
interactions with DOHA prior to the hearing, that contravened the Directive.  To the extent that
Applicant is contending that the Judge’s decision was based on matters outside the record or that the
Judge lacked the requisite impartiality, his contention fails for lack of specificity.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 99-0519 at 9 (App. Bd. Feb. 23, 2001).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel
being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                 
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
5
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
