1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-15013
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on September 22, 2011. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 8, 2013, detailing security concerns
under Guideline D, Sexual Behavior, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J,
Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented on September 1, 2006.
 
Item 4.1
Item 2; Item 4. 2
2
Applicant received the SOR on May 14, 2013. He submitted an undated,
notarized, written response to the SOR allegations, and requested a decision on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on August 12, 2013. Applicant received the FORM on
August 21, 2013. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted an undated
response. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to
me on October 11, 2013. The Government submitted six exhibits, which have been
marked as Items 1-6 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to the SOR has
been marked and admitted as Item 2, and the SOR has been marked as Item 1. His
written response to the FORM is admitted into the record as Applicant Exhibit A (AE A).
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the
SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After
a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 29 years old, works as an engineering technician for a DOD
contractor. He began his current employment in September 2011. He previously worked
from April 2009 until he accepted his current employment as a personal computer
technician and sales associate at a national retail store and in the restaurant industry
from 2006 until 2009. There is no evidence of disciplinary problems at work.1
Applicant is single. He lives with his mother and grandfather. Applicant graduated
from high school in 2002. He received an associate’s degree in May 2009. He received
two additional associate’s degrees: one in computer engineering technology and a
second in electrical engineering technology in 2011. He recently received a bachelor’s
degree, summa cum laude, in both these fields of study.2
On May 24, 2004, the court issued a warrant for Applicant’s arrest based on a
probable cause statement. On June 1, 2004, Applicant voluntarily surrendered to police,
who charged him with sex abuse of a child, first degree, based on a December 31, 2003
incident when Applicant was 19 years old. Applicant plead guilty to sex abuse of a child,
second degree, a felony, on December 6, 2004. The court sentenced him to an
indeterminate term of not less than one year nor more than 15 years in prison. The
court immediately suspended the prison term; however, the court sentenced him to 365
days in the county jail with commitment to begin immediately. The court also fined him
Item 5.3
Id.4
Item 2; item 5; AE A.5
3
$1,850 and ordered him to pay $1,980 in restitution to a crime victims fund. The court
placed him on three years of probation to begin upon his release from jail, conditioned
upon his completion of an inpatient and after care program for sex offenders, no contact
with the victim and the victim’s family, no contact with anyone under the age of 18
without supervision, complete DNA testing, payment of fine and restitution, and
compliance with group conditions for sex offenders. As a result of this conviction, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation Criminal Record for Applicant indicates that he has
been registered as a sex offender since April 29, 2005. 3
Near the completion of his time in jail, Applicant was admitted to a county sex
offender treatment program on November 1, 2005. He returned to the county jail one-
month later after disclosing another sex abuse incident in 2000. The court issued a
warrant for violation of his probation and a show cause order on November 29, 2005.
Applicant’s counsel and the prosecutor reached an agreement regarding this show
cause order, which was stricken by the court on February 1, 2006. Applicant was
readmitted to the sex offender program on this date.4
During his enrollment in the sex offender program, Applicant became sexually
involved with another person in the program, in violation of program rules. His conduct
resulted in his removal from the program in July 2006 and the issuance of a second
bench warrant for violation of probation. Two unidentified allegations were raised
against Applicant in an order to show cause on his violation of probation. At a court
hearing on August 7, 2006, Applicant admitted the first allegation, but denied the
second allegation. The court dismissed the second allegation and revoked Applicant’s
probation. The court then sentenced Applicant to 90 days in jail and granted him credit
for time served. The court reinstated his probation for 36 months to begin on August 7,
2006 and directed he comply with the probationary terms of his original sentence. He
re-entered the sex offender program on September 9, 2006. He successfully completed
this program on August 27, 2007. The court terminated his probation for his first
conviction on July 16, 2009 and closed this case on the same date.5
While participating in the sex offender program, Applicant disclosed an additional
sex child abuse incident which occurred in June 2000, when Applicant was 16 years old.
In August 2007, the State charged him with two counts of sex abuse of a child, second
degree, a felony, for his June 2000 conduct. Applicant plead guilty to charge 1 on
October 29, 2007, and the court dismissed the second charge on the same date. The
court sentenced him to an indeterminate term of not less than one year nor more than
15 years in state prison. The court immediately suspended the prison sentence and
Id.6
Item 2; Item 5; Item 6; AE A.7
Item 4; Item 5.8
4
placed him on 36 months of probation, which was terminated on August 18, 2009 by
court order.6
The sex offender treatment program discharged Applicant on August 21, 2007
with a status of treatment completed. Staff prepared a discharge summary on August
27, 2007. The summary noted that during his third admission, he satisfactorily
completed treatment goals and objectives. He actively participated in the program,
specifically addressed his sexual abuse conduct, identified triggers for his conduct, and
became a group leader. Applicant accepted responsibility for his conduct and developed
techniques to control his conduct. After care recommendations, included outpatient
treatment with a short-term intervention program. Applicant participated in two
outpatient treatment programs. The first program began in 2007 and ended about 18
months later in 2008. The therapists indicated that Applicant successfully reconciled
and reunified with two of his victims and their parents. The second program began in
January 2010 and ended in August 2011 after 14 individual therapy sessions. Both
therapists indicate that Applicant is making healthy and successful choices about his
life. Neither can absolutely assure that he will not offend again; however, they see him
as making correct choices in life.7
Applicant listed his criminal convictions for sexual abuse on his e-QIP. He told
prospective employers about his convictions. He accepts responsibility for and is
forthcoming about his conduct. He has not been arrested since 2006, and he has
complied with the law as required. His statements in the file reflect remorse about his
conduct and his poor decision making while in treatment.8
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
5
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern as:
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
6
AG ¶ 13 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has
been prosecuted;
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a
personality disorder;
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and,
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion
or judgment.
Applicant was charged and convicted of sexual abuse of a child twice. His
conduct shows poor judgment. He is a registered sex offender. The above disqualifying
conditions apply.
The Sexual Behavior guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 14(a) through ¶
14(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature;
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or
duress.      
Applicant has actively participated in counseling and appears to utilize the
principles and techniques he learned in therapy. He is open about his convictions for
sex abuse of a child, which makes it less likely that he can be coerced or exploited
because of his conduct. Although Applicant’s conduct occurred when he was ages 16-
19 and has not reoccurred, he was convicted as an adult for both incidents. Because of
his convictions, he is a registered sex offender. Despite his positive conduct, lingering
concerns remain that his conduct may reoccur in the future. Given the seriousness of
his conduct, I find that the evidence, when viewed in its entirety, is insufficient to
establish mitigation of the security concerns raised under Guideline D.
7
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year. 
Applicant was convicted of sexual abuse of a child twice and of violation of his
probation twice. He was sentenced to prison for not less than one year and not more
than 15 years. Although his prison sentence was suspended, he spent approximately
one year in the county jail for his crimes. He is a registered sex offender. The above
criminal conduct disqualifying conditions apply.
The Criminal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 32(a) through ¶
32(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Applicant’s last criminal conduct involving sex abuse occurred in 2003. Since
completion of his jail sentence, Applicant has actively participated in and completed an
inpatient sex offender program. He also actively participated in two separate outpatient
treatment programs. He continues to follow the recommendations of the treatment
programs to avoid future criminal conduct. Following his release from inpatient care, he
enrolled in a community college and started working. He completed three associate
degrees and recently completed his bachelor’s degree. He has worked steadily since
8
2007 without disciplinary actions, and he has stayed out of trouble. He successfully
completed probation and is no longer under court supervision. He demonstrated
remorse for his conduct and poor decision making. He has mitigated the security
concerns about his criminal conduct under AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d).
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or
rule violations . . . .
AG  ¶ 16(c) is raised when the adverse information is insufficient to be raised
under any other single guideline. AG ¶ 16(d) applies when credible adverse information
is not explicitly covered by another guideline and may not be sufficient for an adverse
determination. In this case, the security concerns about Applicant’s sexual and criminal
conduct are explicitly covered under Guidelines D and J. There is sufficient information
under Guideline D for an adverse determination. See Guideline D discussion, supra.
The general security concerns in the personal conduct guideline about Applicant’s lack
of judgment and his conduct are specifically addressed in Guidelines D and J. Guideline
E is found in favor of Applicant essentially as a duplication.
9
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
sexual abuse conduct began when he was 16 years old and last occurred when he was
19 years old. (See AG & 2(a)(4).) The police charged him with sex abuse of a child, a
felony. He plead guilty to a second degree felony and spent nearly a year in jail for his
conduct. He revealed his first incident during sex offender counseling and plead guilty to
a second felony. After violating a rule in his sex offender program, Applicant changed
his behavior and attitude towards treatment, becoming actively involved in his treatment
and care. He successfully completed his inpatient program, and he fully participated in
two outpatient programs. He complied with the terms of his probation, and there have
been no occurrences of criminal conduct for ten years. In 2009, the court released him
from probation and closed both criminal cases. He completed three associates degrees
and his bachelor’s degree. He works steadily without work-related problems. His
conduct reflects that he is using the tools he developed during treatment. Applicant’s
past conduct is unlikely to be a source of coercion, pressure, exploitation, or duress
because he is open and forthright about what he did in the past.
Applicant’s sexual abuse of a child while a teenager is serious and egregious. He
violated the trust of a child. While he has taken many positive steps since he last
10
offended, his past conduct caused grief for many, including his victims, their families,
and his family. He is now a registered sex offender. This registration and designation
raises questions about his trustworthiness to hold a security clearance. In weighing his
positive conduct against the seriousness of his sex abuse conduct, I find that the
evidence is insufficient to grant him a security clearance.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct under
Guideline J, but that he has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his sexual
behavior and personal conduct under Guidelines D and E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
