KEYWORD: Guideline K
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings of security concern were supported by substantial
evidence.  Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Security-significant
conduct that occurred after Applicant had been placed on notice that her finances were of
concern supports the Judge’s adverse decision.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 11-10405.a1
DATE: 10/28/2013
DATE: October 28, 2013
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-10405
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
G. John Dezenberg, Jr., Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 15, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On July 29, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge James F. Duffy denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1This second bankruptcy filing occurred after the date of the hearing.  Obviously, it was not alleged in the SOR.
However, conduct not alleged can be considered for a number of reasons, including evaluating an applicant’s case for
mitigation and/or evaluating the extent to which the applicant has demonstrated rehabilitation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
11-03664 at 5, n. 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2013). 
 
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s overall adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, and
contrary to law.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is an employee of a Defense contractor.  She has worked for her employer since
late 2010.  She has a bachelor’s degree.  Twice divorced, Applicant has two daughters, the older of
whom serves in the U.S. military.  Applicant has held a security clearance since the late 1980s
without incident.
In 2007, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, following her second divorce.
In 2008, the bankruptcy was converted to Chapter 7 and, early the next year, Applicant was granted
a discharge of her debts.  Applicant’s SOR lists several delinquent debts.  Applicant has attributed
them to the financial consequences of her divorce and to a period of unemployment.  Applicant
worked with a debt consolidation company to resolve her debts, and she made regular payments to
the company in pursuit of this goal.  A court entered a judgment against Applicant for a medical debt
that the debt consolidation company had failed to address.  Applicant terminated her relationship
with the company prior to the hearing.
The Judge found that several of the SOR debts had been discharged in bankruptcy and that
others were repeats of a single debt.  The Judge resolved these debts in Applicant’s favor.  However,
the Judge found against Applicant on eight others, including a judgment for $3,000, a past-due
account for $1,488, and a $9,329 charged-off account resulting from a vehicle loan.  The total
amount of delinquent debt that the Judge found against Applicant was nearly $16,000.  In June 2013,
Applicant filed again for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, her petition showing assets of $21,881
and liabilities totaling $55,477.1  This bankruptcy petition lists some of the debts alleged in the SOR,
including several that the Judge resolved against Applicant.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for her professionalism and trustworthiness.  Her work
performance evaluation states that she met or exceeded expectations.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial circumstances raised concerns under
Guideline F.  He resolved several of these in Applicant’s favor, in light of evidence that the debts
had been resolved through bankruptcy or were repetitive of others.  He noted that Applicant’s
3
finances had been affected by circumstances outside her control, such as her marital difficulties and
her unemployment.  This latter event exerted “a significant impact on her financial situation.”
Decision at 10.  However, the Judge also cited to evidence that Applicant had continued to open and
default on debts after she obtained her current job and after she had submitted to a clearance
interview in 2011 that focused on her debt problems. 
The Judge stated that Applicant’s debts were ongoing and continued to cast doubt upon her
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge
noted evidence of Applicant’s good reputation among friends and co-workers and evidence that she
had experienced financial setbacks beyond her control.  However, the Judge concluded that she had
failed to demonstrate financial responsibility.
Discussion
Applicant alleges that some of the Judge’s findings are in error, stating that the Judge treated
some debts as ongoing even though Applicant had resolved them.  For example, she claims that one
of the debts that the Judge found against her had been paid in full and that another had been
discharged in her prior bankruptcy.  
We have examined the Judge’s findings in light of the record as a whole.  Regarding one of
the debts, the Judge noted that some evidence existed that could mean that the debt had been
resolved.  However, the Judge found this evidence to be inconclusive, which was a reasonable
interpretation of the record that was before him.  Even if the Judge’s findings contained errors, they
did not likely affect the overall decision.  Applicant has not cited to any harmful error likely to
change the outcome of the case.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported
by substantial record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-13180 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 21, 2013).
Applicant cites to evidence favorable to her, such as her having held a clearance for several
years without incident.  This was something the Judge was required to consider, along with all the
other evidence in the record.  The Judge made findings about Applicant’s security record and about
other laudatory matters.  The gravamen of his decision was that Applicant had failed to demonstrate
that her security-significant conduct was behind her.  The Government is not precluded from making
an adverse clearance decision despite an applicant’s good security record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
06-23613 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2013).  Applicant has failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-06026 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar.
5, 2013).    
In support of her appeal, Applicant has submitted evidence from outside the record, for
example, regarding sanctions a court imposed on her bankruptcy attorney and regarding
improprieties committed by the owner of a debt settlement company that she was using.  We cannot
consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
4
Applicant has challenged the Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions.  Examining the
Decision in light of the entire record, we find no error in the Judge’s analysis.  Evidence that
security-significant conduct occurred after Applicant had been placed on notice that her finances
were of security concern is relevant and supports the Judge’s adverse holding.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 11-10127 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 9, 2012) (The applicant’s failure to address a delinquent tax debt
for a year after having been placed on notice that the debt was of security concern cited by the Judge
as a reason to deny the applicant a clearance).  The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billlett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
