 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06944 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 7, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual 
behavior) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on September 23, 2013, and reassigned to me on October 15, 2013. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 11, 
2013, scheduling the hearing for October 16, 2013. The hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 
24, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance. He has a bachelor’s degree. He has never married, and he does not 
have any children.1 
  
 Applicant has worked consistently as an engineer for various companies since he 
graduated from college. His uncle is a retired special agent and polygraph examiner for 
a federal investigatory agency. Applicant admired his uncle since he was a child, and he 
wanted to follow in his uncle’s footsteps.2  
 
 Applicant applied for a job with the federal agency in 2010. He passed the written 
examination and the interview process with a panel of three special agents. He did not 
pass the physical fitness test, but he had another opportunity to take the test. He 
submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in June 2010. He was 
administered a polygraph as a requirement for his employment. There was a pre-test 
interview and a post-test interview. The polygraph examiner determined that the test 
indicated deception.3 The polygraph examiner summarized Applicant’s statement in the 
post-test interview as follows: 
 
When I discussed my viewing of pornography during the pre-test 
interview, I was not completely forthcoming regarding what I viewed. I 
don’t know why I didn’t reveal this during the pre-test interview, other than 
it makes me very uncomfortable to talk about. When I was 18 years old, I 
used Google or some other search mechanism to look for pornography of 
underage girls sixteen to seventeen years old. Also, about five years ago, 
I was searching the web for adult pornography. When I saw an underage 
girl, 13-16 years old on one of the sites. I returned to that same site about 
two more times, each time seeing an underage girl, 13 to 16 years old. I 
don’t recall whether it was the same underage girl each time or different 
girls.4 
 
 Applicant admits that he has searched for and viewed pornography on the 
Internet, but he denies intentionally seeking pornographic images of underage females 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 16, 28, 67-68; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 17-20; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 18-20, 41-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
4 GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
(child pornography).5 He was uncomfortable discussing pornography with the polygraph 
examiner, and he admits that he told the polygraph examiner that it made him 
uncomfortable. When Applicant was about 18 years old (approximately 2002), he 
viewed adult pornography on the Internet. He also searched the Internet for “hot 16 or 
17-year-olds,” but he was looking for scantily-clad girls, not pornographic images.6 
 
 When Applicant was about 22 or 23 years old (approximately 2005), he viewed 
pornography on the Internet. While on an adult pornographic web site, a pop-up came 
on the screen showing what appeared to be an underage girl. There was nothing about 
the site to establish the female’s age, but Applicant estimated that she appeared to be 
between 13 and 16 years old. Applicant returned to the pornographic web site on 
several occasions, during which the same or a similar pop-up appeared. He stopped 
going to the web site because of the pop-ups.7 
 
 Applicant admitted his involvement with pornography in about 2002 and 2005. He 
has a 28-year-old girlfriend, and he credibly denied having any interest in child 
pornography.8 
 
 Applicant submitted a copy of a magazine article about pornography. Part of the 
article addressed the prevalence of “Lolita Porn” on the Internet. According to the 
article: “This is not actual child pornography, a genre still blessedly beyond the reach of 
the casual Web browser. . . . Lolita Porn features girls who are 18 or older but look like 
14-year-olds.”9 
 
 Applicant was told after the polygraph and interview that the federal agency was 
declining his application. Applicant’s uncle encouraged him to contest the polygraph 
results or request another test, but Applicant decided not to pursue the position any 
further. He was somewhat disillusioned by the process, and his engineering job was 
going well, with a recent promotion.10 
 
 Applicant submitted an SF 86 for his DOD clearance in March 2012. Section 25 
asked: “Has the U.S. Government (or a foreign government) EVER investigated your 
background and/or granted you a security clearance eligibility/access?” (emphasis in 
                                                          
5 For adult pornography, I am using the common definition of pornography: “movies, pictures, magazines, 
etc., that show or describe naked people or sex in a very open and direct way in order to cause sexual 
excitement.” See Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary available at: http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ 
pornography. The SOR alleges that Applicant viewed “pornographic images of underage females.” That 
term is not defined. For the purpose of this decision, I will use the definitions of child pornography 
contained in 18 U.S.C. §§ 2252, 2252A, and 2256. 
 
6 Tr. at 25-31, 48-58; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. at 29-30, 50-51, 55-58; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
8 Tr. at 28-31. 
 
9 AE G. 
 
10 Tr. at 19-20, 59-60; AE A. 
 
4 
 
original) Applicant was unsure how to answer this question. He submitted the SF 86 to 
the federal agency, and he went through the polygraph and interview, but he did not 
know if that constituted a background investigation. He asked his uncle, the retired 
agent. His uncle told him that the background investigation came after the polygraph, 
and that since Applicant ended his job application after the polygraph interview, the 
background investigation never took place. Applicant believed he answered the 
question correctly when he answered “No.”11 
 
 Applicant is highly regarded professionally and in his community. He submitted a 
number of letters and documents attesting to his excellent job performance, strong 
moral character, judgment, maturity, professionalism, trustworthiness, work ethic, 
honesty, dedication, responsibility, leadership, and integrity.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 33-36, 60-67; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A. 
 
12 AE A-F. 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
 The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
 When Applicant was about 18 years old, he viewed pornography on the Internet, 
and he would also search for “hot 16 or 17-year-olds,” in order to view images of  
scantily-clad girls. Applicant’s testimony was candid and credible. It was slightly 
inconsistent with the polygraph examiner’s summary of the post-polygraph interview, 
but it was not so inconsistent as to ascribe a fabrication on Applicant’s part.  
 
 When he was about 22 years old, while viewing adult pornography on the 
Internet, pop-ups came on the screen showing what appeared to be an underage girl in 
sexually-explicit poses. Applicant estimated that the female was between 13 and 16 
years old. It is unlikely that Applicant ever viewed child pornography over the Internet, 
 
6 
 
as opposed to “Lolita Porn,” which specializes in adult women who look like they are 
minors.  
 
 Applicant’s viewing of sexually-explicit material that did not involve minors does 
not establish any of the above disqualifying conditions. However, returning on more 
than one occasion to a web site that contained possible child pornography constituted 
risky behavior. AG ¶¶ 13(c) and 13(d) are applicable. There is insufficient evidence for a 
finding that Applicant committed a criminal act. AG ¶ 13(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate sexual behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.  
 
 Applicant is now 31 years old, and it has been about eight years since his last 
questionable involvement with pornography. He has a girlfriend; a good job where he is 
highly regarded; and a strong reputation in his community. I find that the behavior is 
unlikely to recur; it no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress; and 
it does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶¶ 14(b) and 14(c) are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
 
7 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant arguably underwent a background investigation when he applied for a 
position with a federal investigatory agency, submitted an SF 86, and went through a 
polygraph with an interview. A reasonable person could conclude otherwise. Applicant 
was unsure how to answer the question on the 2012 SF 86, so he asked his uncle. His 
uncle told him that the background investigation was separate and came after the 
polygraph. Applicant followed his uncle’s advice and determined that he had not 
undergone a background investigation. He did not intentionally provide false information 
on his SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Applicant’s involvement with pornography, as discussed above under Guideline 
D, showed poor judgment. It also created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, 
and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) are applicable for the same rationale discussed 
above under Guideline D.  
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 31 years old. When he was a young man, he had some questionable 
involvement with pornography. There has been no problematic conduct in about eight 
years. He now has a girlfriend; a good job where he is highly regarded; and a strong 
reputation in his community.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
