 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-00270 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the 
guidelines for drug use. His eligibility for a security clearance, therefore, is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2011, Applicant signed and completed a security clearance 
application (SCA) in which he admitted the use of illegal drugs and the abuse of a 
controlled medication. On May 8, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H 
(Drug Involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a May 22, 2013, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one of the 
allegations raised. He chose not to have a live hearing before an administrative judge. 
On July 6, 2013, the Government submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
 
2 
 
 
containing six attachments, to support the Government’s position that allowing Applicant 
access to classified information is not clearly consistent with the national interest. On 
August 12, 2013, he responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on August 
22, 2013. Based on a thorough review of the case file and submissions, I find that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. Security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. His present position 
is unknown, but he began it in September 2011. He received a bachelor’s degree in 
2008, a master’s degree in 2009, and a second master’s degree in 2011. He is not 
married. There is no evidence of military service.  
 
With varying frequency between May 2006 and at least September 2011, 
Applicant used marijuana. During that period, he also purchased that drug. He used 
cocaine with varying frequency between about May 2006 and at least April 2011. He 
used LSD from at least May 2006 until at least May 2007, during which time he 
purchased the drug from a drug dealer. Applicant purchased and used ecstasy from 
about May 2006 until about May 2007. From May 2006 until about October 2006, 
Applicant used psychedelic mushrooms, which he purchased. He also abused the 
prescription drug Adderall at least once in about October 2006. The majority of 
Applicant’s drug use took place while he was in college, between 2004 and 2009.  
 
Applicant self-identified two particular friends who abused drugs when he was 
using drugs. One friend has left the country, and Applicant believes this individual has 
quit using drugs. Applicant has not had contact with him in quite some time. The other 
acquaintance no longer uses drugs, and Applicant only maintains limited contact with 
him. The only counseling Applicant has received was with a health care professional 
when his mother was suffering from cancer. Applicant has begun an exercise regimen 
and he is presently working on a doctorate degree. He has no present intent to return to 
drug use. There is scant additional evidence of any professional, social, or lifestyle 
changes that he has accomplished since quitting drugs and beginning his current 
employment in September 2011.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
3 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and derived 
from the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 24) “Drugs” are defined as mood and behavior altering 
substances and include drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens) and inhalants and 
other substances. (AG ¶ 24(a)(1-2)) “Drug abuse” is the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction. (AG ¶ 24(b)) 
 
Here, Applicant admits intermittently using marijuana, cocaine, LSD, ecstasy, 
and psychedelic mushrooms, as well as abusing Adderall. He also admits purchasing 
marijuana, LSD, ecstasy, and psychedelic mushrooms. Such facts are sufficient to raise 
 
4 
 
 
Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse) and 25(c) 
(illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, 
or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). With disqualifying conditions 
raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate related security concerns. 
 
Applicant’s drug use from 2006 through September 2009 plateaued during his 
undergraduate years. He successfully quit abusing LSD, ecstasy, and psychedelic 
mushrooms in 2007, and he ended a brief flirtation with Adderall abuse in 2006. To his 
credit, he has continued to abstain from using and purchasing those drugs ever since. 
His use of marijuana and cocaine, however, continued into 2011.  
 
Applicant’s cessation of marijuana occurred in September 2011, the same month 
he began his current job and completed his SCA. Two years of abstinence can be a 
significant period in the life of a 27-year-old. It can also be a challenging time for one 
who has joined the workforce, yet is still living a student’s life. Applicant failed to provide 
additional information, for example, that might tend to establish his more recent drug 
use was demonstrably infrequent, that he has significantly matured since quitting 
cocaine and marijuana, or that shows his commitment to his workplace and profession. 
He similarly failed to offer any comment as to how he quit drugs or whether he has a 
support system should his desire for drugs return.  
 
Applicant gave no significant information as to any changes in his life and 
lifestyle that might tend to mitigate concerns regarding his past milieu, where drugs 
were apparently available, if not tolerated. At most, he provided statements indicating 
that he now has little to no contact with two identified coeds from his college; no 
significant comments are made of current contacts he might have with other drug users 
or dealers, if any. He declined to offer a statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance should he again be determined to be involved with drugs. He offered no 
recommendations from peers, community contacts, or professional associates 
addressing his accomplishments, community involvement, or qualifications for 
maintaining a security clearance. The case file in its present state does not paint a very 
vivid portrait of Applicant. Therefore, due in part to the paucity of evidence submitted, I 
find Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); AG 
¶ 26(b)(1) (disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts); AG ¶ 26(b)(2) 
(changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used); AG ¶ 26(b)(3) (an 
appropriate period of abstinence) and AG ¶ 26(b)(4) (a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation) have limited application. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
 
5 
 
 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my comments under the above-referenced guidelines in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has earned a 
bachelor’s degree, two master’s degrees, and is working on a doctorate degree. He is 
single. Little is known of his personal, social, family, or professional life. Applicant 
became heavily enmeshed in drugs while an undergraduate upperclassmen, using at 
various times marijuana, cocaine, LSD, psychedelic mushrooms, ecstasy, and abusing 
Adderall. He acquired some of these illegal drugs through personal purchase. By about 
2008, he was down to just using cocaine and marijuana. He relates that he quit using 
drugs in September 2011, just as he began his current position.  
 
These cases constructively put the burden on an Applicant to mitigate security 
concerns. In choosing an administrative determination on the record, Applicant limited 
his information and evidence to his submissions, which failed to flesh out the facts at 
issue and his admissions. While he should be commended for truthfully disclosing his 
past drug use on his SCA, the deficiency of his submissions leaves me with insufficient 
documented facts to assess his present fitness against five or more years of drug 
abuse, and in light of approximately two years of abstinence. Lacking more evidence 
and explanation, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
