 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01664 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 9, 2013. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On August 20, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
 
2 
 
 
it was received on August 26, 2013. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
provide additional information. The case was assigned to me on October 17, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e and admitted the 
remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He is a high school graduate. He served in the Air 
Force from 1989 to 1995 and was honorably discharged. He was married from 1989 to 
December 2009. He has two children from the marriage, ages 24 and 21. He remarried 
in 2010 and has a three-year-old child and a twelve-year-old stepchild. He has worked 
for his present employer, a federal contractor, since October 2008. Prior to then he was 
employed in the commercial sector from December 2004 through April 2008. He did not 
list any periods of unemployment on his security clearance application (SCA). 
 
 In June 2003, Applicant had his delinquent debts discharged in Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. The amount that was discharged is unknown. In his sworn statement to 
government investigators in September 2002, Applicant explained he and his first wife 
were struggling financially when they had their debts discharged. He explained they had 
financial problems dating back to about 1997.  
 
 Applicant denied he owes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($452). He indicated in his 
answer to the SOR that the debt was paid. The debt became delinquent in 2010. 
Applicant acknowledged the debt during his November 2011 interview with a 
government investigator and indicated he would resolve the debt through a repayment 
plan. He provided a copy of a statement from the creditor, dated June 17, 2013, 
showing that he established a payment agreement with the creditor in May 2013. The 
letter shows that Applicant was delinquent on his $100 installment payment that was 
due on June 7, 2013. The statement shows a balance owed of $401. Applicant did not 
provide documents from the creditor confirming he made monthly payments or paid the 
debt in full.1 
 
 Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($437). He did not provide information 
as to what steps he has taken to resolve the debt. In his November 2011 interview with 
a government investigator, he stated he believed this debt is associated with knee 
surgery he had, and he planned to satisfy the account. In his answer to the SOR, he 
indicated he did not know what the debt was for and had difficulty finding the creditor.2 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($15,825) is for the loan balance on a repossessed 
vehicle. In his November 2011 interview with a government investigator, Applicant 
                                                          
1 Item 4 at pages 4, 6, Item 6. 
 
2 Item 4 at page 6, Item 6 at page 10. 
 
3 
 
 
indicated he would contact the creditor to make payment arrangements to resolve the 
debt. In his answer to the SOR in July 2013, he indicated he had contacted the creditor 
and was offered two payment options, but is waiting for the creditor to provide him an 
amount he can afford to pay. He did not provide any additional information to show he 
has started making monthly payments to resolve the debt.3 
 
 Applicant provided a document dated June 25, 2013, showing the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.e ($1,358) was settled and the account is closed.4 
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) shows he has a net monthly 
remainder of $2,675. It does not show he is making payments toward any of the 
delinquent debts. He did not list any savings or other assets. There is no evidence 
Applicant has sought financial counseling. In his interview with a Government 
investigator, he explained that his financial hardships are due to his 2009 divorce and 
poor money management decisions.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
3 Item 4 at page 5, Item 6 at page 2. 
 
4 Item 4 at page 3. 
 
5 Item 6 at page 11. 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had debts discharged in bankruptcy and has three delinquent debts 
totaling approximately $16,600 that he is unable or unwilling to pay. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant provided documented proof that he settled and resolved the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. He stated he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, but the document he provided 
does not support the debt is paid. He indicated in his 2011 interview that he was 
resolving the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, but he has failed to provide proof 
the debts are being paid or resolved. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant 
continues to have delinquent debts that are unpaid or resolved. His history of financial 
problems is likely to recur and casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to divorce and poor money 
management decisions. Applicant’s divorce was beyond his control. His poor financial 
decisions were within his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must 
show he acted responsibly under the circumstances. It has been almost four years 
since Applicant’s divorce. He has not had any periods of unemployment. He has a net 
monthly remainder of $2,675 and his PFS shows he is not making any payments toward 
his delinquent debts. There is no evidence to show Applicant was acting responsibly 
under the circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
 No information was provided about whether Applicant has received financial 
counseling. At this time, there are not clear indications his financial problems are being 
 
6 
 
 
resolved or under control. I find AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant provided 
documentation to show he resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. I find AG ¶ 20(d) applies to 
that debt. Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, but his document acknowledged he 
owed the debt, but failed to show he has resolved it. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He served honorably in the Air Force. He has a history 
of financial difficulties dating back to 1997. He had delinquent debts discharged in 
bankruptcy in 2003. He did not list any periods of unemployment. He attributes his 
financial difficulties to his 2009 divorce and poor money management. Applicant was 
made aware during his 2011 interview that his delinquent debts were a security 
concern. He expressed his intention to resolve his delinquent debts. He resolved one 
delinquent debt, but the others remain unpaid. He has a net monthly remainder of 
$2,675. His PFS indicated he is not making any payments to the creditors he owes and 
he has no money in savings. He did not provide any information regarding how he 
spends the remainder of his income. Applicant has failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph   1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
