KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Factual errors in Judge’s decision were harmless.  The Appeal Board cannot consider
new evidence.  Judge’s analysis of the mitigating conditions lacked specificity but was
sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 12-04565.a1
DATE: 10/28/2013
DATE: October 28, 2013
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-04565
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 25, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July
9, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  Department Counsel cross-appealed pursuant to those same
provisions.   
2
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Department Counsel raises the issue of whether the Judge erred by
not granting her motion to amend the SOR based on evidence developed at the hearing.  For the
following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision.
The Judge found the following: Applicant is 32 years old.  Applicant served on active duty
in the U.S. Army from July 2003 until July 2006.  Applicant served in the National Guard from July
2006 until July 2007.  Applicant completed a security clearance application in 2003.  He believes
he had two interim security clearances after 2003.  
Applicant admitted that he used cocaine from July 2007 until at least April 2008.  During
that time he also purchased cocaine.  He used the illegal drug about two or three times a week.
Applicant was candid that his frequent use of cocaine affected his daily life.  Applicant began
employment with a company in the summer of 2007.  Applicant was required to take a
preemployment drug test.  He was informed of the company’s no-drug policy.  He never reported
the use of cocaine to his employer.  Applicant stopped using cocaine in April 2008.  He did not seek
any professional help.    
In July 2009, Applicant reenlisted in the military by joining the National Guard.  He knew
he had a security clearance.  He completed his training and in December 2009, he returned home.
He left the National Guard due to a disciplinary action.  Applicant claimed that he did not know that
he had a “full fledged” security clearance.  He also explained that he believed the interim clearances
had expired in 2006.  Applicant was not credible in his denial of having a security clearance.  When
questioned, he admitted that he had never received notice that his clearance had been denied or
revoked.  When Applicant completed his January 19, 2012 security clearance application, he noted
that he had a security clearance in 2006 and that it had never been denied or revoked.
Applicant admitted that he used marijuana for a period of approximately six months before
completing a 2003 security clearance application.  The Government established that Applicant
omitted material facts from the 2003 security clearance application when he failed to disclose the
marijuana use.  Applicant denied that he falsified his 2003 application.     
During the hearing, Applicant disclosed that he had a pending criminal charge from May
2013.  He stated that he was arrested for breaking and entering.  He has alerted his security officer
of the charge, and has a court date of August 2013.  
Applicant testified that he has changed his ways, that he provides for his family, and that he
is financially stable.  He does not use cocaine, he has changed his friends, and he acknowledges his
bad decisions.  Letters and testimony from those who know Applicant professionally attest to his
judgment, professionalism, and work ethic.  
The Judge concluded: Despite his denials, Applicant’s omission from his 2003 security
clearance application was deliberate.  Applicant admitted the use of cocaine and the purchase of
cocaine.  Applicant had a security clearance during that time.  Additionally, Applicant admitted that
he used cocaine while working for his employer in 2007 directly in violation of company policy.
1Tr. at 36-37.
3
He did not report that use to his employer.  After considering the mitigating factors, Applicant has
not mitigated the personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E.  Under the whole-person
concept, Applicant’s guarded answers about holding a security clearance are self-serving.  He was
intentionally vague about the dates that he held interim clearances.  Applicant acknowledged a
pending criminal charge against him.  The charge is recent.  Applicant does not persuade through
his demeanor or testimony that he is using good judgment or is trustworthy and reliable or suitable
for holding a security clearance.  
Applicant asserts that the Judge made errors in her findings of fact.  He challenges the
Judge’s findings that he reenlisted in the National Guard in July of 2009.  He also challenges the
Judge’s finding that he left the National Guard due to a disciplinary action.  Applicant’s contentions
have merit.
The record reflects that Applicant was in the National Guard from July 2006 until July 2007.
Applicant reenlisted in the Army Reserves in May 2008, and began a period of full time training in
July 2009.  The training period ended in December 2009, but Applicant continued in the Reserves
until June 2011.  He did not return home and leave the National Guard due to a disciplinary action
as the Judge found.  Applicant did receive an Article 15 for being absent without leave while in the
National Guard, but the Article 15 was administered in October 2006, not 2009.  There is no record
evidence that Applicant left the National Guard, or any other branch of service, because of
disciplinary actions, nor is there any evidence from which the Judge could reasonably infer that
Applicant left the National Guard as a result of disciplinary action.  However, given the totality of
the Judge’s fact finding, and the conclusions that support her ultimate decision in the case, the Board
concludes that these factual errors are harmless.
Applicant also challenges the Judge’s finding that he was not credible in his denial of having
a security clearance.  Neither the Judge’s decision nor the Applicant’s brief are particularly clear on
this point.  Applicant admitted that he had a secret clearance, but only found out about the exact
nature of the clearance in 2008.  Prior to that date, he stated that he thought he had two interim
clearances that had expired and never had a “full-fledged” clearance.  The Judge noted that
Applicant had indicated on a 2012 security clearance application that he had been granted a secret
clearance in approximately March, 2006.  A reading of the record and the Judge’s decision suggests
that the  issue is the extent of Applicant’s knowledge of his security clearance status during the
period he used and purchased cocaine in 2007 and 2008.  At the hearing, Applicant denied that he
knew he had a clearance at that point.1  The Judge concluded that Applicant’s answers regarding his
security clearance were “guarded,” “self-serving,” and “intentionally vague.”  After a review of
Applicant’s hearing testimony and after giving due deference to the Judge’s conclusions regarding
Applicant’s credibility, the Board concludes that the Judge’s resolution of this issue is sustainable.
Applicant argues that he did not intentionally give fraudulent information about drug use on
his 2003 security clearance application.  He states he was being advised during the application
process by his military recruiter, who was assisting him with filling out the security clearance
4
application.  The assertions about the recruiter are not contained in the record below.  Thus, they
constitute new evidence, which the Board cannot consider.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  On this record,
the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant intentionally falsified his 2003 security clearance application
is sustainable.         
Applicant asserts that several Guideline E mitigating conditions apply to his circumstances.
He notes that he has not used drugs in more than 5 years, he has stopped associating with friends that
use drugs, and his circumstances have changed.  He stresses that he is now married with children,
he owns his own home, and he is financially stable.  
The Judge’s decision does not specifically enumerate the Guideline E mitigating conditions
that are potentially applicable in this case.  Nor does the Judge discuss with specificity the
applicability of individual mitigating conditions.  It would have been beneficial for the Judge to have
listed the applicable mitigating conditions (as she did with the disqualifying conditions) and to have
discussed them in more detail.  However, Judge’s decisions are not measured against a standard of
perfection. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-03232 at 4 (App. Bd. May 24, 2011). The Judge does
indicate that she considered the mitigating factors under Guideline E and lists several aspects of the
case that led her to conclude that the case was not mitigated.  These include weekly use of cocaine
from July 2007 to at least April 2008, purchase of cocaine during that period, the fact that Applicant
had a security clearance at the time of his cocaine involvement, the fact that Applicant used cocaine
while working for his employer in 2007 in direct violation of company policy, Applicant’s lack of
credibility in denying that he gave any fraudulent information concerning the use of marijuana on
his 2003 security clearance application, and the fact that he had a recent pending criminal charge
against him.  We have examined the Judge’s decision in light of the record and find no reason to
conclude that she weighed the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
  
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Department Counsel cross-appealed on the issue of whether the Judge improperly denied her
motion to amend the SOR to include an allegation that Applicant was recently arrested for breaking
and entering.  While the Judge disallowed the amendment, she did include and consider the evidence
of the charge in her decision.  Given the Board’s disposition of the case, it need not rule on the issue
of the Judge’s denial of the motion. 
5
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett 
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
