 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
            )           ISCR Case No. 12-01977                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                            )          
Applicant for Security Clearance                   ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and written record in this case, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
                                               Statement of the Case 
 
On October 19, 2011, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 4, 2013, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated June 19, 2013, and on 
July 22, 2013, he requested that his case be determined on the written record. The File 
 
2 
 
 
of Relevant Material (FORM), compiled by the Government, is dated August 28, 2013.  
The FORM lists documents identified as Items 1 through 11.1 By letter dated August 27, 
2013, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) forwarded a copy of the FORM 
to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information or objections within 
30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on September 23, 2013. Applicant timely 
submitted a response to the FORM. On October 18, 2013, the case was assigned to me 
for a decision. I marked Applicant’s response to the FORM as Ex. A and entered it in 
the record without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains seven allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g.) In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all seven allegations, with explanation. 
Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and the Applicant. In addition to Applicant’s response to the FORM, the record evidence 
includes Applicant’s October 2011 e-QIP; his responses to DOHA interrogatories;2 his 
credit reports of August 2013, April 2012, and November 2011; and records showing a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. (See Items 5 through 10; Item A.)  
 
 Applicant is 58 years old, married, and the father of two adult sons. He is a high 
school graduate. In 1973, he enlisted in the U.S. military. He served on active duty for 
20 years, and he was honorably discharged in 1993. In December 2002, Applicant filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. His debts were discharged by the bankruptcy court in about 
December 2004. The bankruptcy is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. (Item 1; Item 5; Item 10.) 
 
 Since 2004, Applicant has been employed as an aircraft mechanic. He has 
worked for his present employer, a government contractor, since February 2011. He 
seeks a security clearance. (Item 5.) 
                                            
1 The FORM lists as Item 10 the Applicant’s credit report of July 7, 2005, a record more than seven years 
old. However, this document does not appear in the FORM. In the absence of this document, I have 
marked the records of Applicant’s bankruptcy as Item 10 (See FORM at 2.). 
 
2
 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on November 15, 2011. On May 6, 2013, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant signed a 
notarized statement in which he declined to agree that the investigator’s summary accurately reflected his 
interview. He disagreed with the investigator’s statement that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. became 
delinquent because his wife did not timely pay it. He asserted that the debt was incorporated into a debt 
settlement account, and he and his wife pay $549 each month to settle that debt and several others. He 
also corrected the interview record to reflect that a lien he owed was not a tax lien, and that the past due 
amount of $40,458 alleged on his home mortgage loan did not reflect that the loan was in modification 
status and his monthly payments were current. He also stated that the delinquent debt identified as “e” in 
the interrogatories was, in fact, the same debt identified at “f.” After correcting his interrogatory responses 
and making the revisions described above, Applicant agreed with and adopted the investigator’s 
summary as accurately reflecting his interview. (Item 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator in November 2011, he 
explained that his wife managed his family’s finances and paid their bills. He explained 
that in the previous two years, he and his wife earned less money from overtime. In 
about 2010, Applicant stated, his wife spent more than they earned. To remedy this 
problem, she contacted a debt repayment firm and entered into a contract with the firm 
for the payment of delinquent debts belonging to Applicant and to her.3 Applicant told 
the investigator that he did not know how much his wife paid the debt repayment firm 
each month, and he did not know the status of the debts being paid by the firm. (Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling approximately $63,584. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.a.($3,198), 1.c.($8,520), 
1.d.($609), and 1.e.($5,926) and stated that they were included in the agreement with 
the debt repayment firm. As attachments to his responses to DOHA interrogatories, 
Applicant provided documentation corroborating his participation in the debt repayment 
plan and records showing cleared payments to the firm between May 2012 and May 
2013. The debt at SOR ¶ 1.e. is the only debt in the SOR that appears on the list of 
creditors to be paid pursuant to the agreement with the debt repayment firm. (Item 1; 
Item 4; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant admitted the past-due mortgage debt of approximately $40,458, which 
is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that account was current 
and the past-due amount reflected that the loan had undergone modification. He 
provided a payment history showing payments made and fees assessed between 
November 2011 and April 2013. The payment each month on the mortgage debt, as 
listed on the payment history, was $3,582. Applicant did not provide documentation 
showing that the loan had been modified. (Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.f. that Applicant owes another mortgage creditor 
approximately $4,873 on a past-due account. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the debt but stated: “[T]he amount is different now, as of today $683.” He 
provided a payment schedule showing payments between September 2012 and April 
2013. However, he did not provide documentation corroborating his statement asserting 
that the current amount past due on the loan was $683. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant provided a personal financial statement dated May 4, 2013. The 
personal financial statement showed his net monthly income from employment was 
$3,180. His wife’s net monthly income was $2,156, and his military retirement was 
$1,391. Applicant’s total net monthly income was $6,727. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant listed monthly living expenses of $2,522. His scheduled monthly 
payment on the mortgage debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.b. was $1,791.4 His monthly payment 
                                            
3 Applicant’s wife was the principal on the debt repayment service agreement. Applicant cosigned the 
agreement, which was dated January 9, 2010. (Item 6.) 
 
4 Applicant provided a note stating that the scheduled monthly payment was different from the actual 
payment because the property was owned by four individuals. He also provided a deed of trust showing 
 
4 
 
 
on the mortgage debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.f was $2,436. Applicant’s monthly payment to 
the debt reduction service was $549. Additionally, Applicant listed a monthly payment to 
another creditor of $100. Applicant’s monthly debt payments total $4,876. Applicant’s 
monthly expenses and monthly debt payments exceed his monthly income by $671.  
(Item 6.) 
  
 Applicant reported real estate assets of $225,000, bank savings of $8,000, cars 
and boats valued at $25,000, and savings of $101,000 in his 401(k) account. The record 
does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. (Item 6.) 
  
 In response to the FORM, Applicant asserted that he and his family experienced 
the following financial hardships: loss of tenants in a rental property; loss of overtime 
income by Applicant and his wife; and loss of a job by one of the two sons responsible 
for a mortgage payment on the property held with Applicant and his wife. (Item A.) 
  
                                                     Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                                                                                                            
that he and his wife owned an undivided one-half interest in the property as joint tenants and their two 
sons, both single men, each owned an undivided one-fourth interest as tenants in common in the 
property. The record is not clear whether the $1,791 listed by Applicant as a scheduled payment on the 
mortgage represents the payment for himself and his wife as joint tenants. (Item 6.)  
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
 
6 
 
 
security concerns. Under AG ¶ 19(e), “consistent spending beyond one’s means, which 
may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-
to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis” may also raise a security concern. 
Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable or unwilling to pay 
his creditors. His financial statement indicated he spends approximately $671 more 
each month than he earns. This evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under 
AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(e). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant has been steadily employed as an aircraft mechanic since 2004. He 
delegated the management of family financial matters to his wife. He reported that, in 
2009 or 2010, he and his wife did not receive opportunities for overtime pay, as they 
had anticipated. Their expenses exceeded their income. His wife contracted with a debt 
repayment firm in an attempt to restore the family’s financial stability. 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR remain unresolved. However, Applicant 
provided some documentation establishing that payments were made on the delinquent 
debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.e., and 1.f. Even so, Applicant admitted a history of 
financial difficulties and inattention to his financial responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant’s 2002 Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was discharged in 2004, does 
not raise a present security concern, and, accordingly, allegation 1.g. is concluded for 
Applicant. To his credit, he provided documentation showing a payment plan initiated by 
his wife for the payment of their joint debts. His personal financial statement shows, 
however, that his monthly expenses exceed his monthly income by $671 each month. 
There is insufficient record evidence to conclude that Applicant is able to make 
consistent and timely payments on his delinquent debts and meet his ongoing monthly 
living expenses. These facts suggest that Applicant’s financial situation could become 
 
7 
 
 
unstable if unexpected financial emergencies should occur. At the same time, Applicant 
appears to have sufficient assets that could be used to satisfy his delinquent debts if he 
decided to do so. 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant recited a number of circumstances that 
he believed contributed to his financial delinquencies: tenants unable to pay him rent, as 
agreed; loss of overtime opportunities by Applicant and his wife; and a son’s loss of 
employment, which affected his ability to pay one-quarter of a monthly mortgage 
commitment shared with Applicant, his wife, and a second son. These conditions, which 
resulted in financial problems for Applicant, were beyond his control, thereby suggesting 
the possible application of AG ¶ 20(b). For AG ¶ 20(b) to apply in these circumstances, 
however, Applicant must demonstrate that in the face of these circumstances, he acted 
responsibly. Applicant provided documentation showing that he was making payments 
on the property he owned with his wife and sons. He did not provide documentation to 
support his assertion that the $40,458 alleged as past due on the account was the result 
of a loan modification. Moreover, according to his personal financial statement, 
Applicant’s monthly expenditures surpassed his income by $671 each month. His 
financial overextension was not responsible behavior. 
 
 The record does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. 
Applicant’s current financial situation raises security concerns about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Applicant provided documentation showing he has made a good-faith effort to 
resolve one of his debts (SOR ¶ 1.e.), and he also provided evidence of payment plans 
to address the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.f. However, his personal financial 
statement suggests that he lacks the resources to consistently meet those obligations. 
 
I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part to his case. However, after carefully 
weighing the facts of Applicant’s case, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 
20(e) do not fully apply in mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 58 
years. His financial problems began several years ago and are ongoing. Despite a 
steady income for a number of years, he has failed to budget his income, and he 
continues to live beyond his means. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment as well as his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial delinquencies.  
 
                                                     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:            For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c.-1.d.: Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e.-1.g.: For Applicant  
   
                                              Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
