1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-00931
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Richard L. Morris, Esquire  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on September 26, 2011. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 4, 2013, detailing security concerns
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG),
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
GE 1; GE 5; Tr. 55-58.1
GE 6; Tr. 46-47, 62-66.2
2
Applicant received the SOR on May 6, 2013, and he answered it on May 7, 2013.
Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July
25, 2013. DOHA assigned the case to another administrative judge on July 31, 2013.
For workload reasons, I received the case assignment on August 6, 2013. DOHA issued
a Notice of Hearing on August 30, 2013, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on
September 24, 2013. The Government offered exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1 through
GE 6, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and
one witness testified. He submitted exhibits (AE) marked as AE A through AE K, which
were received and admitted into evidence without objection. The record closed on
September 24, 2013. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 2, 2013.
    
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a request that I take administrative notice of
certain facts relating to Afghanistan. The request and the attached documents were not
admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 1, I-X. The
facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and to matters
not subject to reasonable dispute, and are set out in the Findings of Fact below. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the
SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After
a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 51 years old, works as a linguist for a DOD contractor. He
began his current employment in September 2011. His current position requires him to
work with U.S. military forces. He sleeps, eats, works, and lives with his military
colleagues on the military base. When he leaves the base on foot patrol with his unit, he
wears a full military uniform and gear, including body armor and a helmet. Applicant
speaks Dari, Phasto, and English. He uses his translation and communication skills, as
well as his written skills, to assist his unit members in their mission and work with the
Afghan national police. Applicant acknowledged that his work is hard, dangerous, and
hazardous.1
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan. He graduated from high school in
Afghanistan. He worked briefly as a clerk for a petroleum and gas research office in
1982. In September 1982, he joined the local police force where he worked until 1995.
He has no contacts with people from these jobs.2
GE 1; GE 5, p. 24; Tr. 47-48.3
AE A; Tr. 49, 67.4
GE 1; Tr. 49-51, 67-68. 5
GE 1; GE 5; AE A; Tr. 38-40, 68-70.6
GE 5; AE B; Tr. 37-38, 61.7
3
Applicant and his wife married in 1984 in Afghanistan. He has five daughters,
ages 28, 26, 25, 23, and 21, and one son, age 22, who were born in Afghanistan. In
1995, Applicant, his wife, and his six children moved from Afghanistan to Pakistan for a
better living environment. At this time, the Taliban waged war for control of the
Afghanistan government, and Applicant feared for the safety of his family.3
Applicant and his family lived in Pakistan from 1995 until January 2003, when
they immigrated to the United States. While living in Pakistan, Applicant operated an ice
cream shop. He sold his equipment when he moved to the United States. He has no
contact with anyone in Pakistan. Applicant, his wife, and his six children have become
naturalized U.S. citizens.  4
After arriving in the United States, Applicant worked in the restaurant business
for almost two years. From February 2005 until August 2009, he operated his own taxi
cab. He managed a meat market from August 2009 until September 2011. During this
time, he also worked from July 2010 to September 2011 as a part-time role player for a
DOD contractor.  5
Since leaving Afghanistan in 1995, Applicant and his entire family returned to
Afghanistan once, in 2006, to attend his oldest daughter’s wedding. His wife and one
daughter visited Afghanistan in 2012 to meet this daughter’s fiancé, who currently
resides in Afghanistan. His daughter is sponsoring her fiancé for immigration to the
United States. She plans to marry and thereafter, to live in the United States.6
When Applicant learned that he could not hold a foreign passport as a U.S.
citizen, he formally returned his Afghani passport to the Embassy of Afghanistan. The
Embassy certified the return and cancellation of his Afghani passport on February 1,
2011. Applicant has an active U.S. passport, which he uses when he travels abroad.7
Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Afghanistan and a permanent resident of the
United States, living with him. She does occasionally travel to Afghanistan, and she
talks with Applicant’s brother and sister living in Afghanistan. His mother-in-law is a
naturalized U.S. citizen, living in the United States. His father and father-in-law are
deceased. Applicant has three brothers and a sister. One brother is a naturalized U.S.
citizen, living in the United States. One brother and his wife are now citizens and
GE 1-GE 5; Tr. 53-54, 69-70, 73-74. 8
GE 2; Tr. 52-53, 71-75.9
GE 1; GE 5; Tr. 51, 66, 81-82.10
Tr. 61-62, 84, 86-87.11
4
residents of Denmark. Applicant’s remaining brother, this brother’s wife, Applicant’s
sister, and her husband are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.8
Applicant’s brother in Afghanistan works in real estate, renting property. His wife
does not work. Applicant’s sister works in child care with the United States and the
United Nations in Afghanistan. Her husband owns a small pharmacy in Afghanistan.
Applicant talked with his brother and sister by cell phone when he was working in
Afghanistan, but he did not tell them that he was working for the United States. He has
not visited with them when he is in Afghanistan. He has not spoken with his siblings or
their spouses since February 2013 because his cell phone connections are not working.
His mother does talk with his brother and sister. His Afghani family lives in a safe area
of Afghanistan.9
Applicant does not own property in Afghanistan. He does own a house in the
United States and has some savings in the United States. He does not have any
financial interests or bank accounts in Afghanistan. He does not receive any income
from nor does he owe any money to foreign businesses, persons, groups,
organizations, or governments. He owes no duty to any foreign businesses, interests,
government, organization, or people. Applicant never served in Afghani military nor is
he willing to bear arms for the Afghan government. 10
Applicant stated that his job in Afghanistan is to support the United States. If
anything happens to his siblings in Afghanistan, there is nothing he can do to help them.
If he learned that a family member was a member of a terrorist organization, he would
report that family member to the U.S. government. He stated that membership in
terrorist organizations is not good for the United States, Afghanistan, or him.11
Applicant received a Certificate of Commendation from the U.S. military on May
24, 2012 for his outstanding achievement performing linguistic duties and his dedication
to duty. Just prior to the hearing, he received a Letter of Appreciation from the officer-in-
charge for his services in Afghanistan from February 15, 2013 through September 17,
2013 in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. The officer-in-charge described
Applicant’s translations as “superb” and his ability to connect and establish rapport
between the U.S. military and the Afghan national police as “immeasurable”. This same
officer-in-charge submitted a letter of recommendation for Applicant’s hearing. The
September 17, 2013 letter described Applicant as a superb intellect and a person with a
strong work ethic and linguistic skills. He noted that without Applicant’s outstanding
spoken, written, and translation skills in Dari, Phasto, and English, his 25-man advisor
team would not have successfully completed its mission. Applicant built a solid rapport,
AE I; AE K.12
AE J; Tr. 31-36.13
HE 1.14
5
working relationship, and friendship with the U.S. military and Afghan police and
successfully navigated the Afghan culture in performing his duties. The officer-in-charge
described Applicant as the best linguist with whom he has served. He would serve with
Applicant in combat again. Applicant proved himself to be a reliable and responsible
U.S. citizen.12
Applicant submitted 17 letters of recommendation from family and friends. They
describe him as honest, kind, respectful, hardworking, dependable, and trustworthy.
They hold him in high regard. His wife opines that Applicant sees his current job as
serving the United States. One daughter testified. She described her father as honest
and hardworking. He taught her to be truthful and not to lie.13
Afghanistan
I take administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts. Afghanistan is an
Islamic Republic and emerging democracy. With the support of the United States other
nations, its new government endeavors to build a new system of government and to
rebuild the country’s infrastructure. Its Army and police force are well trained. It
continues to face significant challenges from the insurgency and terrorist organizations
supported by the ousted Taliban and Al Qa’ida. Security and violence remain a serious
issue. The government is not complacent about the terrorist threat, the insurgency, or
security issues; rather it actively seeks to eliminate all with the assistance of the United
States and NATO. The new government is working to reverse a long legacy of serious
human rights abuses, but serious problems remain. Afghanistan is now an active
member of the international community, has signed a “Good Neighbor” declaration with
six nations bordering it, and promotes regional cooperation. The United States supports
the emergence of a broad-based government in Afghanistan and has made a long-term
commitment to help Afghanistan rebuild itself. Sometime ago, the leaders of both
countries concluded a strategic partnership agreement committing to a long-term
relationship between both countries, which was signed on May 2, 2012. Despite its
differences with the United States, Afghanistan continues to seek U.S. support as it
moves forward towards democracy and stability. None of the documents offered in
support of the request for administrative notice indicate whether Afghanistan is an active
collector of intelligence information.14
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
6
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:
7
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. I
have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and    
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Applicant’s wife, children, brother, and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of
the United States. Thus, no security concern is raised by these family members.
Applicant’s mother is also a permanent U.S. resident, who lives with him. She travels
occasionally to Afghanistan and does talk by telephone with his brother and sister, who
are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant maintains a normal familial
relationship with his brother and sister and their spouses in Afghanistan. He  talked with
his brother and sister by telephone occasionally while working in Afghanistan. He does
not provide financial support to his brother or sister in Afghanistan. He visited his
Afghan family once in 2006. His family relationships are not per se a reason to deny
Applicant a security clearance, but his contacts with his family members must be
considered in deciding whether to grant Applicant a clearance. The Government must
establish that these family relationships create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion by terrorists or would create a potential
conflict of interest between his obligations to protect sensitive information and his desire
to help his family members who may be threatened by terrorists. 
In determining if such a heightened risk exists, I must look at Applicant’s
relationships and contacts with his family, as well as the activities of the Government of
Afghanistan and terrorist organizations within Afghanistan. The risk that an applicant
could be targeted for manipulation or induced into compromising classified information
is real, not theoretical. Applicant’s relationship and contacts with his family in
Afghanistan raise a heightened risk and a security concern because the activities of
terrorists organizations, particularly the Taliban. The evidence of record fails to show
8
that the Afghani Government targets U.S. citizens in the United States or in Afghanistan
by exploiting, manipulating, pressuring, or coercing them to obtain protected
information. Thus, the concern that the Afghani Government will seek classified
information is minimal. The same cannot be said for terrorist organizations.
Under the guideline, the potentially conflicting loyalties must be weighed to
determine if an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S.
interests. In determining if Applicant’s contacts in Afghanistan cause security concerns,
I considered that Afghanistan and the United States have a relationship, which includes
working together on international security issues and trade. There is no evidence that
the Afghani Government targets U.S. citizens for protected information, but the terrorist
threat is real. The human rights issues continue to be a concern. While none of these
considerations by themselves dispose of the issue, they are all factors to be considered
in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to pressure or coercion because of his family in
Afghanistan. Applicant’s contacts with his family raise a heightened risk under AG ¶¶
7(a) and 7(d).
The Foreign Influence guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 8(a) through ¶ 8(f),
and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.; and
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.
Applicant has a normal relationship with his sister, his brother, and their spouses.
His family members in Afghanistan do not know that he works as an interpreter and
linguist for a DOD contractor. Because of technical problems with cell phone
connections in Afghanistan, he has not spoken with Afghan family members since
February 2013. His communications with his family in Afghanistan are limited and
create little likelihood for foreign influence or exploitation. His brother, sister-in-law and
brother-in-law do not work for the Afghan government, and they do not have any contact
with government officials. His sister works with the United States and the United Nations
on child care issues. It is unlikely that the Government of Afghanistan would target them
to pressure Applicant for classified information, and thus, Applicant would not be placed
in a position of having to choose between the interests of Afghanistan and the interests
of the United States. Applicant views his job as supporting the United States. He has
9
indicated that he would place the interests of the United States over his family should
they be targeted by terrorists or others who seek to obtain classified information from
him when he testified that he cannot help his family members in Afghanistan if anything
happens to them and that if he learned that a family member was supporting a terrorist
organization, he would report that person to the U.S. government. Outside of his family,
his ties to Afghanistan are nonexistent as Applicant does not own property, bank
accounts, or other assets in Afghanistan. He does not receive any benefits from
Afghanistan. His contacts in Afghanistan do not show that he would chose the interests
of Afghanistan over the interests of the United States. In reviewing all the evidence of
record, there is little likelihood that Applicant’s family in Afghanistan are a security risk.
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns about his family in Afghanistan under AG
¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Eighteen
years ago, Applicant moved his family from Afghanistan to Pakistan because his family
was not safe with the fighting between the Taliban and government forces. Less than
See ISCR Case No. 06-25928 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2008).15
10
eight years later, Applicant and his family immigrated to the United States. All have
become U.S. citizens. Applicant has worked since arriving in the United States. His
children work and attend school. He and his family have no plans to return to
Afghanistan. As soon as he learned that he could not maintain his Afghani passport as
a U.S. citizen, he returned the passport to the Afghan embassy and requested that it be
destroyed. He travels only on his U.S. passport.
Applicant never served in the Afghan Army. However, in undertaking his current
linguist job, he has regularly placed himself in harms way to support the U.S. military
missions in Afghanistan. He participated in routine military patrols into dangerous areas
so that he could act as the cultural and language interpreter for the U.S. military. His
officer-in-charge highly praised his language and communication skills, as well as his
people skills, which contributed significantly to their mission success. His officer-in-
charge would serve with him in a combat zone again. The U.S. military highly respects
him, and the work he has done for the United States in Afghanistan.15
Applicant would report any family member involved with a terrorist organization to
the U.S. government. In his view, such an involvement is not beneficial to the United
States, Afghanistan, or him. His family members live quietly and in a safe area of
Afghanistan. They are not involved with the Afghan government and are not aware that
he works as an interpreter in Afghanistan. In considering all the evidence of record, I
find that he would place the interests of the United States over the interests of his family
in Afghanistan if there were any threats.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his Foreign Influence
under Guideline B.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
11
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
