 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 12-01128 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), Applicant's Response, and the exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for alcohol consumption. His 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 12, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR lists six allegations. In his July 10, 2013 Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted two allegations (1.d and 1.e); admitted three others with explanations 
(allegations 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f); and denied allegation 1.a. He also requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel for the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) prepared a written presentation of the 
Government’s case in a FORM dated July 25, 2013. On August 12, 2013, Applicant 
 
 
 
2 
received the Government’s FORM, and was given 30 days to file submit material to 
refute or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant timely submitted a response dated 
September 10, 2013. (Response) The case was assigned to me on September 24, 
2013, for an administrative decision based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 56 years old, began active duty in the Navy in 1975, and was 
administratively discharged in 1976. His discharge was characterized as General, 
under Honorable Conditions.1 He completed a bachelor’s degree in 1984. Within the 
past eight years, he has completed professional certifications as a cost estimator, a 
management accountant, and a public accountant. Applicant married in 1986, and has 
four children ranging from 19 to 27 years of age. He has worked full-time for the same 
federal defense contractor since 1984. He held a secret security clearance starting in 
1985, and was granted a top secret security clearance in 2004. (Items 5, 6, 11; 
Response) 
 
 Applicant has a history of alcohol-related arrests. In his interrogatory response, 
he noted that he has had “multiple instances of driving with blood alcohol level above 
legal limit (over past 35 years).” (Item 6) As part of his first security clearance 
investigation, Applicant signed a sworn statement on February 1, 1985, in which he 
described five arrests that occurred between 1974 and 1984.2 (Item 9) Two of the 
alcohol-related arrests occurred while Applicant was a college student from 1980 to 
1984, and appear in the SOR: 
 
                                                 
1 Applicant stated during his 2011 security interview that he received a general discharge when he 
decided to leave the Navy after not being granted permission to attend “C” school. (Item 6) 
 
2 The following arrests are not included in the SOR: 1974: Disorderly Conduct; 1977 or 1978: detained 
but not charged with impersonating a police officer; 1979: charged with offenses involving carrying a 
loaded gun and spent about three months incarcerated (Items 5, 7, 9). Alcohol was involved in the 1979 
arrest. Applicant also used marijuana and cocaine between 1970 and 1984, while in high school, and in 
the Navy. In his 1985 statement, he also discussed his three Captain’s Masts while in the Navy. (Items 
7, 9) He used marijuana and cocaine between 1985 and 1991 while he held a security clearance. During 
his 2011 security interview, he stated he did not inform his employer at the time because he thought his 
drug use was legal, and that only possession and sale of such drugs were illegal. (Item 6) He has not 
used illegal drugs since 1991. (Item 6) In accordance with the Appeal Board’s holdings on unalleged 
conduct, I will consider these events only for the following limited purposes: (a) to assess Applicant's 
credibility; (b) to evaluate Applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) 
to consider whether Applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a 
particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines applies; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person 
analysis under Directive § 6.3. See, ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003); ISCR Case 
No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 08-09232 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010). 
 
 
3 
• 1982 (allegation 1.f): At the age of 25, Applicant was arrested and charged in 
State A with driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor (DUI). He was fined 
$365, and assigned to a diversion program that lasted from July 1982 to July 
1983. The program required Applicant to attend the Alcohol Safety Action 
Program (ASAP) for four weeks, and to attend counseling at least twice per 
month. (Items 6 - 9) 
 
• 1984 (allegation 1.e): At the age of 27, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with driving while intoxicated (DWI) in State B. In his 2011 security interview, he 
stated the charge was dismissed. However, in his 1985 sworn statement, he 
said the charge was reduced, he was fined $185, and was required to attend 
what he described as “alcohol counseling” class. (Items 6, 9) 
 
In his 1985 sworn statement, Applicant described his alcohol use at the time as 
“moderate:” one to six drinks “a couple of times” per week. He said his drinking had not 
caused him family or financial problems, and he intended to “maintain a conservative 
attitude” about alcohol use in the future. In his 2013 Response, Applicant stated that he 
realized after his 1984 DUI that he “needed to make an adjustment, and discontinue 
attending the kinds of parties where ‘college-level & style drinking’ was occurring.” 
(Items 7, 9; Response) 
 
 In 1984, after college, Applicant moved to a different city in State A (City A) and 
began working for his current employer. He received his first security clearance in 
1985. He remained in City A until 1994. He described City A as having a “pronounced 
military culture. . . which included a ‘mature’ social drinking aspect, where events were 
frequent, and where there was considerable career pressure associated with 
attendance.” He also stated in his Response that in the early 1990s, “DUI enforcement 
efforts reached crescendo proportions in [City A] due (largely) to the MADD campaign.” 
Applicant admits he “was slow to accept the requirements because I saw my behavior 
as ‘safe’ & ‘responsible.’. . .I guess I did not agree that the change in law was rational, 
reasonable, fair or even socially effective.” (Item 6) According to Applicant’s Response, 
he was “caught so off-guard” by the changed political environment and stricter blood 
alcohol content (BAC) requirements that he “was able to be ticketed for two DUIs within 
about three years (1990 & 1993).” [Emphasis in original] (Response) 
 
 While in City A from 1984 to 1994, Applicant states he behaved in a responsible 
manner, and that “no negative consequences impacted my life other than the two 
tickets that I received.” The “tickets” refer to the following alcohol-related charges: 
 
• 1990 (allegation 1.d): In State A, at the age of 33, Applicant had an argument 
with his wife and left the house. After consuming seven to eight beers, he hit the 
median during a turn. He was charged with DUI. (Items 6, 7) Although he had 
been charged with DUI in 1982 in State A, he was adjudged a “first offender,” 
and sentenced to an Accelerated Rehabilitation Diversion (ARD) Program. He 
was fined, ordered to attend alcohol education classes, and sentenced to 
 
 
4 
probation. The classes taught Applicant about the physiology involved in 
reaching various blood alcohol levels, and he resolved to be a safe driver, and 
“to keep myself below the legal limit, just in case I was randomly pulled over.” 
(Response, emphasis in original) 
 
• 1993 (allegation 1.c): When Applicant was 36 years old, he was charged in 
State A with DUI, marijuana possession, and carrying an unconcealed weapon. 
Applicant admits the allegation in part, and denies it in part, stating in his 
Answer, “I was not ‘carrying’ a weapon. A .25 caliber handgun, properly 
registered in my name, was stored in my vehicle for target practicing purposes, 
and was stored for such transportation in a manner consistent with state law.” 
He stated in his Answer to the SOR that he was charged with violating a local 
storage ordinance of which he was unaware. In his 2011 security interview, 
Applicant stated all charges were dismissed. However, his Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) arrest record shows that only the DUI and drug charges were 
dismissed. He was found guilty of the weapons charge, and fined $150. 
Applicant's FBI sheet also notes “30 days” related to the firearms conviction, but 
provides no further information on whether Applicant was incarcerated, or that 
portion of the sentence was suspended. The record includes no further 
information related to the DUI charge. (Items 6, 7; Answer) 
 
After the two State A DUIs in 1990 and 1993, Applicant determined that drunk 
driving was being pursued more aggressively, and he 
 
. . . acknowledged that my previous focus on managing my consumption 
merely to the point of maintaining “safe driving limits” was inadequate 
within this “new world” . . . [he took] action to reduce my risk by shifting the 
focus of my methods (armed with my improved understanding of 
physiology and metabolism) to keeping my BAC level below legal limits. . . 
(Response) 
 
Applicant made adjustments to his alcohol consumption: he decreased his alcohol 
“intake levels to the ’mild’ end of the ‘mild-to-moderate’ spectrum,” drank slower, paced 
himself, ate food with alcohol, and left social events earlier. (Response) 
 
 In 1994, Applicant’s company transferred him to State C. In about 1997, his 
security clearance was renewed. Applicant had no alcohol-related events for 11 years, 
between 1994 and 2005. He stated in his Response and his interrogatory that this fact 
demonstrates that he was able to effectively manage his alcohol use. (Response) 
 
Subsequently, Applicant had the following alcohol-related charges: 
 
• 2005 (allegation 1.b): At a work-related social event in State C, Applicant drank 
four to five alcoholic drinks over a four-hour period. He felt that he was 
becoming intoxicated, so he left. He was stopped for driving with only his 
 
 
5 
parking lights on. He failed a field sobriety test, and was charged with DUI. 
Applicant was 49 years old. He admits the charge, noting that he “had slipped 
slightly over the legal limit and made the silly mistake of turning on my parking 
lights only . . .  there was significant street lighting, so that I could not see that 
my headlights were not all the way on. That was the extent of my driving failure.” 
He was held in jail for several hours and then released. (Item 6; Response) 
 
Applicant's DUI was processed as a “first offense” in State C, and he was 
allowed to participate in an ARD Program, under which the DUI is dismissed if 
the offender successfully completes probation. He was fined, ordered to attend 
six weeks of alcohol education classes, and placed on probation for one year. 
(Item 6) The program also included what Applicant described as a state-
sponsored evaluation of his alcohol use by a mental health organization. (Items 
4, 6) He stated that he was not found to be alcohol-dependent, and treatment 
was not recommended. (Response at 18) However, the file does not contain a 
copy of the evaluation, or information regarding the evaluator’s credentials, the 
diagnosis, or a prognosis. Applicant states he successfully completed the ARD 
program and probation. He said in his security clearance application that “a 
dismissal agreement was reached” and “Ticket for DUI Dismissed, no conviction 
on record.” (Item 5) In his Answer, he stated that his State C record does not 
show a DUI. (Item 6, Answer; Response)  
 
Five years later, at 54 years of age, Applicant was again charged with DUI. 
 
• 2010 (allegation 1.a): After attending a social event, Applicant was pulled over 
while driving home at about 2 a.m. in State D. The threshold blood alcohol 
content (BAC) in State D was 0.08. At the local police station, Applicant's BAC 
was 0.11. He states in his Response, “I do not deny my technical guilt, and 
ultimate responsibility, but I was driving safely and competently. Nevertheless, I 
had permitted myself to slip slightly over the legal limit. . .” which he describes 
as “. . . not the same as being intoxicated or materially impaired . . . .” [Emphasis 
in original] (Response)  
 
Applicant was charged with three counts of DUI3 and failing to obey a traffic 
device. He denies this allegation, stating in his Answer that he had crossed the 
white line between lanes, which is not a “failure to obey a traffic device.” The 
court record of his January 13, 2011 appearance shows the following charges 
and dispositions: 
 
Charge 1: Driver failure to obey properly placed traffic control device 
instructions. Applicant pled not guilty, and the charge was nol prossed. (Item 10) 
                                                 
3 As Applicant correctly notes in his Answer, he was not charged with three separate DUI incidents in 
State D in 2010. He was charged with three counts of DUI, all of which occurred during the same 
incident on the same date, October 23, 2010. (Answer; Item 10) 
 
 
 
6 
Charge 2: Driving/attempting to drive vehicle while under the Influence of 
alcohol. Applicant pled not guilty, and the charge was nol prossed. (Item 10) 
 
Charge 3: Driving/attempting to drive vehicle while under the Influence of 
alcohol, per se: Applicant pled guilty, and was sentenced to probation before 
judgment. (Item 10) 
 
Charge 4: Driving/attempting to drive vehicle while impaired by alcohol. 
Applicant pled not guilty, and the charge was nol prossed. (Item 10) 
 
Applicant's DUI was considered a “first offense” in State D. Although Applicant stated in 
his 2011 security interview that the case was dismissed, his court record shows he pled 
guilty to one count of DUI per se. He was fined $300, and sentenced to probation before 
judgment. He notes in his interrogatory that his probation was waived and dismissal of 
the charge was effective immediately. (Item 6) In his security clearance application, 
Applicant stated that “a dismissal agreement was reached” and “the DUI was dismissed, 
and no conviction was entered.”4 (Items 5, 6, 10; Response) 
 
 In his 2013 interrogatory response, Applicant described his 2005 and 2010 DUIs: 
 
They did not involve any aggravating circumstances, no accidents, no 
speeding, no reckless or dangerous driving. I was functional, poised, and 
in control. In short, they were borderline cases. (Item 6) 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, he states that he believes there is “no evidence of a genuine 
‘drinking problem.’ ” (Item 4) In 2011, the year Applicant completed his current security 
clearance application, his usual alcohol intake was about three times per month, and 
he did not believe he had a problem with alcohol. When he completed his interrogatory 
in April 2013, he was drinking about one to two times per week, but he expected “to be 
cutting back over the near term, probably back into the 3 times per month range.” In his 
September 2013 Response, he stated he was drinking beer, wine, or spirits about once 
or twice a week, but some weeks he did not drink at all. He currently drinks at work-
related social events and at “happy hours” while waiting for the rush-hour traffic to 
subside, before driving home. Applicant stated in his Response that it would be 
incorrect to infer that he is therefore driving home intoxicated, because his “. . . pattern 
is to drink in sufficiently small quantities, at a sufficiently slow pace, and to permit a 
passage of time when appropriate, so that I do not drive illegally.” The frequency of 
Applicant's drinking alcohol depends on the frequency of his socializing. Regardless of 
the type of alcoholic beverage consumed, if he is eating food, he has three or four 
                                                 
4 Applicant stresses in his documents that convictions in several of his cases were not entered, or that 
his driving record does not show convictions. However, security concerns are raised by an applicant's 
conduct, rather than the court’s ultimate formal disposition. As noted by the Appeal Board, “Furthermore, 
the fact that criminal charges against an applicant were dropped or dismissed does not preclude an 
Administrative Judge from finding an applicant engaged in the conduct underlying those criminal 
charges. See, e.g., ISCR Case No 99-0119 (September 13, 1999) at p. 2.” ISCR Case No. 02-10168 at 
pp. 2-3, (Aug 1, 2003). 
 
 
7 
drinks; if he is not eating food, he has two or three drinks. He stated he has a high 
tolerance for alcohol. (Item 6; Response) 
 
 In discussing mitigation in his July 2013 Answer to the SOR, Applicant mentions 
the “presumptive bias of DUI prosecutions.” He states: 
 
While no one would suggest that receiving a DUI is something to be 
proud of, within the current political environment (including the .08 blood 
alcohol content threshold) it is exceedingly easy for even a very 
responsible light social drinker to be occasionally caught up in, what has 
become, an almost “witch–hunt” mentality dragnet, regarding DUIs, 
where “probable cause” for stops is routinely disputed (for good reason), 
where little regard is placed upon the a [sic] driver’s ability to demonstrate 
that he is not driving beyond his ability to be safe and responsible, and 
where the mere fact of blood alcohol content is all that is considered. 
[Emphasis in original] 
 
Applicant contributes to his community through his involvement in scouting, 
where he has led a cub scout pack, is on the leadership committee of a boy scout 
troop, and is an associate leader of a girl scout troop. He has also served as president 
of his homeowners’ association for seven years. (Response) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and policy in the AG.5 Decisions must also 
reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred 
to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or 
mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline G (alcohol consumption).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government must produce 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the 
                                                 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
8 
applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a 
“right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.7 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government based on trust. Therefore, the Government has a compelling interest in 
ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as her or his own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the following security concern about alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22, and find that the 
following applies: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol when he was a teenager, and has drunk it 
to the point of intoxication on numerous occasions since then. Although he has not 
been diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, he was charged with 
alcohol-related driving offenses on six occasions from 1982 to 2010, between the ages 
of 25 and 54. Four of the six DUIs occurred while he held a security clearance, first 
granted in 1985. AG ¶ 22 (a) applies.  
 
 I have considered the following mitigating factors under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
                                                 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
9 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment 
and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and, 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s mental health evaluation in approximately 2006 did not result in a 
diagnosis of alcohol dependence or alcohol abuse, and he has not been counseled or 
treated for his alcohol use; therefore, AG ¶¶ 23(b) through (d) are not relevant. The 
only available mitigating condition is AG ¶ 23(a).  
 
Significant time has passed since several of Applicant's DUIs. Four of the six 
DUIs in the SOR occurred 20 or more years ago, between 1982 and 1993. Under other 
circumstances, the passage of time might have mitigated his conduct.9 Here, however, 
Applicant's history shows arrests and charges that occurred not only in the distant past, 
but more recently. Taken together, Applicant's arrests constitute a pattern of illegal 
alcohol-related behavior that constitutes a security concern. In analyzing a decision 
involving a series of criminal charges that were dropped or dismissed, the Appeal 
Board held:  
 
Moreover, it was reasonable for the Judge to consider the significance of 
Applicant’s pattern of conduct as a whole, rather than analyzing each 
separate criminal or personal conduct incident in a piecemeal fashion. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12648 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 20, 2006) citing 
Raffone v. Adams, 468 F. 2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, 
separate events may have a significance that is missing when each event 
is viewed in isolation).10 
                                                 
9 In his Response, Applicant cites numerous decisions in which Administrative Judges granted security 
clearances in Guideline G cases. However, the Appeal Board has held that, “. . . decisions in other 
hearing-level cases are not legally binding precedent, even if an applicant can establish close factual 
similarities between those cases and his case. . . [citations omitted] ISCR Case No. 08-07005.a1 at 2 
(App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009). “Each case must be judged on its own merits . . .” Directive at ¶ E2.2(b). 
  
10 ISCR Case No. 06-00520 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007). 
 
 
10 
In spite of his earlier history of DUI arrests, Applicant continued to drink to intoxication 
at times, and was arrested twice for DUIs within the past eight years, in 2005 and 
2010. His illegal conduct extended well into his mature years, with the last arrest only 
three years ago, when he was 54 years old.  
 
Applicant does not drink alcohol in unusual circumstances, but in common 
situations such at bars and social events with friends. He drinks frequently: two to four 
drinks per sitting, once or twice per week. His past decisions to drive in such situations 
after consuming more than the legal limit of alcohol demonstrate poor judgment and 
lack of reliability. Given his history, I cannot confidently conclude that such events will 
not recur in the future. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 In evaluating Applicant under the whole-person concept, I considered the 
positive factors in his history: he is a mature adult of 54 years, who is intelligent, 
educated, and appears to be professionally successful. He provides service to his 
community through volunteer work with the scouts and has been the president of his 
homeowner’s association for a number of years. His commendable efforts to modify his 
drinking in the 1990s resulted in 11 years without incident. However, he was unable to 
maintain that record.  
 
 Applicant's history shows his alcohol consumption over the past 30 years has 
led him to engage in criminal conduct, i.e., violation of the law involving driving after 
drinking alcohol above the legal limit. Between the ages of 25 and 54, he has been 
charged with DUI six times. He has been fined, sentenced to attend alcohol education 
 
 
11 
classes, ordered to undergo an alcohol evaluation at a mental health center, and to 
serve probation. He has tried to adjust his alcohol consumption: in the 1980s after two 
DUIs; and in the 1990s, after two more DUIs. Notwithstanding these efforts, he had two 
more DUI arrests in 2005 and 2010. Although he attempted to modify his drinking in 
the past so that he is not over the legal limit, and he plans to use that approach now, it 
has failed twice in the past eight years.  
 
 Applicant's six arrests comprise a disturbing pattern of risky behavior that 
violates the law. In addition, his current 3 years without an alcohol-related arrest is a 
considerably shorter time span than the 11 years he apparently controlled his drinking 
between 1994 and 2005. It is also troubling that he continues to drink alcohol at social 
events and “happy hours,” before driving home, the very conduct that led to security-
significant offenses in the past.  
 
Of particular concern is the fact that four of Applicant's arrests occurred while he 
held a security clearance. He has held a security clearance since 1985 and is familiar 
with the process. He has known for years that alcohol was a security concern, and 
discussed his DUIs and drinking habits during his 1985 and 1997 security interviews. 
Nevertheless, the frequency of his alcohol consumption has increased between 2011 
and 2013–even though he stated in 2011 that he planned to cut back on his alcohol 
intake. His decision to continue to drive after drinking is not only risky behavior, but 
demonstrates he is willing to place his own desires ahead of the obligations he owes to 
the Government as a security clearance holder. Based on Applicant's history, I cannot 
confidently conclude he will not be involved in alcohol-related offenses in the future. 
 
 A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised about his suitability for a security 
clearance. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f  Against Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
