1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 13-00704 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign 
Preference) and B (Foreign Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 11, 2012. On 
June 26, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines C and B. DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 2, 2013; answered it on July 18, 2013; and 
requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel requested a 
hearing on August 1, 2013, and was ready to proceed on August 20, 2013. (Hearing 
Exhibit (HX) I.) The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2013, and the Defense 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on the same day, 
scheduling the hearing for September 18, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, but presented no witnesses or documents. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on September 26, 2013. My decision in this case was delayed by the 
furlough of all administrative judges from October 1 to October 11, 2013, due to the 
failure of Congress to timely appropriate funds for fiscal year 2014. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about the People’s Republic of China (hereafter referred to as China) and the Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region. The request and supporting documents are 
attached to the record as HX II. I took administrative notice as requested by Department 
Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor since June 
2003. He was born in Hong Kong, while it was a British colony. He came to the United 
States with his family in 1968, and he became a U.S. citizen in 1979. His parents are 
deceased. He testified that he has five siblings, one of whom is deceased, and all his 
surviving siblings are citizens and residents of the United States. (Tr. 38-39.)1 He 
attended a U.S. university and received a bachelor’s degree in June 1972 and a 
master’s degree in June 1974. (Tr. 31-32.) He received a security clearance in 
September 1988. 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in China, moved with her family to Hong Kong and 
became a citizen of Hong Kong. She and Applicant were married in the United States in 
March 1992. She remained in the United States after their marriage and became a U.S. 
citizen in October 2001. Her parents were Hong Kong citizens who became Chinese 
citizens in July 1997, when the Nationality Law of China became applicable to Hong 
Kong. They reside in China. (GX 3 at 1.) Her three siblings are citizens and residents of 
China. (GX 2 at 6A.) Applicant and his wife have two children, ages 18 and 19, who are 
native-born U.S. citizens. (GX 1 at 20-21; Tr. 39).)  
 
 In 2009, Applicant, his wife, and his children traveled to Hong Kong for a few 
days of sightseeing; traveled to Beijing, China, for sightseeing; and then traveled to 
                                                          
1 In his May 2012 SCA, Applicant listed six siblings, including a brother who lives in Hong King. (GX 1 at 
21-28.) In a personal subject interview (PSI) in October 2012, and in response to DOHA interrogatories in 
June 2013, Applicant stated that he has one brother who lives in Hong Kong. He stated that he had no 
contact with this brother after 1968. (GX 2 at 6A, 23.) The discrepancies between Applicant’s testimony 
and his SCA, PSI, and responses to interrogatories were not clarified at the hearing. However, whether 
Applicant has four or five surviving siblings who are U.S. citizens is not of decisional significance. 
3 
 
southern China and stayed with his mother-in-law for about 10-15 days. (GX 2 at 24.) 
His wife’s siblings visited them during their China visit. (Tr. 39-40.) Applicant has not 
had any contact with his wife’s siblings or their spouses since the 2009 visit to China. 
(Tr. 44.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife has a “normal” relationship with her mother, who is a housewife 
and is now in her 80s. Applicant testified that he does not know how often they talk. (Tr. 
43.) He talks to his mother-in-law about once a year. (Tr. 44.) His wife occasionally 
sends gifts of money to her mother. He thought his wife might send as much as $1,000, 
but he was unsure. (Tr. 38, 50-51.) His wife visited her mother in China in 2012 and 
2013, but Applicant does not know if she visited her sisters and brothers. (Tr. 47.) He 
avoids contact with his wife’s family because he does not want to subject them to 
pressure from Chinese authorities due to his job and security clearance. He testified, 
“The less they know the better for them.” (Tr. 48-49.) 
 
 In July 2009, while visiting Hong Kong, Applicant renewed his permanent identity 
card issued by the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. When he discovered that 
his identity card raised security concerns, he destroyed it in the presence of his facility 
security officer. (GX 2 at 22; Tr. 29-30.) 
 
 Applicant’s sister-in-law is about 60 years old and is a retired laborer. Her 
husband also is retired. Applicant does not know what his sister-in-law’s husband did 
before retirement. (Tr. 40-41.) 
 
 One of Applicant’s brothers-in-law owns a small hotel, and the other brother-in-
law works at the hotel. The spouses of both brothers-in-law are housewives who do not 
work outside the home. None of Applicant’s in-laws have worked for the Chinese 
government or have been affiliated with the Chinese military. (Tr. 42.)  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law was born in Indonesia. He is wealthy and supports 
Applicant’s in-laws who live in China. Applicant has virtually no contact with him. (Tr. 42-
43.) 
 
 Applicant has no assets in Hong Kong or China. He owns his home in the United 
States, which is worth about $300,000, and he estimates that his total net worth is about 
$2,000,000. (Tr. 36-37.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he feels some attachment to Hong Kong because it is his 
birthplace. However, he emphatically stated that his allegiance is to the United States, 
because he and his children live here, and they have a good future that he is unwilling 
to jeopardize. (Tr. 35-36.) 
 
 In late 2009, Applicant was required to complete a new security clearance 
application, in order to renew his clearance. He did not realize the urgency of 
completing the application and experienced some difficulty obtaining updated 
information about his relatives. He procrastinated in submitting the application, and his 
4 
 
clearance was not renewed. (GX 2 at 26.) It apparently was reinstated on a date not 
reflected in the record. 
 
 For 150 years, Hong Kong was a British colony. In 1997, China resumed the 
exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong, and designated Hong Kong as a special 
administrative region. Hong Kong enjoys a high degree of autonomy, except in the 
areas of defense and foreign policy. While defense and foreign policy are a Chinese 
responsibility, Hong Kong is an independent customs authority and economic entity 
separate from China, with the authority to make international agreements on its own 
behalf in commercial and economic matters.  
 
Human rights concerns in Hong Kong include limited ability of citizens to 
participate in and change their government, limitations on freedom of the press, denial 
of visas for political reasons, election fraud, trafficking in persons, societal prejudice 
against certain ethnic minorities, arbitrary arrest or detention, aggressive police tactics 
hampering freedom of assembly, and a legislature with limited powers in which certain 
sectors of society wield disproportionate political influence.  
 
 Hong Kong is an active member of the global coalition against terrorism. It has 
cooperated in eliminating funding for terrorist networks and combating money 
laundering, and it has enacted legislation designed to comply with the United Nations 
anti-terror resolutions and financial task force recommendations.  
 
 China has an authoritarian government dominated by the Communist Party. It 
has large and increasingly sophisticated military forces. The United States and China 
have been rivals since the Cold War. Despite political disagreements, the United States 
and China have become major economic and trading partners. China aggressively 
targets sensitive and protected U.S. technology and military information, using 
worldwide intelligence operations, including those in Hong Kong. It is one of the most 
aggressive practitioners of industrial espionage. U.S. citizens of Chinese ancestry are 
considered prime intelligence targets.   
 
 China has a poor human rights record. It suppresses political dissent, and it 
practices arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners. Travelers to China can expect to be placed under surveillance, with their 
hotel rooms, telephones, and fax machines monitored and personal possessions, 
including computers, searched without their knowledge or consent. 
 
 China considers persons of Chinese descent born in Hong Kong to be Chinese 
citizens. However, China and the United States have agreed that all U.S. citizens 
entering Hong Kong on U.S. passports will be considered as U.S. citizens by Hong 
Kong authorities, even though such persons may be considered Chinese citizens by 
Chinese authorities.  
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
6 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant renewed his expired Hong Kong permanent 
identity card in July 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG 
¶ 9: “When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or 
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” The relevant 
disqualifying condition is AG ¶ 10(a): “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of 
foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member.” The relevant illustrative examples of the exercise of foreign citizenship 
include AG ¶ 10(a)(1) (possession of a current foreign passport) and AG ¶ 10(a)(3) 
(accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a 
foreign country). 
 
 Applicant’s possession and renewal of a Hong Kong identity card entitled him to 
stay in Hong Kong longer than would be permitted on a tourist visa. Thus, AG ¶ 10(a)(3) 
was established. Although an identity card is not a passport, its destruction is similar to 
the mitigating condition in AG ¶ 11(e) (“the passport has been destroyed, surrendered 
to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated”). Department Counsel 
conceded that the security concerns raised by Applicant’s Hong Kong identity card were 
mitigated. (Tr. 55.)  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of the Hong Kong 
Special Administration Region, residing in China (SOR ¶ 1.a), and his wife’s three 
siblings are citizens and residents of China (SOR ¶ 1.b). The security concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
7 
 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and  
 
AG ¶ 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
8 
 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 
22, 2003). An applicant with foreign family ties to a country that is hostile to the United 
States has a very heavy burden of persuasion to show that neither he nor his family 
members are subject to influence by that country. ISCR Case No. 11-01888 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 1, 2012), citing ISCR Case No. 07-00029 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007). A[T]here is a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 
DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002).   
 
 Applicant’s wife travels to China regularly to visit her mother, and she is 
vulnerable to direct pressure and coercion during those visits. During his testimony, 
Applicant acknowledged that his wife’s family members were vulnerable to pressure, 
and he has minimized his contact with them to minimize their vulnerability. He has 
virtually no contact with his wife’s father or siblings, but he has not rebutted the 
presumption that he has ties of obligation to his wife’s family. Thus, I conclude that the 
evidence establishes the heightened risk under AG ¶ 7(a) and (d) and the potential 
conflict of interest under AG ¶ 7(b) are established. 
 
 Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) is not established, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of 
AG ¶ 7(a) and (b). However, I have considered that Applicant’s in-laws appear to be 
independently wealthy, making them less vulnerable to financial pressure from Chinese 
authorities.  
 
9 
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant has no sense of loyalty or obligation to China. 
He, his wife, and their families grew up in Hong Kong when it was a British colony. 
However, his wife’s family now resides in China, where they are vulnerable to coercion 
and exploitation. His wife regularly visits her family in China, and her vulnerability to 
direct coercion and exploitation is increased during her visits.  
 
 Applicant has recognized the vulnerability of his wife’s family members, and he 
has minimized his contacts with them. Most importantly, Applicant has deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. All his immediate family 
members, except one brother, are citizens and residents of the United States. One 
brother lives in Hong Kong, but Applicant has had no contact with this brother since 
1968. Applicant has lived in the United States since 1968, been a U.S. citizen since 
1979, and received a security clearance in 1988. His wife has resided in the United 
States since 1992 and been a U.S. citizen since 2001. His children are native-born U.S. 
citizens. He has spent his entire professional career in the United States, and all his 
assets, which are significant, are in the United States. Although he has some emotional 
attachment to Hong Kong, his birthplace, he readily destroyed his Hong Kong identity 
card when he learned that it raised security concerns. I am confident that he would 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) is established for Applicant’s father-in-law and his wife’s siblings, with 
whom he has virtually no contact. However, it is not established for Applicant’s mother-
in-law. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
10 
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He is a mature adult 
who was educated in the United States and spent all his adult life in the United States. 
He has held a security clearance for many years. He left Hong Kong before it fell under 
Chinese control. He feels some attachment to Hong Kong because it is his birthplace, 
but he readily disposed of his Hong Kong identity card when he learned that it raised 
security concerns. He feels no attachment to China or the Chinese government. He 
recognizes the potential pressure that might be placed on his in-laws by Chinese 
authorities, and he has carefully insulated himself from that pressure.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines C and 
B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign preference and foreign 
influence. Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
