1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 13-00476
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 25, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On June 5, 2013, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive
5220.6, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 1, 2013, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.)
On July 18, 2013, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered 10 documentary exhibits. (Items 1-10.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on September 13, 2013. Applicant  did
not submit a response. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on
2
September 17, 2013. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 39 years old.  He is married and has four biological children and one
step-child. (Item 4.) He is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 41 allegations (1.a. through 1.oo.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically judgements and overdue debts totaling approximately $26,580, under
Adjudicative Guideline F. In Applicant’s RSOR, he admitted the allegations in
subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.nn, and he denied the allegations in subparagraph 1.oo.
Pursuant to the Credit Reports, dated June 7, 2012; February 1, 2013; and May
1, 2013 (Items 8, 9, and 10); Applicant has 35 medical accounts and two non-medical
accounts that have been placed in collection, and one charged off account. Many of
these have been delinquent between two and seven years. Additionally, three
unresolved judgements were entered against Applicant that are seven to 15 years old.
(Items 6, 7, and 8.) 
While Applicant denied SOR subparagraph 1.oo. in his RSOR, Item 6 establishes
that this debt of $2,059 is based on a judgement that was entered on May 5, 1998. No
evidence was introduced to show that this judgement debt has been resolved. Nor has
documentation been introduced to establish that any of the other SOR debts or
judgements has been resolved. Applicant indicated that as of April 2013 he was not
making any payments toward any of the debts, nor had he made any arrangements to
make any payments. (Item 5.)
In an October 11, 2012 Subject Interview, Applicant indicated that he was
unemployed from December 2010 through July 2011, after he was terminated from his
job for failing to follow company policy. He also claimed that some of the debts arose
during medical problems he and his son incurred when he had no medical insurance.
Finally, Applicant claimed that some of his financial problems were incurred because of
the death of his baby in 2012. (Item 5.) 
During his interview, Applicant also stated that he planned to either contact the
creditors and make payment plans to resolve his debts, or else file for bankruptcy. But
as reviewed above, no evidence has been introduced to establish that these debts have
been resolved, or reduced, or that a bankruptcy has been initiated.  Finally, Applicant
3
indicated that he had sought no credit counseling or debt consolidation services to help
him resolve his financial difficulties. (Item 5.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
4
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s unemployment in 2010 and 2011, in addition to his medical problems and
those of his son, and the death of a baby in 2012,  could potentially make this mitigation
condition applicable. However, since there is no evidence that Applicant has made any
attempt to resolve his overdue debts, I do not find that Applicant has acted responsibly.
Therefore, this mitigating condition is not applicable in this case. 
Additionally, I do not find that AG ¶  20(c) is applicable, since Applicant has not
received any counseling for the problem, nor do I find that AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable,
since Applicant has not “initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.” Finally, I do not find that any other mitigating condition applies
to this case. Therefore, I find Guideline F against Applicant.
5
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the lack of evidence to
establish that Applicant has made any attempt to resolve the past-due debts listed on
the SOR, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-
person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.oo.: Against  Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
