 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00287 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 6, 2013, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on August 14, 2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns.  
 
2 
 
Applicant received the FORM on June 18, 2013. He timely submitted an answer 
to the FORM with documents that are marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through M. 
The case was assigned to me on October 18, 2013. Applicant’s Exhibits and the 
Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted without objection. Department 
Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts about Pakistan. 
Applicant did not object, and the request is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old linguist working for a defense contractor. He is 
applying for a security clearance. He completed a technical school. He is married with 
three minor children.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Pakistan to Pakistani parents. His parents were already 
living in the United States when Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1993. He 
became a U.S. citizen in 1999. His parents are now deceased.2 
 
 Applicant’s wife, who is also his cousin, was born in Pakistan. They married in 
Pakistan in 1994. His wife remained in Pakistan for several years, and their oldest child 
was born in Pakistan. The child is now a U.S. citizen. Applicant visited his wife in 
Pakistan several times before she moved to the United States. He has not visited 
Pakistan since 2004. Applicant’s wife became a U.S. citizen in 2005. Their younger two 
children were born in the United States.3 
 
 Applicant had five siblings. One of his siblings is deceased. He was a U.S. 
permanent resident before he passed away. Two of Applicant’s siblings are U.S. 
citizens. They have also worked as linguists. Two of Applicant’s siblings, as well as their 
spouses, are citizens and residents of Pakistan.4 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a Pakistani citizen, but she is a U.S. permanent 
resident, living with Applicant and his wife. His father-in-law is a citizen and resident of 
Pakistan. He is retired.5 
 
 Applicant’s wife has six siblings who are Pakistani citizens and residents. His 
wife’s siblings are also his cousins. Applicant has other cousins and an additional five 
stepsiblings who are Pakistani citizens and residents. One of Applicant’s cousins served 
about 20 years in the Pakistani military before he retired as a senior officer. Applicant 
stated that he does not have any contact with this cousin, and he does not remember 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 8; AE A.  
 
2 Items 3-6, 8.  
 
3 Items 3-6, 8; AE A.  
 
4 Items 2-6, 8; AE A.  
 
5 Items 2-6, 8; AE A.  
 
3 
 
the last time he saw or talked to this cousin. With the exception of this cousin, none of 
Applicant’s family has any association with the Pakistan government.6 
 
 Since 2005, Applicant has spent a number of years working overseas under 
combat conditions as a linguist for defense contractors. Applicant submitted 
commendatory material and letters from U.S. military and civilian personnel, who 
praised his character, abilities, and service to the mission. In 2005, a U.S. military officer 
wrote that Applicant’s “professional manner, attention to detail, and impartial and 
accurate translations have led to countless leader engagements resulting in an 
immeasurably positive impact in our area with the [local] populace.” Another military 
officer wrote that Applicant was “one of the finest interpreters and patriots that [he had] 
ever served with.” A battalion commander wrote that he “strongly recommend[ed] 
[Applicant] for positions of high trust, political sensitivity, and judgment based on his 
outstanding performance as [his] senior interpreter.” Another officer praised Applicant’s 
performance during numerous operations “in an austere and rugged environment,” 
noting that “after five deployments to Southwest Asia, [he had] yet to see a better 
interpreter working for the United States.”7 
 
 A military officer wrote in 2009 that Applicant was “by far the best ITCA 
(interpreter, translator, and cultural advisor) [he had] worked with throughout [his] 
multiple deployments in Iraq and Afghanistan.” A senior DOD civilian wrote in 2010 that 
throughout his career, “no linguist has shown the high level of dedication, effective 
professionalism, and work ethic of [Applicant].” In 2012, a senior noncommissioned 
officer praised Applicant as an essential member of their team, noting that Applicant 
“served faithfully in a mission essential role in extremely harsh, stressful, and life 
threatening conditions.”8  
 
 Applicant is currently working overseas as a linguist for the fourth time. He stated 
that he is serving overseas because he wants “to serve the needs of the United States.” 
He stated that his and his wife’s main goal is to give their children a fine education and 
raise them as good U.S. citizens. His family loves America and they “thank God every 
day that [they] live in the best country of the world.” He stated that he would never “do 
anything wrong that [his] family would be ashamed of or let anybody do anything to 
harm [his] country regardless of who they were.”9 
 
Pakistan 
 
 The U.S. Department of State has defined terrorist safe havens as ungoverned, 
under-governed, or ill-governed  physical areas where terrorist groups that constitute a 
threat to U.S. national security interests are able to organize, plan, raise funds, 
                                                          
6 Items 2, 5-8; AE A.  
 
7 Items 3, 8; AE A-M.  
 
8 AE B-D, I.  
 
9 Items 3, 8; AE A.  
 
4 
 
communicate, recruit, train, transit and operate in relative security because of 
inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both. Portions of Pakistan’s Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) province, and 
Balochistan are safe havens for terrorist groups seeking to conduct domestic, regional, 
and global attacks. Al-Qa’ida, the Haqqani Network, the Afghan Taliban, Lashkar e-
Tayyiba, and other groups exploit the inability of Pakistan’s security agencies to fully 
control portions of its own territory to find refuge and plan operations. Taliban senior 
leaders continue to be based in Pakistan, which allows them to provide strategic 
guidance to the insurgency without fear for their safety 
 
 Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Tayyiba will continue to be the most multifaceted and 
problematic of the Pakistani militant groups. The group has the long-term potential to 
evolve into a permanent and even HAMAS/Hizballah-like presence in Pakistan. In 2012, 
Pakistan did not take significant action against Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, which continued to 
operate and raise funds openly in Pakistan through its political and charitable wing, 
Jamaat ud Dawa. The U.S. Department of State has concluded that, in 2012, Pakistan 
continued to experience significant terrorist violence, including sectarian attacks. The 
Pakistani military undertook operations against groups that conducted attacks within 
Pakistan, but other groups, such as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, were able to continue to 
operate in Pakistan. Pakistan did not directly target the Afghan Taliban or the Haqqani 
Network.  
 
 The Haqqani Network, an extremist organization operating as a strategic arm of 
Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence Agency, is also operating from Pakistan with 
impunity. This group has staged attacks on Afghan and U.S. troops in Afghanistan (as 
well as civilians), including the September 13, 2011 attack on the U.S. Embassy in 
Kabul, Afghanistan. On September 7, 2012, the United States formally declared the 
Haqqani Network a Foreign Terrorist Organization.   
 
 On May 1, 2011, U.S. special forces personnel raided a large al-Qa’ida 
compound located in Pakistan and shot and killed al-Qa’ida leader Osama bin Laden. In 
announcing bin Laden’s death, senior administration officials characterized him as a 
“sworn enemy of the United States and a danger to all humanity; a man who called for 
the murder of any American anywhere on Earth,” who designated the United States as 
al-Qa’ida’s “primary target,” and who was responsible for killing thousands of innocent 
men and women not only on 9/11, but in the 1998 East Africa embassy bombing, the 
attack of the USS COLE, and many other acts of brutality.” That he was found in a 
residential neighborhood of Pakistan, in a compound that was “roughly eight times 
larger than other homes in the area with 12-to-18 foot walls topped with barbed wire” 
and other “extremely elaborate” physical and operational security measures, highlights 
the U.S. concern that terrorists, militants, and insurgents find safe havens in areas of 
Pakistan. 
 
 The State Department warns U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel to 
Pakistan, as the presence of several foreign and indigenous terrorist groups poses a 
potential danger to U.S. citizens throughout Pakistan. In 2012, Pakistan experienced 
numerous bomb blasts, suicide attacks and sectarian violence resulting in the deaths of 
 
5 
 
more than 2,000 civilians and 680 security forces personnel. Attacks targeting civilians 
and security personnel occurred across all provinces. These included attacks against 
U.S. citizens and other Western interests, U.S. Government vehicle convoys, U.S. 
personnel, and Pakistani government authorities. In 2011, the Governor of Punjab and 
the Pakistani Federal Minister for Minority Affairs were assassinated in two different 
attacks. Terrorists have demonstrated their willingness and capability to attack targets 
where Americans are known to congregate or visit. Suicide bombings and attacks occur 
throughout Pakistan on a regular basis. Also, several American citizens throughout 
Pakistan have been kidnapped.   
 
 Major human rights problems in Pakistan include extrajudicial killings, torture, 
and disappearances committed by security forces, as well as by militant, terrorist, and 
extremist groups, affecting thousands of civilians in all areas of the country. Additional 
problems include poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrest, widespread government 
corruption, rape, honor crimes, and widespread trafficking in persons. Military and 
terrorist operations in all four provinces and in FATA resulted in hundreds of deaths and 
thousands of injuries.  
 
 The Pakistani government maintains several domestic intelligence services that 
monitored politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, and the media. Credible 
reports indicated that authorities routinely used wiretaps and intercepted and opened 
mail without the requisite court approval, as well as monitoring mobile phones and 
electronic correspondence.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
                                                          
10 Items 9-17.  
 
 
6 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
 
7 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s siblings, cousins, and in-laws are citizens and residents of Pakistan. 
This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion, both directly and through his wife. It also creates a potential 
conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
 Applicant has been in the United States since 1993, and he has been a U.S. 
citizen since 1999. Almost all of his immediate family members are U.S. citizens or 
permanent residents. A number of his siblings, in-laws, and extended family members 
are Pakistani citizens and residents. Pakistan has continuing human rights and terrorist 
concerns. Because of the nature of its government and the terrorist concerns, I am 
unable to find AG ¶ 8(a) applicable.  
 
 Since 2005, Applicant has served overseas on four occasions, working under 
combat conditions as a linguist for defense contractors. The praise from the U.S. 
military and civilian personnel he worked with is impressive. He stated that he loves 
America, and that he would never “do anything wrong that [his] family would be 
ashamed of or let anybody do anything to harm [his] country regardless of who they 
were.” The Appeal Board has stated that such statements, standing alone, are of limited 
value, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner 
in the past in comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track 
record of complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of 
dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which he or she made a significant contribution to 
 
8 
 
the national security.11 In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the 
Appeal Board discussed this issue: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
 
 I find Applicant provided extraordinary evidence of his compliance with military 
requirements in dangerous, high-risk circumstances during his combat services 
overseas, and he has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
America that he can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
                                                          
11 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
9 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s character evidence and particularly his outstanding work 
overseas under hazardous conditions. I also considered the totality of Applicant’s family 
ties to Pakistan. Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The 
United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified 
information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have 
access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests 
inimical to those of the United States.”12 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly 
governments must be made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, 
sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged 
in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United 
States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the 
foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas in support of the 
national defense. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of 
action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable 
result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”13 Pakistan continues to struggle with 
human rights issues, and it is plagued by terrorism. The complicated state of affairs in 
Pakistan places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his 
foreign family members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that 
burden. I also find that his devotion to the United States, as evidenced by his 
participation overseas in combat missions, mitigates any concerns raised by his foreign 
contacts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
13 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
