 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 13-00110 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is close to his mother and brother, who are citizens and residents of 
Egypt. He is also close to his brother, who is a citizen of Egypt and a resident of the 
United Arab Emirates (UAE). However, he has much closer and stronger connections to 
the United States. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 2). On February 
22, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to 
him, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). The 
SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, 
DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance, 
and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On March 22, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR. On June 5, 2013, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On June 11, 2013, DOHA assigned the 
case to me. On July 9, 2013, DOHA issued notice of the hearing, setting the hearing on 
July 30, 2013. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered six exhibits, and Applicant offered nine exhibits.) There were no objections to 
GE 1-4 or AE A-I, and all exhibits were admitted. (Tr. 17, 20-22)  
 
I received the transcript of the hearing on August 7, 2013. I held the record open 
until August 8, 2013, to permit Applicant to submit additional evidence. (Tr. 75-79) On 
August 6 and 8, 2013, I received seven post-hearing documents. (AE J-P) There were 
no objections, and AE J-P were admitted into evidence.    
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Egypt 
and the UAE. (Tr. 17; GE 5 and 6) Department Counsel provided supporting documents 
to show detail and context for those facts. Applicant objected to admission of GE 5 and 
6. His objections go to the weight to be accorded GE 5 and 6 and not to their 
admissibility. I granted Department Counsel’s request and admitted GE 5 and 6. (Tr. 20) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.g, and he 
providing mitigating information. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old senior engineer, who seeks a security clearance. (Tr. 
23, 25) He began his employment with a government contractor in August 2012. (Tr. 23, 
33) He earned a bachelor of science degree in electrical engineering in Egypt in 1994. 
(Tr. 26; AE B) He earned a master’s of science degree in computer information systems 
in 2003, a master’s degree in electrical engineering in 2007, and a Ph.D. in electrical 
engineering in 2009. (Tr. 26, 32; AE B) All post-graduate degrees were earned in the 
United States. (Tr. 32) 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant lived in Egypt from 1971 to 2000, except for a brief visit to the United 
States in 1999. (Tr. 30-31, 34-35) Applicant served in the Egyptian military from May 
1995 to January 1998 as a junior officer. (Tr. 29-30) He entered the United States in 
2000 on a tourist visa when he was 29. (Tr. 26, 30-31) In 2004, he married a native-
born U.S. citizen. (Tr. 27) His spouse is a part-time pharmacist. (Tr. 27, 48; AE I) He 
has two U.S.-born, adopted sons. (Tr. 27-28, 46; AE F) One son is four months old, and 
the other son is five years old. (Tr. 28) Each adoption cost about $30,000 and depleted 
his savings. (Tr. 44-45) Both sons live with Applicant and his spouse. (Tr. 47) He 
became a U.S. citizen in September 2009. (Tr. 29)  
 
Applicant and his spouse own three properties in the United States. (Tr. 35-36; 
AE D) One of the properties is “underwater,” meaning the mortgage is greater than its 
fair market value. (Tr. 36) His equity in the three properties is about $100,000. (Tr. 44) 
He does not own any property in Egypt. (Tr. 37) He will not inherit any property in Egypt. 
(Tr. 38) Applicant has five 401K accounts, totaling about $60,000, all in the United 
States. (Tr. 41-43) He has about $6,000 in his bank accounts. (Tr. 44) His spouse has 
about $150,000 in her 401K accounts. (Tr. 45) 
 
Applicant’s spouse was born in the United States of parents, who are dual 
citizens of the U.S. and Egypt. (Tr. 45) Applicant’s father-in-law has lived in the United 
States for 45 years, and his mother-in-law has lived in the United States for 40 years. 
(Tr. 51-52) His father-in-law is an associate dean at a U.S. university and holds about 
10 patents. (Tr. 51) His mother-in-law is a retired social worker. (Tr. 52) Applicant 
communicates with his parents-in-law about once every three or four weeks. (Tr. 72) 
Applicant’s two brothers-in-law and one sister-in-law were born in the United States and 
live in the United States. (Tr. 52-53) Applicant has two cousins, who live in the United 
States. (Tr. 59, 70-71) 
 
Applicant’s father worked for the Egyptian government delivering food. He retired 
and then passed away in the 1990s. (Tr. 53, 60-61) Applicant’s mother, who is 74 years 
old, was a stay-at-home spouse, and is supported by her late husband’s Egyptian 
government pension. (Tr. 54, 73) Applicant does not send money to his family in Egypt. 
(Tr. 54) His mother visited Applicant in the United States three months ago for about 
four weeks and on average visits Applicant in the United States about once a year. (Tr. 
55) Applicant purchases the ticket for her flight to the United States. (Tr. 55) His mother 
has significant health problems; however, she is considering moving to the United 
States. (Tr. 55-56) He communicates with his mother about once a week. (Tr. 68) 
 
Applicant’s brother lives with his mother in Egypt. (Tr. 54, 56-57) He is an 
engineer employed by a private company in Egypt. (Tr. 54, 56-57) He is not married, 
and he does not have any children. (Tr. 59) Applicant currently talks to his brother about 
once every two or three months. (Tr. 57, 68-69) His conversations with his brother are 
casual and usually involve discussions about the health of family members. (Tr. 57) His 
brother is actively seeking employment outside of Egypt. (AE P)  
 
Applicant’s brother, who is living in the UAE, is an engineer. (Tr. 50, 56, 83) He is 
married and has two sons. (Tr. 58) His spouse and children are Egyptian citizens. (Tr. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
58) The UAE does not grant citizenship to foreign workers such as Applicant’s brother. 
(Tr. 58) Applicant currently talks to his brother about once every two or three months. 
(Tr. 70) His brother intends to immigrate to New Zealand. (Tr. 50, 56) He has 
interviewed for employment in New Zealand. (Tr. 50; AE C) In June 2013, New Zealand 
immigration officials discussed immigration procedures with his brother in an email. (AE 
C) 
 
Since 2000, Applicant traveled to Egypt twice. (Tr. 62, 74-75) In 2005, he went to 
Egypt for ten days, and in February 2013, he stayed in Egypt for four days. (Tr. 62, 74-
75) In September 2012, Applicant surrendered his current and previously-expired 
Egyptian passports to his security officer. (Tr. 63-67; AE L) The most recent Egyptian 
passport he surrendered has now expired. (Tr. 65) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
An associate branch head in a technology branch described the critical 
requirement for Applicant’s expertise, cited his competence and specialized knowledge, 
and recommended approval of his security clearance. (AE O)  
 
A professor of electrical engineering, who has known or worked with Applicant 
since 2004, lauded his professionalism, honesty, and good character. (AE G) He highly 
recommended Applicant for a security clearance. (AE G) 
 
An electrical engineer, who has known Applicant since August 2012, praised 
Applicant’s skill, expertise, trustworthiness, reliability, credibility, and generosity. (AE H) 
He recommended approval of Applicant for a security clearance. (AE H)  
 
Egypt 
 
Egypt is the most populous country in the Arab work. In the past, it has been a 
strategic partner of the United States and the countries have enjoyed a strong friendly 
relationship. The United States is facing a series of challenges stemming from dramatic 
changes in Egypt. Its recently deposed President, Muhammad Morsi, is part of the 
Muslim Brotherhood, and the extent of his cooperation with the United States on some 
security and economic matters was unclear. He was deposed by elements of the 
Egyptian military and analysts are concerned about the impact of this change on the 
Egyptian democracy, relationships of Egypt and Israel, and continued cooperation with 
the United States on intelligence and terrorism-related issues. Moreover, the Muslim 
Brotherhood continues to maintain widespread followers in Egypt and may be able to 
regain power. 
 
Political protests and demonstrations have turned violent numerous times in the 
past year. There are instances of instability, public disorder, and extremist activity in 
Egypt. Following the revolution of January 2011, the number of criminal incidents has 
increased throughout the country, including crimes against foreign visitors. This is likely 
attributable to a reduction in overall police presence and diminished authority of police 
on the street. In May 2013, the U.S. State Department issued a travel alert to U.S. 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
citizens traveling to or living in Egypt, about the continuing possibility of political and 
social unrest, incidents of which led to recent violence. 
 
Due to the political climate after the January 2011 revolution, there is a 
potentially more permissive operating environment for terrorist groups, including al- 
Qaeda, which the U.S. State Department designated a foreign terrorist organization. 
 
Egyptian human rights abuses are common. Violent clashes with police and 
military at demonstrations are a continuing concern. Problems also include torture, 
arbitrary arrests, limits on the judiciary, and restrictions on civil liberties. 
 
The threat of terrorism in Egypt remains high and transnational terrorist groups 
and local terrorist groups pose threats in Egypt despite Egypt’s aggressive pursuit of 
terrorists and extremism. In 2003, Egypt discovered and disrupted a terrorist plot 
against U.S. interests. Between 2004 and 2006, Egypt suffered a series of deadly, 
coordinated terrorist bombings, which caused many deaths and hundreds of injuries, 
including U.S. citizens. Although the Egyptian government took measures against the 
perpetrators of the attacks, there is a persistent, indigenous threat of terrorist activities. 
In April 2009, the Egyptian government uncovered a Hezbollah cell clandestinely 
operating in Egypt. 
 
Terrorists use overt, covert, and clandestine activities to exploit and undermine 
U.S. national security interests. Terrorist organizations currently target the United States 
for intelligence collection through human espionage and other means. Some terrorist 
groups conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. 
 
Egypt considers all children born to Egyptian mothers to be Egyptian citizens 
even if the child is not issued an Egyptian birth certificate or passport. Dual nationals 
residing in Egypt for more than six months require proof of Egyptian citizenship. Male 
dual nationals staying in Egypt for more than six months, and who have not completed 
military service, must obtain an exemption certificate before they can leave. Individuals 
who travel to Egypt on their Egyptian passport are normally treated as Egyptian citizens. 
The ability to provide U.S. consular assistance to those traveling on Egyptian passports 
is extremely limited.   
United Arab Emirates 
 
The UAE is a federation of seven independent emirates. The federal government 
is a constitutional republic based on Islamic ideals and beliefs. It has no democratically 
elected institutions or political parties. Freedom of speech, assembly, and religion are 
restricted. Incommunicado detention is lawful and has been used in sensitive criminal 
cases. About 85 percent of UAE’s population is composed of expatriates.  
 
The United States has friendly relations with the UAE. Private commercial ties 
have developed into government ties, including security assistance. Relations were 
strengthened during the U.S.-led coalition’s campaign to expel Iraq from Kuwait. The 
UAE has been a key partner of the U.S. in the war on terror.  
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. Applicant was born in Egypt. His mother and two 
brothers are citizens of Egypt. His mother and one brother live in Egypt and his other 
brother lives in the UAE. Applicant’s mother is receiving a pension from the Egyptian 
government because of Applicant’s father’s government service in food distribution. 
Applicant’s mother visits Applicant in the United States on an annual basis. He has 
frequent contact with his mother and two brothers. He cares about the welfare of his 
family living in Egypt and the UAE. Applicant went to Egypt in 2005 and February 2013. 
There are safety issues for people living in Egypt because of the prevalence of terrorists 
and other lawless elements. The UAE is a safe and stable country and terrorists and 
other lawless elements are not a major threat to Applicant’s brother. Applicant’s family 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
in Egypt is not receiving any special protection from the Egyptian government. 
Applicant’s brother living in the UAE is only living there temporarily, and he is not a 
citizen of the UAE.  His brother living in UAE expects to move to New Zealand in the 
near future.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in a 
dangerous country, such as Egypt, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See 
Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The relationship of 
Egypt with the United States, places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members 
living in Egypt do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position 
where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire 
to assist family members living in a foreign country.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
  
The SOR alleges a foreign interest security concern raised by Applicant’s cousin, 
who is a citizen of Egypt living in the United States in ¶ 1.d, Applicant’s father-in-law, 
who is a dual citizen of the United States and Egypt in ¶ 1.e, and Applicant’s mother-in-
law, who is a dual citizen of the United States and Egypt in ¶ 1.f. Applicant’s cousin, 
father-in-law, and mother-in-law were born in Egypt, and they are residents of the 
United States. His father-in-law and mother-in-law have lived in the United States 45 
years and 40 years, respectively. There is no evidence of any of their connections or 
relationships to any person or entity in Egypt, that that they traveled to Egypt in the last 
few years, or that they intend to go to Egypt in the future. These three SOR allegations 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
do not establish a foreign interest security concern, and are found for Applicant without 
further discussion. 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Egypt 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Egypt has a significant problem with 
terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with family members living in Egypt creates a 
potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist family members in Egypt by providing 
sensitive or classified information. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply with respect Applicant’s 
mother and two brothers under SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c, and further inquiry is necessary 
about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
his mother and brother, who are living in Egypt, and his brother, who is living in the 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
UAE.1 Applicant’s loyalty and connections to his family living in Egypt and UAE are 
positive character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those same 
connections negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant failed to 
fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his 
relatives who are Egypt citizens] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. Applicant moved to the United States in 2000, 13 
years ago. He is married to a native-born, U.S. citizen, who lives in the United States. 
He has two children, who are U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. He has 
affection for his spouse and children. He earned two master’s degrees and his Ph.D in 
the United States. When he took an oath and swore allegiance to the United States in 
2009, as part of his naturalization as a U.S. citizen, he manifested his patriotism, loyalty, 
and fidelity to the United States over all other countries.  His employment is in the 
United States, and he has substantial investments in the United States, including three 
houses and 401K accounts.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family living in Egypt. 
He frequently communicates with his family living in Egypt. There is no evidence, 
however, that terrorists, criminals, the Egyptian government, or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family to coerce Applicant 
for classified or sensitive information.2 As such, there is a reduced possibility that 
Applicant or his family living in Egypt would be specifically selected as targets for 
improper coercion or exploitation. Of course, the primary risk to his family living in Egypt 
is from terrorists and other lawless elements. There is some risk from the Egyptian 
government because of the ongoing turmoil after the forcible overthrow of the Morsi 
regime. The post-Morsi political and law enforcement situation is unclear. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
evidence of threats or attempted coercion of Applicant or his family, if such record 
evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier evidentiary burden to mitigate 
foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ 
sizable financial and diplomatic investment in Egypt. Applicant and his family in Egypt 
could become potential targets of terrorists because of Applicant’s support for the 
United States, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information could 
theoretically add some risk to Applicant, if he visits Egypt in the future.  
 
                                            
1
The remainder of this decision will focus for clarity on Egypt and not discuss the UAE because 
the risk of violence and coercion is much greater for Applicant’s mother and brother in Egypt because of 
the political turmoil and crime conditions in Egypt. Moreover, Applicant has much stronger connections to 
his mother than to either of his brothers. All of the same concerns and mitigating conditions are applicable 
to his brother in the UAE.  
 
2
There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Egypt. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with family members living in Egypt. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because Applicant has no investments in Egypt. 
AG ¶ 8(f) is only available to mitigate security concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e).3   
  
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family living in Egypt and UAE are significant. 
He is close to his mother and brother, who are citizens and residents of Egypt, and his 
brother, who is a citizen of Egypt, living in UAE. These connections raise foreign 
influence security concerns under Guideline B; however, those concerns are mitigated 
because of his strong connections to the United States, including his wife and two 
children, earning three post-graduate degrees in the United States, his oath to the 
United States when he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen, and his U.S. employment.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s family 
living in Egypt and UAE. Applicant’s mother and one brother are citizens and residents 
of Egypt. His brother is a citizen of Egypt, and he lives in the UAE. He frequently 
communicates with his mother and two brothers. His mother is dependent on her 
Egyptian pension. His mother visits Applicant every year. Over the last 10 years, he has 
visited Egypt twice. His close connections to his family in Egypt and the UAE make him 
                                            
3
AG ¶ 7(e) provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or 
in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk 
of foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
more vulnerable as a target of coercion by lawless elements in Egypt. His family in 
Egypt and UAE will be at a greater risk if his clearance is granted. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Egypt must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.  Egypt is a dangerous place because of 
violence from terrorists, the Egyptian Brotherhood’s powerful role in Egypt, and other 
lawless elements. Terrorists continue to threaten the Egyptian government, the interests 
of the United States, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. The Egypt 
government does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many 
instances. The United States and Egypt are allies in the war on terrorism. Egypt and the 
United States have close relationships in diplomacy, counter terrorism, and trade.      
 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are more 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. When he was naturalized as 
a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance to the United States. His spouse and two sons were 
born in the United States and reside in the United States. He was awarded two master’s 
degrees and a Ph.D in the United States. He has substantial investments in the United 
States. There is no evidence raising questions about his loyalty, trustworthiness, or 
reliability.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person. I conclude Applicant has carried his 
burden and foreign influence concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
