1
 On August 13, 2013, Department Counsel amended the allegations under Guideline H of the SOR by striking
subparagraph 1(b), revising subparagraph 1(a), adding a new subparagraph 1(b), and adding two additional
subparagraphs, 1(c) and 1(d).   Department Counsel also added new allegations under paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal
Conduct).  
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11–07161
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan K. Hahn, Attorney At Law
January 27, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
dated November 22, 2006 and October 11, 2011.  (Government Exhibits 1 and 2.)  On
May 22, 2013, and August 15, 2013, the Defense of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR)  detailing the security concerns under Guidelines H and E for1
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program”
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on July 2, 2013, and September 11, 2013,
and he requested a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was
2
assigned to the undersigned on November 14, 2013.  A notice of hearing was issued
November 20, 2013,  and the hearing was scheduled for December 11, 2013.  At the
hearing the Government presented seven exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits
1 through 7.  The Applicant presented seven exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits
A through G.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was
received on December 19, 2013.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
   
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 37 years old and married with two children.  He has a Bachelor’s
Degree in Art with an emphasis on photography.  He is employed by a defense
contractor as a Photographer.  He is attempting to retain his security clearance in
connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
(See Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.)  Applicant started using marijuana in high school
in 1994, at the age of 18, a couple of times.  While in college his use of marijuana
became more regular, about two times a month over a six year period.  After college,
from 2000 to 2003, he reduced his marijuana use to about six times a year.  From 2003
to 2008, he reduced his use of marijuana even further to one to two times a year.  He
usually used marijuana when he was at a social events, like camping trips.  Most of the
time marijuana was given to him for his use, but on occasions he contributed small
amounts of money into a pool with others to purchase it.  He estimates that he
purchased marijuana on at least five occasions from 1996 through 2003.  On one
occasion in 1994 the Applicant sold marijuana his brother had given him to a friend of a
friend.
In January 2006 Applicant began working for his current employer.  At that time
he underwent a drug test.  He initially started his employment in a part-time call-in
status, but by the end of 2006 it grew into a full time position.  It was at that time that his
employer requested that he apply for a security clearance.  Applicant stated that he
initially admitted using marijuana on his security clearance application, and his security
clearance was granted in August 2007.  (Tr. p. 61 and Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)
Following this, he continued to use marijuana on occasions.  He estimates that from
high school to 2008 which is the last time he used marijuana, he has used marijuana
about 156 times in total.  (Tr. P. 99.)  Applicant testified that he understands that the use
of marijuana is illegal but he did not think it was a “big deal” to violate the law.  He also
knew that it was against company policy to use marijuana, but he stated that he did not
know that continuing to use marijuana would disqualify him from obtaining a security
clearance.  He also thought that the company policy was only enforced at work and did
not extend to his personal time outside of the work place.  Applicant admits that he
3
received some on-line security briefings from his company, but that he did not read it,
review it or take the time to understand it.  (Tr. p. 109-110.)   
Applicant testified that he did not understand that using marijuana would
adversely affect his security clearance until about January 2009 when he applied for
Special Program Access with another agency and was told that he had to be clean from
marijuana for a year and that he had to self-report.  (Tr. p. 63)    
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he has engaged in conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations.  
The Applicant denied each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.  (See
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.)  Applicant completed a security clearance application
dated November 22, 2006.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  Question 24(a) of the application
asked the Applicant if since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, has he illegally used any
controlled substance?  The Applicant responded “Yes,” and disclosed marijuana use
approximately five times from May 2001 to 2005.  The Government contends that he
failed to list the full extent of his marijuana use that occurred from May 2001 to the
present.  Applicant denies that the omission was deliberate.  Applicant should have
indicated that he continued to use marijuana up to the present, which at that time was
2006.  Accordingly, this allegation is found against the Applicant.     
Question 24(b) of the same application asked the Applicant if he has ever
illegally used a controlled substance . . . while in possession of a security clearance?
The Applicant responded “No.”  Applicant explained that he answered, “No”, because
he applied for a security clearance in November 2006 and was not granted a clearance
until August 2007.  At the time he filled out the form, he had not been granted a
clearance yet.  (Tr. p. 73.)  Based upon this analysis, this allegation is found for the
Applicant.  
Question 24(c) of the same application asked the Applicant if in the last 7 years
has he been involved in the illegal purchase. . .  of any narcotic . . . or cannabis for his
own intended profit or that of another?  Applicant responded, “No.”  Applicant  indicated
that he did not know if there was any intended profit by anyone when he purchased the
marijuana.  (Tr. pp. 74-76.)  Applicant failed to disclose that he had purchased
marijuana from 1999 to 2003.  Accordingly, this allegation is found against the
Applicant.       
Applicant completed another security clearance application dated October 11,
2010.  Question 23(b) of the application asked the Applicant if he has ever illegally used
a controlled substance while in possession a security clearance?  The Applicant
responded “No.”  Applicant failed to disclose that he had used marijuana after he had
been granted a security clearance in August 2007.  The Applicant was clearly dishonest
when he answered this question.  He should have revealed the full extent of his
4
marijuana use, namely that he had been using it since high school to at least 2008.
Accordingly, this allegation is found against the Applicant.    
Question 23(c) of the same application asked the Applicant if in the last seven
years has he been involved in the illegal . . . purchase . . . of any controlled substance?
“ Applicant responded “No.”  Applicant explained that he last purchased marijuana in
2003, which was outside of the seven years requested by the question.  He also stated
that he only sold marijuana once in 1994 and that it was not within seven years of the
application date and that is why he did not disclose it.  Applicant should have disclosed
his purchase of marijuana in 2003.  (Tr. pp. 78-79.)  Accordingly, this allegation is found
against the Applicant.
From December 2008 to September 2010, during a security background
investigation by another agency for Special Program Access, the Government contends
that the Applicant provided false information regarding his dates of marijuana use, the
dates of marijuana use while holding a security clearance, his purchase of marijuana
and his sale of marijuana.  The evidence in the record indicates that the Applicant was
denied Special Program Access based upon his past use, sale and purchase of
marijuana.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G, and Government Exhibit 3.)  Applicant admits that he
can’t specifically recall all dates of use, but he does remember that his last use of
marijuana was in May 2008.  He denies any deliberate falsifications concerning his drug
involvement.  There is no evidence in the record that supports the fact that the Applicant
provided false information regarding his illegal drug involvement.  Accordingly, this
allegation is found for the Applicant
Nine letters of recommendation were submitted on behalf of the Applicant from
his Manager who hired him, a past supervisor, and coworkers who have worked closely
with him on many assignments.  They attest to the Applicant’s good judgment,
professionalism, trustworthiness and honesty.  In the work place, Applicant has always
demonstrated highly ethical behavior, dependability and reliability.  Applicant is highly
recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)
Applicant signed a Letter of Intent dated July 2, 2013 indicating that he will not
use marijuana in the future and that any future illegal drug use will result in automatic
revocation of his security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
5
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities;
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
6
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse and dishonesty that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
7
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence, the
Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guidelines H and E of the
SOR.  
The evidence shows that the Applicant has used marijuana from about 1994 to at
least May 2008 at varying frequencies.  He continued to use marijuana after having
been granted a Secret DoD security clearance in about 2007.  Applicant testified that he
knew is was illegal and against DoD policy to do so, but did not think it was a big deal.
The fact that the Applicant failed to follow rules and regulations demonstrates that he is
not an individual whom the Government would find sufficiently trustworthy for clearance.
In addition, common sense is one of the very basic character requirements that one
must have to be eligible for access to classified information.  In this case, Applicant fell
short in this area.      
Applicant claims that he was naive, does not have a military background, and did
not understand the restrictions and requirements involved in holding a security
clearance.  I find this argument difficult to accept.  Applicant is a 37 year old college-
educated man with two children who has worked in the defense industry since 2006 and
who by now should have a concrete understanding of the eligibility requirements for
security clearance holders.  Under the circumstances, I find that he intentionally
disregarded the law and DoD policy.  He contends that he last used marijuana in 2008.
Although he has not used illegal drugs in several years, his judgement is warped to
some extent and raises serious security concerns about his reliability and
trustworthiness.  Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a)
any drug abuse, 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, and
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  None of the
mitigating conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under
Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
Furthermore, Applicant deliberately falsified his answers to questions concerning
his illegal drugs involvement on two different security clearance applications in response
to questions about his drug history.  There is no excuse for this misconduct and poor
judgment.  The Government relies on the representations of its civilian employees and
must be able to trust them in every instance.  Under the particular facts of this case, his
poor personal conduct is considered a significant security risk, which prohibits a
favorable determination in this case.  Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct,
Disqualifying Condition 16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
8
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities applies.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  I have considered all of the evidence,
including his favorable letters of recommendation.  Under the particular facts of this
case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole,
support a whole-person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a
lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualification
for access to classified information, it must determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the Government’s national interest. According to the standards set forth in the Directive,
based upon the conduct outlined here, this Applicant has demonstrated that he is not
trustworthy, and he does not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified
information.  
    
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
   
   Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.c.: Against the Applicant.
       Subpara.  2.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.f.: For the Applicant.
     Subpara.  2.g.: Against the Applicant.
    
 
9
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
