 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12222 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 1, 2013. He did not request a hearing as 
part of his answer, but subsequently requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on September 20, 2013. Scheduling of the hearing 
was delayed due to the shutdown of the federal government. The Defense Office of 
 
2 
 
 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 30, 2013. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on December 5, 2013. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, and he offered exhibits (AE) A and B, and they were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was held open until December 23, 2013, to 
provide Applicant the opportunity to present additional exhibits. He provided Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AE) C through E, which were admitted into evidence without objection and the 
record closed.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 13, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR, except ¶ 1.d, which he denied. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He graduated from high school in 1988. He married in 
1991 and divorced in 1997. He has a son from the marriage. He is required to pay child 
support for the child until March 2014, when he turns 21. He remarried in 1999 and he 
has a son who is five years old. Applicant has worked for his present employer since 
January 2008. 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1999. He and his wife had debts and he 
fell behind in paying his bills due to his divorce. He did not have a good job at the time. 
His wife had medical bills and student loans. They completed the terms of the Chapter 
13 bankruptcy. Applicant’s wife continues to pay her student loans.2 
 
Applicant served in the Marine Corps from 1989 to 1993 and was honorably 
discharged. He reenlisted in the Marine Corps in 2000 and intended to serve until he 
was retirement eligible. In 2005, Applicant hurt his back. He was medically discharged 
under honorable conditions in 2008. He was a staff sergeant (E-6) when he was 
discharged. While in the Marine Corps, Applicant served two combat tours in Iraq and 
held a secret clearance.3  
 
Some of the medical problems associated with his injury were addressed by the 
military, but residual problems were not covered. He required surgery in December 
2011 that was not related to his injury, and he was responsible for paying for his care. 
Applicant’s medical insurance has a $3,000 deductible. He receives $548 monthly 
disability payments from the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (VA). In late 2010, 
Applicant’s wife was laid off from her job. At the same time, Applicant learned that his 
child support payments increased. In the state where Applicant’s child lives, child 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibits I and II are Department Counsel’s memoranda indicating he did not object to the 
documents.  
 
2 Tr. 36-37. 
 
3 Tr. 21. 
 
3 
 
 
support payments are mandated until the child is 21 years old. His child support 
payment increased by $230 to $620. Applicant’s wife also had some medical issues 
during this time.4  
 
Due to these issues, Applicant had difficulty paying his mortgage loan. He 
contacted his mortgage company in January 2011 to see what actions he could take. 
Applicant sent his $3,000 income tax refund to the mortgage company. The mortgage 
company discussed a possible modification of the loan. Applicant credibly testified that 
he sent the requested paperwork to the mortgage company five or six times and each 
time he was told that some document was missing or the company lost the paperwork. 
The company sent back payments to Applicant because it was not sent by certified mail. 
Applicant was never informed payments had to be sent in this way. Applicant contacted 
a law firm to help him resolve the matter and was advised that the federal government 
was getting involved with this mortgage company in an attempt to resolve certain 
mortgages that were issued. Applicant continues to work with the law firm to prevent his 
house from foreclosure. He provided documents from the law firm to show he has been 
attempting to modify the mortgage loan and resolve the debt.5 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are medical debts ($33 and $79) that have 
been paid. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($3,849) is for medical treatment related to his back 
injury. He has been unsuccessful in having the VA cover this debt. He has an 
agreement with the medical provider to pay $40 a month on the debt. He is making 
payments and provided documentary proof of his action.6 Applicant also has a payment 
agreement with the creditor for the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($2,368) to pay $35 
monthly.7  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($2,171) is a state tax lien from State A. The lien was 
imposed when Applicant was in the Marine Corps. He has contacted State A’s tax office 
numerous times to show he was not a resident of the state and is not required to pay 
state taxes there. He was stationed in the State A, but he and his wife lived in 
neighboring State B. His wife worked in State B, and Applicant did not have any outside 
employment. Applicant commuted daily to the base in the State A. Applicant provided 
documents to show he listed State B as his state of residence at that time. He continues 
to dispute this lien.8 
 
Appellant’s wife recently was able to get a job as a part-time substitute teacher 
now that their son is in school. Along with working full-time, Applicant is attending 
college full-time and has one class left to complete his bachelor’s degree. He is hopeful 
                                                          
4 Tr. 21, 25, 43, 47-48, 51. 
 
5 Tr. 26-30, 37-42, 52-58, 67-69; Answer to SOR; AE A. 
 
6 AE B. 
 
7 Tr. 23-25, 32-35, 49, 64, 66; AE C, D, E. 
 
8 Tr. 30-32. 
 
4 
 
 
that once he completes his degree he will be entitled to a raise in salary. Due to a mix-
up, he did not receive his educational benefits through the military on time. He expects 
to receive a lump-sum payment in January 2014. Along with the discontinuation of his 
child support payments in March 2014, Applicant believes he will be in a better financial 
position in the near future. He and his wife maintain a written budget and are actively 
attempting to reduce their debt. Most of their disposable income goes toward medical 
debts that are not covered by insurance. They have paid other debts that are not 
alleged in the SOR.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
9 Tr. 43-48, 58, 60-62, 67, 70, 72. 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had six delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. I find 
there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because some of Applicant’s debts are still being 
resolved. Applicant attributed his financial problems to medical issues and a high 
medical deductible, an unexpected increase in child support payments, his wife’s 
medical issues and loss of income when she lost her job. These things were beyond his 
control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant paid two small debts and has payment agreements 
for two others. When he began having financial problems he contacted the mortgage 
company in an attempt to modify his loan. He has been working with a law firm to help 
him resolve this debt. He has not abandoned his debts and has acted responsibly. AG ¶ 
20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant resolved two delinquent debts and is making monthly payment on two 
others. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, and 1.g). He is working with a law firm to help him modify 
his mortgage loan. AG ¶ 20 (d) apply to these debts. Despite his efforts to work with the 
mortgage company, he has been frustrated by its failures to follow through on its 
promises. Applicant is hopeful he will receive a raise after completing his college 
degree. His wife is now working, and he should receive payments owed to him in 
January 2014 for educational benefits. He and his wife maintain a budget. There are 
clear indications his financial problems are being resolved and under control. AG ¶ 
20(c) applies. Applicant is actively disputing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. He has contacted 
State A and provided proof that he was not a resident and should not have to pay taxes 
in that state. AG ¶ 20(e) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He served his country in the Marine Corps for 12 years 
before being medically discharged due to an injury. Some of his financial problems are 
due to medical bills associated with his injury and his high medical deductible. He has 
not abandoned his debts and is slowing gaining financial stability. He has paid the small 
debts and has payment plans in place to resolve the larger ones. His wife is now 
employed and along with his child support payments discontinuing in March 2014, he 
anticipates he will be in a better financial situation. He has been working with a law firm 
to modify his mortgage. Applicant has met his burden. His finances are not a security 
concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
