 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12436 
                                                                      )                         
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On March 12, 2010, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 26, 2013, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated March 15, 2013, and 
he requested that his case be determined on the written record. The Government 
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 4, 2013. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 9. By letter dated April 4, 2013, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, 
with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of 
receipt. Applicant received the file on October 30, 2013. His response was due on 
November 30, 2013. Applicant submitted additional information within the required time 
period. On December 9, 2013, the case was assigned to me for a decision. I marked 
Applicant’s response to the FORM as Item A and admitted it to the record without 
objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 11 allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.k.). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., and 1.g. He denied the 
allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.e., 1.h., 1.i., 1.j., and 1.k. Applicant’s admissions are 
entered as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 2.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by Applicant in his response to the FORM. The record evidence includes 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR; his March 12, 2010, e-QIP; a summary of Applicant’s 
personal subject interview, prepared by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office 
of Personnel Management;1 Applicant’s responses to financial interrogatories; and his 
credit reports of March 26, 2010, July 28, 2011, and October 12, 2012. Absent any 
objections, all Items in the FORM are entered as evidence in this case. (See Items 2 
and 4 through 9.) 
 
 Applicant, a high school graduate, is 56 years old, married, and employed by a 
government contractor as a mechanic. He is the father of two adult children. He seeks a 
security clearance for the first time. (Item 4.) 
 
 Between 1997 and 2007,2 Applicant owned twelve residential properties and 
rented them. When the housing market suffered a downturn, he sold most of the 
properties. One property went into foreclosure. Applicant owes a deficiency balance on 
the property of $46,999. This delinquent debt is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. Additionally, 
Applicant remains responsible for a $3,164 judgment for unpaid homeowner’s 
                                            
1
 As a part of his investigation for a security clearance, Applicant was interviewed under oath by an 
authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on August 3, 2011. On 
December 4, 2012, he signed a notarized statement affirming that the summary of his interview was 
accurate. He made no changes or additions to the summary, nor did he, pursuant to ¶ E3.1.20 of the 
Directive, object to its admissibility. (Item 5.) 
 
2 Applicant also identified the time of his ownership of real property for commercial purposes as 1996 to 
2005. (Item 2.) 
 
3 
 
 
association dues on the property. The judgment, which is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b., was 
filed against Applicant in April 2005 and remains unsatisfied. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 5; 
Item A.) 
 
 From approximately November 2007 until August 2011, Applicant was employed 
overseas as a government contractor. During his last overseas assignment, he fell ill, 
returned to the United States, and was treated successfully for a serious disease. (Item 
1; Item 2; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant has a history of delinquent debt. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.j. that 
Applicant owes a judgment of $159 to an individual. The judgment was filed against 
Applicant in June 2003. Applicant denied the debt, which is listed on his credit bureau 
report of March 26, 2010. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he claimed it had been 
paid long ago. He provided no documentation to corroborate payment. (Item 1; Item 2; 
Item 6; Item 9.) 
 
 The SOR also alleges that Applicant is responsible for five delinquent accounts in 
collection status (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.e., 1.f., 1.i., and 1.k.) and three accounts in charged-off 
status (SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1,g., and 1.h.). In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the 
$254 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. and reported that he had no record of it. When he was 
interviewed by an authorized investigator in August 2011, Applicant did not recognize 
the debt, but he stated he would investigate and attempt to resolve it. In response to 
DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he had called the creditor, an energy 
company, and the creditor claimed it had no record of the debt. The debt is listed on his 
credit bureau reports of March 2010 and July 2011. It was reported as delinquent in 
2009, and it was referred to a collection attorney. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 5; Item 6; Item 8; 
Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant also denied the $17,435 debt in collection status alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e., 
and he asserted that the debt had been settled. As an attachment to his answer to the 
SOR, he provided documentation corroborating that the debt had been settled in August 
2011. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant admitted a $7,457 debt in collection status, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. In his 
interview with an authorized investigator, Applicant stated that the debt arose when he 
purchased an automobile for his daughter in 2003. In 2005, he fell behind in his monthly 
payments on the vehicle, and he stopped making payments in 2006. When he went 
overseas on assignment, he lost track of the debt. The debt appears on Applicant’s 
credit bureau report of July 2011. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he provided a 
letter from the creditor, dated November 12, 2012, reporting that it had received a $75 
post-dated check from him which would be credited against the balance on the account. 
Applicant provided no other evidence of payment, and the debt has not been resolved. 
(Item 2; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant denied a $1,431 debt, in collection status, to a home-improvement 
store. The debt is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i. In his interview with an authorized investigator, 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant stated that the debt was incurred for repairs on his rental property. He told the 
investigator that he thought he had paid the debt, but if he had not paid it, he would 
make arrangements to do so. The debt is alleged on Applicant’s credit bureau reports of 
March 2010 and July 2011, and it remains unresolved. (Item 2; Item 5; Item 8; Item 9.)  
 
    Applicant denied a $192 debt to an energy company in collection status, and he 
claimed he did not recognize the debt. The debt is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.k. The record 
reflects that the debt was reported as delinquent on February 2006, and it is reported on 
his March 2010 credit bureau report. (Item 2; Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed a $2,383 debt, in charged-off status. The debt is 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. He reported that the debt was for a motorcycle repossessed in 
2005 or 2006. He listed the debt on his e-QIP and told the authorized investigator he 
would contact the creditor to arrange for payment. The debt has not been resolved. 
(Item 4; Item 5; Item 8; Item 9.)   
 
 Applicant also admitted a $17,000 debt, in charged-off status, alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.g. He reported that the debt arose when he failed to make payments, as agreed, on 
an automobile. The automobile was repossessed in 2005. He listed the debt on his e-
QIP. In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he was negotiating a 
settlement agreement. The debt has not been satisfied. (Item 4; Item 6.) 
 
 In 2005, Applicant took a truck-driving course. As a part of the training 
agreement, tuition for the course was waived if Applicant completed the six-month 
training period. Applicant told the authorized investigator that he left the course before 
the end of the training period, and he made no payments on the course. He told the 
investigator he would contact the truck-driving school to arrange payment. In response 
to DOHA interrogatories, he stated that he was negotiating a settlement agreement with 
the creditor. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.h. that Applicant owes an educational creditor 
$3,884 on a debt in charged-off status. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the 
debt, which the record identifies as the debt owed for the truck-driving course. (Item 1; 
Item 5.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a copy of a statement, 
dated December 3, 2012, from the educational creditor, which identified the creditor’s 
address. The original debt was identified as $3,809, with additional accrued interest of 
approximately $4,803. A hand-written notation on the statement indicated monthly 
payments of $75, with interest waived if the debt was settled. Applicant’s credit report of 
July 2011 shows the debt as belonging to an educational creditor under a different 
name at the same address as the original creditor. The record contains no evidence that 
the original creditor or the successor creditor has been paid.3  (Item 5; Item 6; Item 8.) 
 
                                            
3 Applicant’s personal financial statement, dated December 3, 2012, identified a debt to the educational 
creditor and listed a $75 monthly payment. (Item 6.) 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant provided a personal financial statement, dated December 3, 2012. He 
listed a net monthly income of $3,718,4 monthly expenses of $1,350, and payments 
made on existing debt of $1,834. His monthly net remainder was $534. The record does 
not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. (Item 6.)        
  
                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
                                            
4 Included in Applicant’s monthly income is $1,100 derived from a rental property. (Item 6.) 
 
6 
 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
                Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial 
obligations@ may raise security concerns. Applicant has a history of delinquent debt 
dating to at least 2003. He has not resolved many of his old debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply to the facts of his case. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied responsibility for five debts, totaling 
approximately $23,355. He provided evidence to corroborate settlement of the 
delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e., and I conclude that allegation for Applicant. 
 
The remaining four debts denied by Applicant appear on his three credit reports. 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), DOHA’s Appeal Board 
 
7 
 
 
explained: “It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations under 
[Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden shifts to applicant 
to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for the debt or that matters in 
mitigation apply.” (Internal citation omitted). 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. In 2003, he purchased an 
automobile for his daughter as a graduation gift. In 2005, he fell behind in his payments, 
and in 2006, he stopped making payments altogether. Additionally, he owes 
deficiencies on an automobile and a motorcycle that were repossessed in 2005 or 2006 
for failure to pay as agreed. He failed to provide documentation to establish that he is no 
longer responsible for those debts. 
 
In 2005, Applicant enrolled in a truck-driving course and training program. He 
understood that tuition would be waived if he completed the training program, but he 
abandoned the course before the training program ended. His debt to the educational 
institution for the training course remains unresolved. 
 
Applicant experienced some financial reversals when the downturn in the 
housing market affected his twelve rental properties. Additionally, he has suffered a 
serious health condition, which has been treated successfully. The record does not 
support a conclusion that these setbacks prevented Applicant from meeting his financial 
obligations. It is worth noting that his delinquencies involving two automobiles, a 
motorcycle, and a truck-driving course occurred before the reversal in the real estate 
industry.   
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s failure to address his delinquencies reflects a lack of good faith in 
resolving his obligations to his creditors. DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained what 
constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option . . . in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 06-14521 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2007) (quoting ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). 
 
Applicant failed to demonstrate a credible good-faith effort to satisfy his 
delinquent debts. There is no evidence that his financial situation is under control. The 
record does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. I conclude that 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply in mitigation in Applicant’s 
case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. His 
 
9 
 
 
financial delinquencies are significant and have existed for several years. While he 
denied six delinquent debts, he provided documentation to corroborate payment of only 
one of them. Despite steady employment, he failed to address and to accept 
responsibility for his debts. His unwillingness to resolve his long-standing delinquencies 
raises concerns about his trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, and ability to protect 
classified information. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.d.:                Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e.:                        For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f. - 1.k.:                         Against Applicant  
 
                                                  Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
