KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Although the Judge acted hastily in dismissing the possibility that Applicant has been
making payments on her IRS debts, there is an adequate basis for the Judge’s ultimate adverse
decision.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-14784.a1
DATE: 01/17/2014
DATE: January 17, 2014
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-14784
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 19, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
2
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On October 18, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether certain findings of fact and
conclusions made by the Judge are supported by record evidence; and (2) whether the Judge’s
decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms
the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision.
The Judge found: Applicant is 43 years old.  The SOR alleges that she is indebted to the IRS
for taxes and penalties on her 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010 personal
income tax returns.  The SOR also alleges that Applicant failed to timely file income tax returns for
the years 2002 to 2011 inclusive, and that she has eight federal liens against her totaling
approximately $94,000.  The SOR also alleges a state tax judgment in the amount of $3,513, several
private collection accounts totaling $125, and a homeowner’s association judgment for $871.
Applicant admits that she did not file her tax returns in a timely fashion and stated that she had no
excuse for not doing so.  She did not request extensions.  She does not dispute that she owes the IRS
taxes, but does dispute the amount the IRS claims she owes for each year.  Applicant asserts she
owes about $25,000 to the IRS.  
Applicant has now filed the tax returns for the years 2002 through 2012.  In 2002 she entered
into an installment agreement but there is no evidence of payments.  The agreement ended in 2005.
Although Applicant has not been able to pay all of her taxes each year, she claims she has made
some payments.  Tax transcripts for years 2002 through 2011 reflect credits to her account, but it
is not clear why the credits were issued.  Three offers in compromise were denied by the IRS.  
Applicant’s husband was unemployed from April 2010 until September 2012.  His job loss
impacted her ability to continue to pay her taxes.  In February 2013, Applicant talked with a tax
service, seeking their assistance to work with the IRS to contest the tax assessments and negotiate
an installment agreement.  She is required to pay the service $4,800.  She has paid $2,800.  The
service will not work on a client’s behalf until 65% of the fee is paid.  Applicant’s plan is to obtain
a loan from her 401(k) account to pay the delinquent taxes.  She wants to know exactly what she
owes the IRS before she agrees to a plan.  The state tax judgment ($3,513) and the homeowner’s
association judgment ($871) are still unpaid.  She recently contacted the state collection agency and
will attempt to negotiate a payment plan.
The Judge concluded: Applicant disputes the amount of tax owed the IRS and she has
attempted to determine the actual amounts she owes.  However, she has not paid consistently during
the years of the delinquencies.  She has been on notice since 2005.  She has earned a significant
salary during those years, despite the unemployment of her husband.  She did not seek the advice
of a tax attorney to help determine what she owed the IRS.  Applicant did not produce any
documentary evidence to show that she has actually paid any additional taxes to the IRS not
1The record contains ten IRS tax transcripts for the years 2002 through 2011, each of which gives a detailed
summary of the status of Applicant’s tax debt for that particular year.  While Applicant states on appeal that she supplied
these documents, this is unclear from the record.  The tax transcripts were entered into the record as Government Exhibits
5 through 14.  There is no indication that Applicant supplied the documents.  They do not appear to have accompanied
her answer to the SOR, nor were they included as attachments to her response to interrogatories (Government Exhibit
2). 
2The Judge discounts the likelihood that the “credit to your account” amounts on the tax transcripts covering
multiple years resulted from Applicant’s payments by speculating that they could be an offset due to a refund for certain
years or a readjustment of the tax assessment.  Given Applicant’s longstanding history of tax delinquencies, the
possibility of an offset due to a tax refund is extremely unlikely, and there is no evidence that the IRS adjusted it’s
assessment of Applicant’s tax liabilities.
3Even when the “credit to your account” figures are factored in, the total amount of the tax delinquencies, as
evidenced by the tax transcripts greatly exceeds the $25,000 amount that Applicant admits she owes.
3
automatically withheld from her salary.  She has smaller debts that she has not paid.  She disputes
the amount owed on these debts, but did not substantiate the basis of the dispute.  She has obtained
the services of a company to help negotiate with the IRS, but has not paid enough of their fee so that
they may begin to work on her behalf.  She stated she would like to pay her delinquent obligations
but has failed to demonstrate any payments on those obligations.  It is not clear that she will resolve
the issue in the near future.  Applicant has not met her burden in this case to mitigate the financial
considerations concern.    
Applicant argues that the Judge erred regarding several related findings of fact centering on
the issue of whether Applicant adequately documented her claims that she consistently made
payments to the IRS toward her ongoing tax delinquencies.  Applicant asserts that she submitted tax
transcripts from the IRS that unmistakably identify that she made payments for each tax year “that
there was a debt.1”  The Judge found that the “credit to your account” entry on the tax transcripts
did not contain enough information on why they were issued and were not sufficient to establish
payments on the part of Applicant.  Applicant has not established harmful error on the part of the
Judge.       
This case involves a significant discrepancy between what the numerous tax documents and
credit reports show Applicant owes the IRS (in excess of $90,000) and what Applicant admits she
owes (approximately $25,000).   The tax transcripts do list credits to Applicant’s account for most
of the years in question, and these do provide some corroboration for Applicant’s testimony that she
has been making payments.  After a review of the record and the Judge’s decision, the Board
concludes that the Judge erred by too hastily dismissing the possibility that Applicant has been
making payments on her IRS debts.2  However, the record supports the Judge’s conclusion that
Applicant’s failure to resolve the dispute over what she owes the IRS indicates an ongoing
delinquent status unlikely to be resolved in the near future.3  The Judge’s adverse decision is also
based on Applicant’s failure to resolve a state tax lien and a substantial homeowner’s association
debt–the amounts of which she also disputes, but provides no basis for the dispute.  In the context
of the Judge’s overall decision, any error by the Judge on the finding that Applicant has not been
making consistent payments on her delinquent taxes is harmless.  Other important components of
4Throughout the hearing, Applicant repeatedly insisted that the IRS figures for her tax delinquencies were
incorrect.  She offered no evidence in support of her claim, other than references to her tax returns, which she completed
herself, and which she asserted were correct.
4
the Judge’s decision are her conclusions that Applicant’s delinquent tax debt has been ongoing since
2003, that she did not file timely tax returns for tax years 2002 to 2010, that she did not ask for
extensions and she has no excuse for not filing timely, that she earned a significant salary during the
delinquent years, despite the unemployment of her husband, and the fact that Applicant has failed
to resolve the dispute over the amount of taxes owed through diligent employment of professional
help.4  These conclusions are reasonably based on record evidence, and provide an adequate basis
for the Judge’s decision.
Applicant argues that her case has been mitigated, based on the fact that she has not ignored
her debt to the IRS, that she is a dedicated employee, and that she has been placed on a payment plan
to rectify her problems with the IRS.  The last assertion contains a matter not included in the case
record.  The Board may not consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
 The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25157 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 4,
2008).  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
A review of the Judge’s decision reveals that, regarding Guideline F, the Judge listed the
potentially applicable mitigating conditions and then discussed several components of those factors
in her analysis.  The Judge offered a narrative explanation as to why the disqualifying conduct under
Guideline F was not fully mitigated.  Applicant has not demonstrated that the Judge erred when she
weighed the mitigating evidence mitigating against the seriousness of the disqualifying conduct. 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
5
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                  
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; James E. Moody                    
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
