 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13878 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct), but failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 20, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 24, 2013, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 8, 2013, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated September 5, 2013, was 
provided to him by letter dated September 10, 2013. Applicant received the 
FORM on September 23, 2013. He was given 30 days to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit 
any information within the 30 days after receipt of copy of the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on November 25, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations under Guideline F, SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.q, as well as two allegations under Guideline E, SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 
2.b. He denied the third allegation under Guideline E, SOR ¶ 2.c. After a thorough 
review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old product support representative, who has worked 
for a defense contractor since January 2011. He seeks a security clearance in 
conjunction with his current employment. He was previously granted a secret 
security clearance, when he enlisted in the Air Force Reserve in 2009. (Items 4 
and 8.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 2000. He married in July 
2005, and has a 19-year-old stepson and a 6-year-old son. Applicant has been 
continuously affiliated with the Air Force Reserve since April 2009, and as a result 
of that affiliation, has maintained a security clearance since then. (Items 4 and 8.) 
 
Financial Considerations   
 
In February 2013, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
interviewed Applicant about his background and delinquent debts listed on his 
credit report. During that interview, he discussed many accounts, but did not 
recognize several debts. Applicant told the investigator he intended to research 
those debts for which he had no knowledge and otherwise resolve his debts. He 
understood the importance of resolving his credit problems. Applicant attributed 
the delinquent debts to being unemployed from September 2008 to September 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2009, his misplaced reliance on his wife to pay their bills, and his own 
irresponsibility. (Item 8.) 
 
According to Applicant’s credit reports, dated December 19, 2012, and 
April 9, 2013, his delinquent debts began accumulating in 2009 and continued into 
2013. Based on those credit reports, the SOR alleged 17 delinquent debts 
exceeding over $50,000, of which $19,968 of that amount is for delinquent federal 
taxes and $11,732 for state taxes. The debts include two state tax liens filed 
against Applicant in 2009 in the amounts of $6,825 and $1,879, credit card debts, 
consumer loans, telephone bills, medical debts, and a student loan. (Items 5 and 
6, SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.p and 1.q.)  
 
Applicant states that he has contacted his state department of revenue to 
set up payment arrangements starting in July 2013 for the two state tax liens. He 
also asserts that he has made arrangements to pay $265 per month to the U.S. 
Treasury until his tax debt is paid in full. Applicant further explained in his SOR 
answer that he has paid some of the delinquent debts, and has made payment 
arrangements for others. The only documentation that Applicant provided to 
substantiate his claims of payment were some debits from his checking account 
reflecting payments to the U.S. Treasury, and a few other creditors. It is unclear 
what the current status of his SOR debts are and whether they are paid or being 
paid. (Items 3, 7, and 8.) 
 
Applicant provided a copy of his May 2013 budget. He claims his net 
monthly income is $8,961, and he has a net remainder of $4,448 after paying 
monthly expenses and payments. (Item 7.) It is unclear why he would have such a 
substantial net monthly remainder and so many unpaid debts. Applicant has not 
provided evidence of credit counseling or debt consolidation services. (Item 8.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Three separate allegations are alleged under this concern -- that he failed 
to file his federal tax returns from 2006 to 2008, that he failed to file his state tax 
returns from 2008 to 2011, and that he deliberately failed to disclose his federal 
and state tax debts and failed to file federal and state tax returns on his July 2011 
e-QIP. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a - 2.c.) As noted, he admitted the allegations of failure to file 
federal and state tax returns, but denied deliberate falsification. 
 
His explanation for failing to file his federal and state income tax returns 
was that he relied on his wife to file tax returns. (Item 8.) I do not find this 
explanation persuasive given the importance of filing federal and state returns. 
While he may have “relied” on his wife, it does not relieve him of his individual 
responsibility to jointly file and pay his federal and state taxes. However having 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
said this, failure to file federal or state income taxes is more appropriately pled 
under Guideline F, which lists a specific disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 19: 
“(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
fraudulent filing of the same.”  This pleading issue is further discussed in the 
Analysis section, infra. 
 
However, with regard to SOR ¶ 2.c, this is the only allegation of the 20 
allegations that Applicant denied. In reviewing Applicant’s February 2013 OPM 
interview, I note that he failed to list several other items such as a judgment, his 
delinquent accounts, two previous addresses, a 2011 letter of counseling, two 
previous supervisors, and middle names for his parents. Applicant explained that 
all of these discrepancies were oversights. It is clear that he did not exercise due 
diligence in completing his July 2011 e-QIP, to include important and less 
important information. Given his 19 admissions and willingness to “own up” to his 
other mistakes in his SOR answer, I accept his oversight explanation that he did 
not deliberately fail to list these federal and state income taxes and federal and 
state tax debts on his e-QIP. (Item 8.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with 
respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. 
He submitted no character references describing his judgment, morality, 
trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his demeanor or 
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”1 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified 
information. Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a 
disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion for 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case 
No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).2 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
  
                                                          
1
 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a 
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary 
evidence in the record.” ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ 
E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing 
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being 
supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 
(1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
2 “
The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable 
and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent 
provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion 
under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts 
to generate funds. 
 
Since at least 2009 Applicant has been accumulating debts that he has 
been unable or unwilling to satisfy. Included among those debts are tax debts 
owed to the U.S. Government as well as his state tax authority.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s 
history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his OPM interview, 
and in his SOR answer.  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,3 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. However, partial 
application of the mitigating condition in ¶ 20(b) is warranted as a result of 
Applicant’s unemployment from September 2008 to September 2009. To receive 
full credit under this mitigating condition, the Applicant must demonstrate that he 
also “acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Admittedly, unemployment can 
be expected to adversely affect one’s ability to remain financially afloat. There is 
no evidence in the record to suggest that Applicant remained in contact with his 
creditors in any meaningful way. Furthermore, Applicant’s unemployment was 
over four years ago and there is no persuasive evidence in the record that he has 
shown a reasonable good-faith effort to resolve his debts.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process.  
 
                                                          
3
  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-
22173 at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts 
are considered as a whole. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Government’s evidence does not establish that Applicant deliberately 
falsified his July 2011 e-QIP. As noted, Applicant was forthcoming in admitting 
culpability in 19 out of 20 allegations and it is clear from the record that he was 
less than attentive in completing his e-QIP. While he should have shown greater 
diligence in accurately completing a document as important as an e-QIP, his 
negligence does not establish that he was attempting to conceal his financial 
situation from the Government. Based on Applicant’s denial and explanation, I find 
that Applicant did not deliberately attempt to deceive the Government or security 
officials on his security clearance application.  
 
The two allegations under SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b of failing to file federal and 
state income tax returns raise three potentially disqualifying conditions under AG 
¶ 16 as follows: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports 
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to 
consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . . ; and  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may 
affect the person's personal, professional, or community standing, 
or (2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal 
in that country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
States and may serve as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the 
foreign security or intelligence service or other group. 
 
A failure to file tax returns is more appropriately alleged as a disqualifying 
condition under Guideline F, AG ¶ 19: “(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” The poor 
judgment encompassed in failure to file tax returns when required is also 
encompassed under the “Concern” in AG ¶ 15, and under AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 
16(e).    
 
It is unclear why Applicant’s failure to file federal and state income was not 
alleged under Guideline F when Guideline F has a specific provision addressing 
that concern. What is clear is that failing to file federal and state incomes taxes is 
explicitly covered under Guideline F.  As indicated in the previous section, the 
primary security concern is caused by Applicant’s financial irresponsibility and not 
by his lack of integrity or that he was attempting to defraud the federal or state tax 
authorities. In light of my finding against Applicant under Guideline F, and the 
clear focus of this case being on financial matters, there is no need to utilize the 
general disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), or 16(e), and I find in 
Applicant’s favor for SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. Additionally, for reasons discussed 
above, I also find in Applicant’s favor for SOR 2.c. Having reached that 
conclusion, there is no need to discuss disqualifying or mitigating conditions under 
this concern. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did 
not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. In reaching this conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due 
consideration and that analysis does not support a favorable decision. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:  For Applicant 
  
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
