 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13336 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 In an undated response to the SOR Appellant requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 20, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
30, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 3, 2013. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and they were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified. He did not offer any exhibits. The record was held open 
until December 26, 2013, to provide Applicant the opportunity to present exhibits, which 
he did. They were marked AE A and B and admitted into evidence without objection.1 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 11, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant responded to the allegations in the SOR with explanations, but did not 
admit or deny each one. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He is a college graduate. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 2005 and a master’s degree in 2010. He served in the Marine Corps from 
1989 to 1991 until he was honorably discharged due to a medical condition. He served 
in the Army National Guard from 1998 to 2004 and was deployed to Iraq from February 
2002 to February 2003. He received an honorable discharge in 2004. He has been 
married twice. His first marriage ended in divorce in 2003 after eight years. He has a 15-
year-old son from the marriage. He remarried in 2006 and has a three-year-old son and 
two stepchildren, ages 22 and 12.2 
 
 From January 2004 to January 2005, Applicant attended college. Applicant was 
employed with a state government from April 2006 to September 2010. He 
unexpectedly lost this well-paying job when he was not reappointed to the position. 
Applicant found another job in September 2010, but it required that he move to a 
different state. He did so, but his family remained, and he was required to maintain two 
residences. Although the job was a temporary position, he believed it would turn into a 
permanent one. It did not and ended in May 2011. Applicant found a new job in June 
2011, but during the training period of four weeks he was only paid minimum wage. He 
was still separated from his family, and in August 2012, he transferred back to the state 
where his family was living.3  
 
After losing his well-paying job, Applicant began to experience financial 
problems. He exhausted his savings in an attempt to stay current on his debts. In May 
2013, his wife was unable to work when she was injured at her job. His family relied on 
her income to pay the bills. She is currently not working.4  
 
Applicant also attributed his financial problems to his divorce in 2004. While he 
was serving in Iraq his first wife did not maintain his finances. When he returned he 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibits I and II are Department Counsel’s memoranda. 
 
2 Tr.22, 24, 78-81, 98. 
 
3 Tr. 23-31, 76-78. 
 
4 Tr. 31-33. 
 
3 
 
 
realized she had written checks beyond his ability to pay. Applicant was also a full-time 
college student when he returned to civilian life. He received educational benefits from 
the federal government to help pay for school, but incurred additional debts. He 
estimated he has about $85,000 in student loans. He is still in college earning another 
degree so the loans are not yet due.5  
 
There are four debts alleged in the SOR. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($3,048) is a 
charged-off credit card debt. Applicant received a settlement offer from the company 
and has paid the settlement in full. He provided proof of his payment.6  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($876) is a store credit card account that was charged-off. 
Applicant provided proof that he paid made a final payment in April 2013 and the 
account was paid is full.7 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($7,027) is a charged-off credit card account. Applicant 
settled the account for $2,460. He provided proof that he completed the settlement 
payments in April 2013.8 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($57,003) is a bank loan that was charged-off. Applicant 
obtained this loan in 2009. He consolidated his debts at the time and used this loan to 
make one payment. He was current on his payments until September 2010 when he 
lost his well-paying job. He made an agreement with the creditor in March 2013 to pay 
$250 a month on the debt. He fell behind for a couple months, but he provided proof 
that he is current on his payments and has arranged an automatic withdrawal from his 
account to make future payments.9  
 
 Applicant stated that he has accepted a teaching position and will begin to 
receive income from it in December 2013, which will put him in a better financial 
position.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
5 Tr. 21, 42-43, 45-51. 
 
6 Tr. 19, 90; AE A; Answer to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. 87-88; Answer to SOR. 
 
8 Tr. 87; Answer to SOR. 
 
9 Tr. 34-41, 44, 52-58, 60; AE B; Answer to SOR. 
 
10 Tr. 60-65. 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had four delinquent debts that were unpaid or unresolved. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because Applicant’s is still resolving his largest 
debt. Applicant attributed his history of financial problems to his ex-wife mismanaging 
his finances while he was deployed, the loss of a well-paying job, and having to 
maintain two households for a period of time. In addition, his wife was unable to work in 
May 2013, which exacerbated his financial difficulties. These things were beyond his 
control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
 
6 
 
 
under the circumstances. Applicant paid or settled three of the delinquent debts alleged 
in the SOR. His largest debt is a loan he used to consolidate his other debts. He has an 
agreement with the creditor to pay $250 a month. He began making payments in March 
2013 and is up-to-date with his payments. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant paid or settled three of the debts alleged in the SOR. He is making 
payments on the fourth debt. There is no evidence he has received financial counseling, 
but there are clear indications his financial problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 20 (c) and 
20(d) apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
11 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He had financial problems when he returned from 
deployment in 2003 and due to his divorce in 2004. He was steadily employed with a 
well-paying job from 2006 to 2010. When he lost this job unexpectedly, he again 
experienced financial difficulties. He paid three of the debts alleged in the SOR. The 
remaining debt is a loan that he used to consolidate his other debts. He has a payment 
agreement with the creditor of his fourth debt and is making payments. His finances are 
not a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
                                                          
11  
 
7 
 
 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
