KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: The Appeal Board has not adopted a “bright-line” rule for what constitutes recent
conduct.  Rather, this is a matter for the Judge to evaluate in light of the record as a whole. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 11-12165.a1
DATE: 01/29/2014
DATE: January 29, 2014
In Re:
---------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-12165
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 7, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  The Government requested a
hearing.  On November 6, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall Jr. denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether certain statements of fact by the
Judge were erroneous; and (2) whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
2
law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance
decision. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is 33 years old.  He first received
a security clearance in 2004.  He is currently pursuing a bachelor’s degree.  Applicant was married
in 2010.  He and his wife have an infant child, and he is also the father of an eight-year-old child.
Applicant used marijuana about 15 times between January 1999 and August 2000 when he was in
college.  He was 19 years old and under the influence of a college roommate.  The drug did not do
much for him and he only used it socially.  By late 2000, Applicant asked the roommate to move out
and Applicant stopped using the drug.  At Applicant’s bachelor party in June 2010, a former friend
showed up with marijuana.  Applicant knew he should not use the drug because he had a security
clearance and because it was illegal.  Despite a decade of abstinence, he accepted the drug because
of a lack of judgment.  Between New Year’s Eve of 2010 and New Year’s morning of 2011,
Applicant was outside of a home where a holiday party was underway.  He was with about six other
people when he was again offered marijuana.  Without thinking, he used the drug a second time. 
Applicant has not had any drug counseling.  He stated that he was inebriated during both his
2010 and 2011 lapses.  He attributed his bachelor party lapse to not being in the best state of mind.
He partly attributed his New Year’s lapse to being with some of the same people in the same type
of gathering.  He knew he should decline the offer of marijuana, but cannot explain why he accepted
it.  He stresses that he no longer associates with those individuals or with those who use drugs.  He
also stresses that he has changed his environment and now avoids places where drugs may be
available.  He prefers instead to spend time with his family at home and at work.  He emphasizes
his new commitments as a husband and father, and his mature commitment as a responsible
professional.  In addition, after the hearing, Applicant submitted a Statement of Intent not to use
illegal drugs in the future.  Applicant offered three reference letters and two witnesses who praise
his capabilities, integrity, judgment, and character.  Applicant’s wife credibly testified that he has
made positive efforts to make sure he never again is tempted by marijuana.  Personally, she does not
use drugs, notes that they are illegal, and has little patience for their use.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s admissions regarding marijuana
use are sufficient to raise security concerns.  With disqualifying conditions thus raised, the burden
shifts to Applicant to mitigate those concerns.  Applicant stresses that he has not handled classified
material.  That is not the point.  The point is that in 2004, he was entrusted with a security clearance
based on certain criteria and conditions.  Such conditions included his remaining abstinent from both
illegal drugs and illegal activity while maintaining the security clearance.  It similarly obligated him
to report any transgressions as soon as practicable.  
By the time he received a security clearance in 2004, the earlier period of youthful
indiscretion regarding marijuana use was behind Applicant.  What breathed new life into such old
security concerns, however, was Applicant’s use of marijuana at his June 2011 bachelor party and
a January 1, 2011 New Year’s day party.  While the former incident is sufficient to move drug
involvement security concerns forward into the recent past, the latter incident increases the
frequency of Applicant’s lapses, doubles the instances at issue, and makes the conduct even more
1 Applicant asserts that the Judge asked him to submit a letter of intent not to use controlled substances in the
future and that he promptly did so.  Applicant’s description of the dialogue during the hearing, although not precisely
accurate, is not unreasonable either.  That discussion could arguably be interpreted as the Judge advising the Applicant.
The Board has previously noted that “[g]iving advice to Applicant on what to do to qualify for a security clearance would
be inconsistent with the Board’s obligation to conduct itself in a fair and impartial manner,” and “the Board cannot and
will not advise Applicant about what action or actions he can or should take.”  See ISCR Case No. 03-01578 at 4 (App.
Bd. May 27, 2004.  However, the Board has also noted “that it does not have supervisory jurisdiction or authority over
the conduct of Department Counsel or Hearing Office Administrative Judges.”  See ISCR Case No. 02-04344 at 3 (App.
Bd. Sep. 15, 2003).  On this record, the Board concludes that Applicant has not raised an issue within the Appeal Board’s
jurisdiction.
3
recent.  Moreover, given the circumstances, the repeated lapses cast serious doubts on Applicant’s
trustworthiness and judgment.  Under these facts, a period of less than three years of abstinence is
insufficient to demonstrate the level of commitment to abstinence Applicant previously
demonstrated until June 2010, and falls short of demonstrating a renewed commitment to remaining
drug-free.  Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the drug involvement
guideline. 
Applicant asserts that the Judge’s decision erroneously speaks to Applicant’s more recent
drug use being over a period of two years, from 2010 to 2011.  He states that the usage was actually
twice over a period of six months, in June 2010 and again on New Year’s Eve 2010.  He also states
that to say the use was over a period of two years is to misrepresent time line of usage and makes
the drug use appear as though it was much more extensive and over a more significant period of time
than it actually was.  Applicant’s argument lacks merit.  After a review of the Judge’s decision, the
Board concludes that at no time did the Judge find, or even imply, that Applicant’s drug use was
over a full two-year period of time.  Rather, the Judge’s findings and his discussion of the facts in
the Analysis portion of his decision specifically mention that there was one instance of marijuana
use in June 2010, and a second instance on New Year’s Eve 2010.  No other incidents are discussed
or implied.
Applicant points out that the Judge stated he used marijuana in June 2011, which is a full
year off from the date of actual use, which was June 2010.  Applicant is correct in that, during a
discussion of the facts in the Analysis section, the Judge does make one reference to marijuana use
in June 2011. However, the Board does not consider portions, passages, or words used in a decision
in isolation.  Rather, the Board considers the Judge’s decision in its entirety to discern what the
Judge found and concluded.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-22311 at 4 (App. Bd., Apr. 4, 2003).   A
review of the decision indicates that his single reference to a June 2011 instance of marijuana use
is a typographical error.  The Judge correctly refers to the June 2010 date four times elsewhere in
the decision, and there is no indication that the single error influenced the Judge in his mitigation
analysis relating to the passage of time since Applicant’s last use.
Applicant lists several factors in mitigation that he argues support a favorable result in his
case, including the passage of three years since the last incident, his declaration of intent never to
use drugs again,1 his good character and position as a family man and church member, and his career
position.  He states that his use of marijuana was not reflective of the person he is when compared
4
to these favorable attributes.  Applicant’s argument concerning mitigation does not establish error
on the part of the Judge.
Regarding the passage of time since Applicant’s last involvement with marijuana, the Board
has declined to adopt any “bright-line” definition for what constitutes “recent” conduct, or the lack
thereof.  Rather, the Board has indicated the matter requires a Judge to evaluate the record evidence
as a whole and reach a reasonable conclusion as to the recency of an applicant’s conduct for
purposes of mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004).  In this
case, the Judge concluded that the passage of less than three years since Applicant’s drug
involvement was insufficient to establish a solid commitment to remain drug-free and did not serve
to mitigate security concerns.  This conclusion is reasonably supported by the record evidence.  
 As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
5
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
