 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
         ----------------- )             Case No. 11-10740 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns related to Guideline F. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On May 18, 2011, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application. On 
February 14, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an answer dated March 18, 2013, Applicant admitted 10 of the 11 debts 
reflected in allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.k, but generally disputed the balances noted. (FORM, 
Item 4) She also requested a decision without a personal hearing. Counsel for DOD 
prepared a Form of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine attachments to support 
the Government’s position in this case. Applicant timely responded to the FORM with a 
letter and two attachments. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned 
the case to me on November 13, 2013. I thoroughly reviewed the FORM and other case 
 
 
 
 
2 
file materials. Based on the materials submitted, I find that Applicant failed to meet her 
burden in mitigating financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old technical planning manager who has worked for the 
same defense contractor since September 2005. She served in the United States Army 
for three years, from August 1978 to July 1981. Soon thereafter, she earned a diploma 
in industrial electronics from a vocational school. Applicant has been continuously 
employed without any notable interruption since at least the late 1990s. She has a 
domestic partner with whom she has cohabitated since 2010. Applicant has no children. 
In completing her 2011 Security Clearance Application, Applicant disclosed some 
delinquent accounts under the section regarding personal finances. The SOR alleges 
11 debts, amounting to approximately $40,000. As discussed below, Applicant denies 
the debt noted at ¶ 1.c, which is alleged to represent an obligation of about $11,433. 
 
 The debts noted in the SOR, as set forth in her January 2013 and August 2012 
credit reports, as well as her personal financial statement, are as follows:  
 
1.a - Medical Collection - $104 - Applicant admits this debt was owed, but wrote that it 
has been paid. No documentary evidence of its satisfaction, however, was offered. 
 
1.b - Collection - $3,282 - Applicant admits that this debt is owed, but wrote that the 
correct balance was $3,272.93. No explanation is provided regarding this discrepancy.  
 
1.c - Collection - $11,433 - Applicant denies this allegation. However, she introduced no 
documentation showing correspondence with the creditor, no repayment plan, or other 
evidence indicating that the obligation was satisfied or successfully disputed. 
 
1.d - Medical Collection - $851 - Applicant admits this debt is owed. There is no 
evidence indicating she has worked with her creditor on this obligation. 
 
1.e - Charged-Off Account - $8,994 - Applicant admits that this debt is owed. There is 
no evidence indicating she has worked with her creditor on this obligation. 
 
1.f - Charged-Off Account - $327 - Applicant admits that this debt is owed. There is no 
evidence indicating she has worked with her creditor on this obligation. 
 
1.g - Charged-Off Account - $2,955 - Applicant admits that this debt is owed. In her 
response to the FORM, Applicant offered an October 17, 2013, letter from the creditor 
indicating that a postdated payment in the amount of $955 would be processed on 
October 25, 2013, and applied toward a repayment plan. There is no evidence showing 
this initial payment was transacted.  
 
1.h - Charged-Off Account - $9,267 - Applicant admits that this debt is owed. In her 
answer to the SOR, she wrote “went to mediation, payment plan in progress.” In 
 
 
 
 
3 
response to the FORM, Applicant introduced a copy of a Settlement Agreement and 
Release indicating the debt had been settled for $4,040 under a payment plan. The plan 
was to include an initial payment of $2,000 by January 21, 2013, followed by monthly 
payments of $170. Applicant wrote in her cover letter to her response to the FORM that 
she had timely made payments on the plan and that her payments were to be 
completed by December 2013. However, the evidence submitted does not substantiate 
this claim or document her payments. 
 
1.i - Charged-Off Account - $3,004 - Applicant admits that this debt is owed. It is unclear 
whether it is the same debt as the obligation set forth in 1.b. There is no evidence 
indicating she has attempted to address this debt. 
 
1.j - Telecommunication Collection - $139 - Applicant admits that this debt was owed, 
but wrote that it has been paid. There is no evidence, however, showing that this debt 
has been satisfied. 
 
1.k - Telecommunication Collection - $354 - Applicant admits that this debt was owed, 
but wrote that it has been paid. There is no evidence, however, showing that this debt 
has been satisfied. 
 
 Applicant’s November 2012 personal financial statement reflects a net monthly 
remainder of $3,758.99. In her response to the SOR, she characterized her 
delinquencies as “unacceptable and careless” and wrote that she aimed to have her 
debts resolved in 2014. (FORM, Item 4, at 1) Her explanation for how her debts were 
created is unclear. In her March 16, 2013, cover letter accompanying her response to 
the SOR (FORM, Item 4, at 1), she wrote: 
 
I admit to being lazy and procrastinating. . . . In 2008, my family situation 
changed such that I took on additional responsibilities as well as a new 
partner. My financial health took a downturn during that time period and 
I’ve simply not recovered.   
 
 There is no documentary evidence indicating Applicant received financial 
counseling to help her address her finances. Her approach or plan for addressing her 
outstanding debts remains unclear. Applicant’s most resent assessment of how she has 
addressed her debts was stated thusly: “[m]y last action was to write to each creditor 
and ask for them to itemize and legitimize their claims prior to entering in to a 
repayment agreement with them. Some creditors have responded and some have not. It 
is my express desire to have these creditors paid by the end of 2014. . . .” (FORM, Item 
4, at 1). Applicant submitted no documentation demonstrating the efforts alleged. 
 
In her October 22, 2013, response to the FORM, Applicant wrote she had made 
progress “mending” her credit and “repaying” her debts.  She also wrote that she was 
working on negotiating payment plans on the debts noted at ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.i. 
No documented evidence of such efforts was introduced. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts amounting to about $40,000. Applicant admits responsibility 
for the majority of the debts at issue. Such facts are sufficient to invoke two of the 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns [AG ¶ 
20(a) - AG ¶ 20(e)]. In this case, the debts at issue are multiple in number and remain 
largely unaddressed, despite a net monthly remainder of approximately $3,750. So few 
facts about these debts and how Applicant has tried to approach them are known. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 20(a) [the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment] does not apply.  
 
Moreover, Applicant cites to carelessness, laziness, and procrastination for her 
delay in addressing her delinquent debts; she only vaguely attributes the creation of her 
obligations to unidentified changes in her home life in 2008 that led to financial 
difficulties. Without more specificity regarding the creation of these delinquent debts and 
her efforts to address them, AG ¶ 20(b) [the conditions that resulted in the financial 
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances] does not apply. Further, there is 
no evidence that Applicant has received financial counseling or made notable progress 
in addressing her multiple debts. Consequently, AG ¶ 20(c) [the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control] does not apply. 
 
 There appears to be some progress on at least two debts in terms of having 
negotiated repayment plans. There is insufficient documentary evidence, however, 
showing that Applicant has successfully commenced payments on those plans and also 
established a significant record of timely and consistent payments on those plans. 
Further, regarding those obligations she claimed to have been paid, the record lacks 
 
 
 
 
6 
documentation confirming her assertions. Given these considerations, it cannot be 
discerned whether AG ¶ 20(d) [the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts] applies. Finally, to the extent Applicant 
admits all but one of the SOR allegations and provided no documentary evidence of 
formally disputing any of the accounts at issue, AG ¶ 20(e) [the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue] does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
limited facts and circumstances noted in this case. I incorporate my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, others may have warranted additional comment. 
  
Applicant is a 53-year-old technical planning manager who has worked for the 
same defense contractor since September 2005. From 1978 to 1981, she served in the 
United States Army. She then earned a diploma in industrial electronics from a 
vocational school. Applicant has been continuously employed without any notable 
periods of unemployment or underemployment since the late 1990s. She is domiciled 
with a domestic partner and has no children. Applicant admits the vast majority of the 
debts at issue. She cites to procrastination for her failure to address debts which first 
began accumulating during undefined life changes from circa 2008.  
 
The main concern in this case is related to 11 delinquent debts. How these debts 
were created remains as unclear as how they became delinquent. The evidence 
showing Applicant’s attempts to address these debts is scant. The balance on one 
obligation seems to have been lowered subject to a settlement agreement, but there is 
no evidence reflecting what, if any, progress has been made on that plan. Another 
repayment plan is referenced. However, there is insufficient documentation to show that 
a meaningful record of timely and regular payments on that plan has been made. The 
rest of the delinquent accounts at issue lack evidence either reflecting the Applicant’s 
attempts to address them or showing their current status. In short, Applicant’s written 
narrative and submissions fail to establish that she has devised and successfully 
implemented a reasonable plan for addressing her delinquent debts – despite a 
significant monthly net remainder of slightly over $3,750.  Finally, while there is no 
reason to doubt Applicant’s loyalty or honesty, her submissions are insufficient to 
 
 
 
 
7 
mitigate the security concerns at issue. Based on the limited materials in the case file, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to carry her burden in this matter.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
