 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 11-14952   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Since late 2006 Applicant accumulated six delinquent debts totaling over 
$63,000. At this time he has paid $11,000 toward one debt.  The other five debts remain 
unpaid or unresolved. He failed to demonstrate that he is reliable in addressing his 
financial delinquencies. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On August 1, 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On August 7, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On August 30, 2013, Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR requesting that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 3.) On October 21, 2013, a complete copy of a File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing seven Items, was mailed to Applicant and afforded him an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on October 28, 2013, and returned the receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). He did not provide additional information in response to the FORM 
within the 30-day period. I received the case assignment on December 19, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his responses to the SOR, Applicant denied all six allegations pertaining to 
delinquent debts. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He is married to his second wife with whom he has one 
child. He has three children from his first marriage. In May 1997 he earned a bachelor’s 
degree in psychology. Since May 2010 he has worked as a protective security officer for 
defense contractors. From 2001 to the present, he has also been working in the real 
estate field.  Sometime toward the end of 2007, he terminated a real estate business 
partnership, resulting in debt and other related issues. From 1988 to 2001, he worked 
as a police officer. (Item 4.) 
 
  In September 2011 a security investigator interviewed Applicant about his 
background and delinquent debts listed on a current credit bureau report (CBR). During 
that interview, Applicant discussed the accounts, subsequently alleged in the SOR, 
along with other debts. He indicated that many accounts became delinquent in 2007 
after his business partnership failed. He said that some creditors would not accept 
payments because the debts were charged off. He acknowledged that he did not have 
enough money to pay the debts. (Item 7.) On June 20, 2013, he completed a set of 
interrogatories relating to ten delinquent debts, six of which are included in the August 
2013 SOR. He noted that the civil statute of limitations for four of the six debts had 
expired in 2010, and that they would be removed from his credit history in late 2013. 
(Item 7.) 
 
 According to CBRs, dated August 2011 and February 2013, Applicant’s 
delinquent debts began accumulating in late 2006 and into 2007. Based on those 
CBRs, the SOR alleged six delinquent debts totaling $63,295. The status of each debt 
is as follows: 
 
 1. The 2007 judgment listed in ¶ 1.a for $21,796 is being resolved with monthly 
payments of $300. As of June 2013 the balance was $10,812.  (Items 3, 7.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 2.  The $84 debt listed in ¶ 1.b is owed to a cellular company, and remains 
unpaid or unresolved. Applicant asserted that he did not intend to pay the debt because 
the company illegally changed his service. (Items 3, 7.) 
  
 3.  The $13,579 debt listed in ¶ 1.c is owed to a bank for a credit card Applicant 
used for his failed business. Applicant did not contest the underlying debt. However, he 
asserted that he did not intend to pay the debt because the creditor documented it as a 
loss on its ledger, and the collection agency has no evidence of ownership of the debt. 
He said the civil statute of limitations ran in 2010. He disputed the debt with the credit 
reporting bureaus. In his Answer he wrote, “This debt will be automatically removed 
from my credit report in three months and will effectively cease to exist.” He failed to 
provide documentation to support his claim. It remains unpaid or unresolved. (Items 3, 
7.)  
 
 4. The $10,986 debt listed in ¶ 1.d is owed to a department store. Applicant used 
the account for his failed business. Applicant did not contest the underlying debt. 
However, he asserted that he did not intend to pay the debt because the creditor 
documented it as a loss on its ledger, and the collection agency has no evidence of 
ownership of the debt. He said the civil statute of limitations ran in 2010. He disputed 
the debt with the credit reporting bureaus. In his Answer he wrote. “This debt will be 
automatically removed from my credit report in three months and will effectively cease 
to exist.” It remains unpaid or unresolved. (Items 3, 7.) 
 
 5. The $12,760 debt listed in ¶ 1.e is owed to a financing company. Applicant 
used the account for his failed business. Applicant did not contest the underlying debt. 
However, he asserted that he did not intend to pay the debt because the creditor 
documented it as a loss on its ledger, and the collection agency has no evidence of 
ownership of the debt. He said the civil statute of limitations ran in 2010. He disputed 
the debt with the credit reporting bureaus. In his Answer he wrote. “This debt will be 
automatically removed from my credit report in three months and will effectively cease 
to exist.” It remains unpaid or unresolved. (Items 3, 7.) 
 
 6. The $4,090 debt listed in ¶ 1.f is owed to a credit card company. Applicant 
used the account for his failed business. Applicant did not contest the underlying debt. 
However, he asserted that he did not intend to pay the debt because the creditor 
documented it as a loss on its ledger, and the collection agency has no evidence of 
ownership of the debt. He said the civil statute of limitations ran in 2010. He disputed 
the debt with the credit reporting bureaus. In his Answer he wrote. “This debt will be 
automatically removed from my credit report in four months and will effectively cease to 
exist.” It remains unpaid or unresolved. (Items 3, 7.) 
 
 To date, Applicant has resolved $10,986 of the $63,295 of SOR-listed delinquent 
debts. He has no intention to resolve the remaining $52,309 and denies responsibility 
for the debt. He submitted his June 2013 household budget. He and his wife have a net 
monthly income of $3,166 and expenses of $1,065, including $150 payments for child 
 
 
4 
 
 
support. He also pays $1,645 toward four debts, which include two student loans, one 
SOR-listed debt, and a car loan. He has approximately $456 remaining at the end of the 
month. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted 
no character references describing his judgment, morality, trustworthiness, integrity, or 
reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person 
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Since late 2006 Applicant has been accumulating delinquent debts that he has 
been unable or unwilling to satisfy. The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s six delinquent debts began accumulating in late 2006. He is making 
payments toward the resolution of one debt. His other five debts remain unresolved. He 
failed to demonstrate that such problems are unlikely to continue, recur, or be resolved, 
calling into question his reliability and trustworthiness. The evidence does not support 
the application of AG ¶ 20(a). 
  
 Applicant provided some evidence that his delinquent debts arose because he 
experienced problems related to a partnership termination in late 2006 and into 2007. 
That may have been a circumstance beyond his control. However, he did not provide 
evidence that he attempted to responsibly address or manage the delinquent debts as 
they were accumulating after the partnership termination, a factor that must be 
considered in establishing mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Thus, this mitigating condition 
has little application.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in credit or financial 
counseling. He acknowledged that five of the six SOR-listed delinquent debts, totaling 
$52,309, remain unresolved. Hence, AG ¶ 20(c) has no application, as there are not 
clear indications that his financial problems, specifically the SOR-listed debts, are under 
control. Other than one debt, Applicant did not provide evidence that he made a good-
faith effort to resolve the other five debts as required under AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
 Although Applicant disputed the delinquent debts through the credit reporting 
agencies some time ago, there is no evidence that Applicant’s disputes were successful 
and resulted in the removal of the debt from his credit history. AG ¶ 20(e) has no 
application.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 46-year-old 
man, who began working for a defense contractor in May 2010. In August 2011 he 
completed a SF-86. In September 2011 he discussed delinquent accounts with a 
security investigator. In June 2013 he submitted interrogatories essentially indicating 
that he was no longer responsible for the debts and that they were legally 
unenforceable. In his August 2013 Answer he denied financial responsibility for the five 
debts that remained unaddressed. While Applicant may have a legal basis to challenge 
the delinquent debts, his refusal to manage or address $52,000 of delinquent debts over 
the past several years raises questions about his trustworthiness, reliability, and 
judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant  
 Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.f:   Against Applicant  
    
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
