 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10437 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 24, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 12, 2013, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s 
written case was submitted on October 22, 2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
 
2 
 
Applicant received the FORM on December 16, 2013. She responded with documents 
that were marked Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A through E. The case was assigned to me 
on January 29, 2014. The Government exhibits included in the FORM (GE 1-5) and AE 
A through E are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2010. She seeks to retain her security clearance, which she 
has held since 2008. She has a bachelor’s degree and additional education, but as of 
2012, she had not obtained a post-graduate degree. She is engaged to be married. She 
does not have any children.1   
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana in 2005. She described it as a one-time occurrence 
with friends from college. She denies any illegal drug use since that incident.2   
 
 Applicant submitted Questionnaires for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
November 2008 and May 2012. Both SF 86s required her to disclose any illegal drug 
use within the previous seven years. She did not disclose her 2005 marijuana use on 
either SF 86. She was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in July 2012. Her marijuana use was not discussed. In March 
2013, she revealed her marijuana use in response to a DOHA interrogatory request that 
stated: “Records indicate that you used marijuana in the past. Please provide the 
approximate dates and frequency of use below.”3   
 
 Applicant denied that she deliberately failed to disclose her marijuana use on the 
two SF 86s. She wrote that “[t]he incident was so long ago that I blocked it or have 
forgotten about it.”4 Applicant’s denial lacks credibility. The first SF 86 was submitted 
less than four years after her marijuana use. I cannot accept that a woman of 
Applicant’s education would simply forget that she smoked marijuana. I find that she 
intentionally provided false information about her marijuana use on her 2008 and 2012 
SF 86s.  
 
 The SOR alleges four defaulted student loans for $1,546; $11,381; $2,408; and 
$5,764. Applicant admitted defaulting on the loans. On her May 2012 SF 86, she listed 
$30,000 in delinquent student loans to the same financial institution alleged in the SOR, 
but she added: “I believe I made the payment in full through a third party. Still under 
investigation . . . disputing charges.” Applicant’s credit report from June 2012 listed four 
delinquent student loans totaling about $31,000.5   
                                                          
1 GE 1-3.  
 
2 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3.  
 
3 GE 1-3.  
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
5 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant told the OPM investigator in July 2012 that she fell behind on her 
student loans after the loans were transferred to a different company without notification 
to her. When she received the bills from the new company, she did not pay them 
because she thought it might have been a scam. She stated that she was in the process 
of contacting the financial institution to determine who she should pay, and that she 
would then start making payments.6   
 
 Applicant responded to interrogatories In March 2013. She wrote that payment 
arrangements on the loans alleged in the SOR “are in progress.” She submitted forms 
indicating that in October 2012, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) paid $2,232 and 
$2,650 from her income tax refund to the financial institution identified in the SOR. She 
also submitted a copy of an IRS form 1098-E (Student Loan Interest Statement), 
indicating that the financial institution received $2,292 in interest during 2012.7   
 
 Applicant earned $131,084 in 2012. On her personal financial statement, she 
reported monthly net income of $7,089; total monthly expenses of $1,221; and a net 
remainder of $5,868.8 She remarked: 
 
I live with my fiancé and he pays for the rent. My only expense is the 
home phone, car insurance, life insurance, and gasoline. Also, I do not 
have any credit cards.9   
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR in September 2013. She wrote that she had 
made several attempts to contact the financial institution to establish a payment plan, 
but she was unsuccessful. She was placed on hold for extended periods and her calls 
were disconnected.  
 
 When Applicant replied to the FORM, she established that in December 2013 the 
IRS paid the financial institution $4,953 from her income tax refund. She indicated that 
after additional lengthy attempts, she finally was able to speak to a representative from 
the financial institution. She paid $1,080 and established a payment plan. She indicated 
that an additional $5,000 would be paid, and she anticipated all the loans would be paid 
within about three months.10   
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
6 GE 3.  
 
7 GE 3.   
 
8 GE 3.   
 
9 GE 3.  
 
10 AE A-E.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information about her marijuana use on her 
2008 SF 86 and again on her 2012 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s denials that she intentionally provided false information about her 
marijuana use were not credible. There are no applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant did not pay her student loans for several years. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant noted her defaulted student loans on her 2012 SF 86. She discussed 
them with the OPM investigator in July 2012, in response to interrogatories in March 
2013, and in response to the SOR in September 2013. She had more than enough 
disposable income to start paying her student loans. She had a difficult time contacting 
 
7 
 
the financial institution, but she should have been more diligent. She receives less credit 
in mitigation for the payments made through seizure of her income tax refunds. See 
ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 2010). Her recent efforts and payment 
arrangements also require greater scrutiny. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions 
to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or 
other responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 
2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
 Applicant did not make a good-faith effort to pay her debts. Her financial issues 
are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They 
continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
There are no applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant lied about her drug use on her 2008 and 2012 SF 86s. Despite a 
substantial disposable income, she shirked her financial obligations and defaulted on 
her student loans. I have concerns about her judgment, trustworthiness, and honesty.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
