 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-03304 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns related to Guideline F. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On June 28, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response, Applicant admitted the eight allegations raised in the 
SOR with brief comment. She also requested a decision without ahearing. Counsel for 
DOD prepared a Form of Relevant Material (FORM) containing six attachments to 
support the Government’s position in this matter. Applicant did not submit a response or 
any additional information within the specified time period following her receipt of the 
 
 
 
 
2 
FORM. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me 
on November 21, 2013. I have thoroughly reviewed the FORM and other case file 
materials. Based on the materials submitted, I find that Applicant failed to meet her 
burden in mitigating financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old over-the-road truck driver who has worked for the 
same employer since September 2011. She was employed full-time from July 2003 to 
September 2005 in trucking, then did not work from September 2004 through July 2006 
while she attended school. From July 2006 to September 2009, Applicant worked full-
time as a self-employed hair stylist. She ultimately closed her business when it proved 
to be unprofitable. In September 2009, she returned to trucking. Applicant has earned a 
one-year degree from a technical institution. She is married and has a stepchild.  
 
 The June 2013 SOR alleges eight debts, representing approximately $18,300 in 
delinquent obligations. Applicant fully admits the owed balances noted at ¶¶ 1.b ($465, 
dating from at least March 2008), 1.c ($330, dating from at least January 2007), 1.d 
($370, dating from at least February 2007), 1.f ($1,464, dating from at least February 
2010), and 1.g ($871, dating from at least July 2009).   
 
Applicant wrote that the debt noted at ¶ 1.a ($12,824), a judgment filed in 
September 2012, had been reduced to $8,374.72 through monthly payments of $400 
made at unspecified times. Her documentary evidence reflects the balance was 
reduced to $9,974.72 (FORM, Item 4, page 3, Letter of Apr. 16, 2013). There is no 
explanation as to how this sum was reduced. That same documentary evidence reflects 
that the account was then currently past due, specifying that the underlying payment 
agreement thus could be cancelled at any time and the full balance become due in full. 
A handwritten notation on the letter states that a payment of $400 was made on April 
20, 2013, but no documentary evidence of that payment was attached. The current 
status of this obligation and the repayment agreement is unknown. 
 
The school-related debt noted in the SOR at ¶ 1.e ($1,900) is reflected in a June 
2012 credit report as having been delinquent since February 2010. It is shown as still 
owed in a June 2013 credit report (FORM, Item 5). Applicant stated in her answer to the 
SOR that she had begun making payments on this debt, but no evidence was offered 
substantiating her assertion. 
 
Applicant wrote that she had paid the debt listed in the SOR at ¶ 1.h ($74) in 
February 2012. A 2012 credit reports shows it became delinquent in December 2010. 
Applicant introduced no documentary evidence proving that this obligation was paid.  
 
The FORM reiterated the delinquent debts noted in the SOR. It also noted 
Applicant’s responses to the SOR allegations. Evidentiary deficiencies regarding those 
debts were highlighted. No additional information or supporting documentation, 
however, was timely submitted in response to the FORM. In addition, there is no 
 
 
 
 
3 
indication as to whether Applicant received financial counseling that has aided her in 
addressing her finances. 
 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts. Such facts are sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The debts at issue are multiple in number, vague in origin, and largely 
unaddressed, obviating application of AG ¶ 20(a). Moreover, it is noted that Applicant’s 
hair stylist business, which she owned from 2006 through 2009, failed. However, there 
 
 
 
 
5 
is insufficient record evidence to link her 2009 business failure to the debts at issue or to 
show that, in the face of a declining business, she acted responsibly. Therefore, AG ¶ 
20(b) does not apply. Further, there is no evidence she received financial counseling, 
obviating application of AG ¶ 20(c). 
 
 In addition, although there appears to be some progress on the debt noted at ¶ 
1.a, there is no documentation showing how it was made, as opposed to negotiated or 
settled; nor is there documentation indicating whether the past-due status mentioned in 
Applicant’s documentation was eventually rehabilitated or led to cancellation of the 
repayment plan. Without more, it cannot be discerned whether AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
Finally, to the extent Applicant admits all SOR allegations and provided no documentary 
evidence of formally disputing any of the accounts at issue, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
limited facts and circumstances noted in this case. I incorporate my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, others may have warranted additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old truck driver who has worked for the same employer 
since September 2011. She was employed full-time from July 2003 to September 2005 
in trucking, took a break from work to attend school from September 2005 through July 
2006, then ran her own business until it failed in September 2009. Applicant then 
returned to trucking. She has a one-year technical degree and is married.  
 
The main concern in this case is related to eight delinquent debts. Seven of the 
debts became delinquent between early 2007 and 2010, and a significant judgment was 
entered against Applicant in 2012. Applicant does not deny responsibility for any of the 
obligations. She failed to provide any significant documentary evidence regarding her 
efforts, if any, regarding these obligations except for a letter noting that the adverse 
judgment (SOR ¶ 1.a) was reduced through what appears to have been a debt 
repayment plan. Her evidence in that matter, however, also notes that she was then 
past due on the judgment’s repayment plan, leaving the plan’s current status unclear. 
Moreover, Applicant described no nexus between her debts and any periods in her life 
in which her financial situation was seriously beyond her control, nor did she depict any 
reasonable efforts that she might have taken to keep her obligations timely. Further, 
there is no documentary evidence showing that she received financial counseling. 
 
 
 
 
6 
Finally, while there is no reason to doubt Applicant’s honesty in her proffered materials, 
her submissions are deficient as substantive evidence. Based on the limited materials in 
the case file, I conclude that Applicant failed to carry her burden in this matter. 
Consequently, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under 
Guideline F.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
