1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
        )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-02018
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On August 5, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 23, 2013. A notice of
hearing was issued on November 1, 2013, scheduling the hearing for November 26,
2013. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-6 were admitted into evidence, without objection.
Applicant testified, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX ) A-E  for the record, which
was admitted without objection. I kept the record open until December 20, 2013, for
additional submissions. Applicant provided a packet of receipts, which was marked AX
F, and entered into the record without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on
2
December 4, 2013. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations, with the
exception of ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.k through 1.o, with explanation.  
Applicant is a 39-year-old security guard of a defense contractor. He attended a
technical college. He is divorced and has three children.  Applicant served in the U.S.
Army from 1998 until 2004, and received an honorable discharge. He has been with his
current employer since April 2013. (GX 1) Before that time, he had two part-time jobs.
(Tr. 21) Applicant held a security clearance in the military. 
The SOR alleges Applicant has unresolved debts totaling approximately $39,641.
This includes judgments, child support obligation, collection accounts,  emergency
medical bills,  and both federal and state tax debts.
In 2006, Applicant and his family moved to another state for better job
opportunities. He experienced unemployment for a period of time and had
underemployment as well. His employer also encountered financial problems and
Applicant did not receive pay for work that he had completed. (GX 2) He had difficulty
paying his rent, utility bills, and daily expenses, and he incurred delinquent debt. (SOR
1.a) He contacted his creditors, but he could not make payments on the accounts. At
this time, Applicant and his wife separated. Applicant lost the income of his spouse.
Applicant was responsible for all marital debts, although his wife promised that she
would help pay the judgment for the unpaid rent and utility bills. (Tr. 82) Applicant’s wife
also received the family car, which was repossessed when she failed to make
payments. (SOR 1.h)
Applicant and his wife divorced in 2012. Applicant’s child support obligation
caused him to incur other debts. He explained that $1,060 a month was deducted from
his paycheck for child support. Since that was the highest amount that could be
deducted from his check, he still had arrears, which amounted to $11,000. Through his
payments, he now has a balance of approximately $8,000. (AX C) Applicant has made
an inquiry with the child support agency for a reduction based on his income.
Applicant contacted a bankruptcy attorney. Following the hearing, he filed for
Chapter 7 protection on December 11, 2013. (AX F) The debts listed in the SOR, other
than the tax debts and those he already paid, are included in the bankruptcy petition.
Applicant’s debt to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is based on incorrect
exemptions that he listed for a second job. (Tr. 14) In 2009, he obtained the services of 
a tax preparer. The IRS sent Applicant a letter that his tax return for 2009 had not been
received. In 2011, Applicant learned that there was an error in the 2009 tax return.  The
November 2011 letter advised Applicant that he owed $3,000 rather than the $2,000 he
originally believed was owed. He had a professional company file his tax returns
3
properly. He has a payment plan with the IRS. Applicant pays $200 a month. Applicant
is current with his payment plan. (AX F) The amounts are taken directly from his
checking account. 
Applicant has a payment plan for the 2009 state tax debt ($577.25). He pays $48
a month to the state. SOR 1.k. (AX B)
During the past year, Applicant paid the debt alleged in SOR 1.l ($925) This
related to automobile insurance for his motor vehicle in the amount of $3,000.
Applicant’s mother had been paying his premiums, but stopped suddenly and did not
advise him.  He originally made a down payment of $600. He paid $924 to settle the
account. (AX A)
Applicant’s net monthly income is $2,250. After expenses and bill payments, he
has a net remainder of approximately $500. He is current on his monthly expenses.  He
has no new debts.
Applicant was candid and forthright. He has not ignored his creditors. Initially, he
did not want to file for bankruptcy. He has payment plans for his state and federal taxes.
He settled other debts. He has now, on advice of counsel, filed for Chapter 7
bankruptcy. He is paying his child support. Applicant fully disclosed the situation on his
security clearance application, and during his investigative interview. 
. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
      1 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).
      2 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
      3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      4 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
      5 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      6 Id.
4
Department Counsel. . . .”1 The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance
of evidence.2 The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.3 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”4 “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”5 Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.6 The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
5
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant acquired delinquent debts as a result of unemployment, separation,
and divorce. He acknowledged his delinquent debt. His credit reports confirm the debts.
In addition, he admits his federal and state tax issues. Consequently, the evidence is
sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions in ¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following
are potentially relevant:
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are the result of unemployment, separation and
divorce. He and his wife separated and he lost his wife’s income. He was responsible
for all marital debt since obtaining his current job in April 2013, and he has paid what he
could on his bills. He prioritized the debts and did not ignore his creditors. He was given
bad advice about this 2009 taxes and as a result in 2012, he learned that he owed more
tax. He did not ignore the issue. He had his tax returns properly prepared. He entered
into a payment plan as soon as it was feasible. Applicant is current with both the federal
and state payment plans.  In addition, his divorce created a child support obligation. He
fully explained the situation with child support. He did not overlook his duties to his
children. He has paid some accounts in full. Applicant obtained financial counseling
through the bankruptcy process. He provided sufficient mitigation to show his good-faith
efforts and to prove he has taken sufficient steps to get his financial  situation  under
control. Mitigating conditions AG ¶ 20(a), (b), (c), and (d) apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
7
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the military
and was honorably discharged. Applicant’s marriage ended in divorce, which
contributed to his financial difficulties. He has never ignored his creditors. He is
supporting his three children through child support. He has been unemployed or
underemployed, which exacerbated his problems.  He received bad advice about his tax
filing with regard to the number of exemptions that he could file. He addressed the issue
when he learned about the problem. He is current on his state and federal tax
repayment plans. He has addressed his other delinquent accounts. He has paid other
non-SOR debts.  On advice of counsel, he has recently filed for bankruptcy. This is a
legal means to resolve debts. He provided sufficient documentation to mitigate the
financial considerations security concerns. I have no doubts about his reliability or
judgment.  Applicant was candid and forthright at the hearing. He was also open and
honest about his finances on his security clearance application and interview. Applicant
has met his burden of proof. Clearance is granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
8
