KEYWORD: Guideline f
DIGEST: Given Applicant’s delinquent debts, her dilatory efforts at remediation, and lack of
corroboration for her claims. , the Judge’s analysis is sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-01023.a1
DATE: 01/17/2014
DATE: January 17, 2014
In Re:
-----
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 12-01023
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation.
On June 5, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
1The Judge resolved the medical debt in Applicant’s favor. 
2“[Q]: And do you recall when the last payment you made was before . . . your current arrangement was in
place? [A]: At some point in 2009.”  Tr. at 25.  Compare with Interview Summary at 1-2, contained in Government
Exhibit (GE) 2, Answers to Interrogatories: “”In 12/2009 (estimated), [Applicant] contacted Sallie Mae, via the
telephone, in order to come up with a new monthly payment plan.  The new payment plan called for [Applicant] to make
$400 monthly payments, which was a verbal agreement.  From 12/2009 to 12/2010, [Applicant] made all of her payments
on time, without any problems.”  
3The hearing was conducted on September 24, 2013.  
2
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On October 23, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Rita C. O’Brien denied Applicant’s request for a
trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge made errors in her
findings of fact; whether the Judge erred in her whole-person analysis; and whether the Judge’s
adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Federal contractor.  She has a bachelor’s degree, her education
financed with student loans.  These loans became due upon Applicant’s graduation.  After college,
she experienced some unemployment and under-employment.  Fifteen of the debts alleged in the
SOR are student loans and one is a medical debt.1  The loans total $168,800.
Applicant testified that, upon graduation, she had an agreement with the student loan
creditors to pay whatever she could afford.  However, during her trustworthiness interview, she
stated that she had originally been required to pay $900 a month toward satisfaction of these debts.
In this interview, she stated that she negotiated a lower amount for her monthly payments and made
them in a timely fashion until the end of 2010.  At the hearing, however, she stated that she had not
made payments since 2009.2  She testified at the hearing that she may have been in error to have
stated in her trustworthiness application that she had no debts that had been delinquent for more than
180 days.
Two weeks before the hearing, Applicant negotiated a new repayment plan, with monthly
payments of $200.  After five months, this plan will be reevaluated, with a possibility for an
adjustment in the required payments.  Applicant made her first payment on September 21, 2013.3
Applicant has a negative monthly income remainder of $33.  Her financial statement does
not show any payments on debts, including the $200 payment recently negotiated.  Neither does it
list a home or checking or retirement accounts.  She testified that she intended to reduce her monthly
expenditures to enable her to make the $200 payment toward her student loans.
3
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised trustworthiness concerns.  In
concluding that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from her delinquent student loans,
the Judge stated that the loans are recent insofar as they are unpaid and that Applicant’s lack of
“substantial efforts to meet her obligation casts doubt on her trustworthiness and reliability.” 
Decision at 5.  The Judge noted evidence that circumstances beyond Applicant’s control affected
her financial situation–her unemployment and her lack of full-time employment.  On the other hand,
the Judge stated that Applicant failed to corroborate her claim to have contacted her creditors
regarding her limited financial circumstances.  The Judge also stated that Applicant could have taken
other steps, such as adjusting her monthly expenses, much earlier than she had done.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant’s relatively recent efforts to address her debts were not sufficient to
demonstrate a track record of debt resolution.  Efforts to resolve debts motivated primarily by the
pressure of qualifying for a public trust position are not sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness
concerns established in Applicant’s case.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted positive aspects of Applicant’s record,
including her educational attainments and her work experience.  The Judge also noted that Applicant
had made some efforts to resolve her debts.  However, she found these efforts to have been
“intermittent, and insufficient to bring [Applicant’s] debts under control.”  Id. at 7.  She stated that
her Applicant’s recent payment plan is too recent to enable a conclusion that it will succeed.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding about the extent of her debts.  She argues that her
student loans are not fifteen separate debts but are actually a single continuing obligation that was
renewed each semester.  She argues that the way in which these loans are listed creates a false
impression as to the nature of her financial difficulties.    
We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by substantial record evidence,
that is, “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See also
ADP Case No. 08-06284 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 10, 2009).  In the case before us, the SOR contained
fifteen allegations regarding Applicant’s student debts, and Applicant admitted each allegation in
her reply.  These debts are separately listed in Applicant’s credit reports.  In her trustworthiness
interview, Applicant agreed that the information regarding her student loan debts appeared to be
correct.  The interviewer represented her as saying that “the reason there are so many account
numbers is due to each one being for an individual semester in school.” Interview Summary at p.
1, contained in Government Exhibit 2, Answers to Interrogatories.  Applicant certified the accuracy
of the interview summary.  
Neither in her SOR reply or in her interview summary did Applicant state that the
information unfairly magnified the extent of her financial problems.  We note that the Judge made
4Interview Summary at 1, GE 2: “[Applicant] was given the opportunity to develop any accounts or loans that
had become over 180 days delinquent, to which she did not reply with any.”  
4
appropriate findings about Applicant’s delinquent debts having arisen in regard to her pursuit of a
college education.  There is nothing in the record to suggest that the Judge treated these debts as
totally unrelated in purpose or that she unreasonably multiplied Applicant’s trustworthiness
concerns.  Considering the record as a whole, we conclude that the Judge’s findings about
Applicant’s student debts are based upon substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences
from the evidence.  
  Applicant argues that the Judge did not take into account evidence that she is meeting other
financial obligations.  She cites to evidence that she has acquired no additional debt beyond those
found against her, and she contends that she was honest in admitting the extent of her financial
problems.  Applicant also contends that the Judge erred in concluding that her efforts at debt
resolution were intermittent and insufficient.
To the extent that Applicant is arguing that the Judge did not properly examine her conduct
in light of the entire record, thereby impairing her whole-person analysis, we find no error by the
Judge.  A proper whole-person analysis requires a Judge to consider the totality of an applicant’s
conduct in reaching his or her decision.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 09-02388 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 21,
2010).  
The Judge made findings about Applicant’s personal circumstances, those favorable to her
and those that detracted from her case for mitigation, and discussed them in a reasonable manner in
her analysis.  We note her findings concerning inconsistent statements by Applicant.  We also note
that the Judge addressed Applicant’s having failed to list her delinquent debts in her application and
her failure to admit her delinquencies to the interviewer until confronted with them.4  Although the
omissions were not alleged in the SOR, the Judge stated that she was considering them for their
bearing on Applicant’s credibility and case for mitigation, which was an appropriate manner in
which to address the evidence.   See, e.g., ADP Case 09-06770 at 3(App. Bd. Nov. 8, 2010)
(“[C]onduct not alleged may be relevant to evaluating an applicant’s evidence for extenuation or
mitigation and for assessing his credibility.”)  Given evidence of Applicant’s delinquent debts, her
relatively dilatory efforts at remediation, the absence of corroboration for her claims of debt
resolution, and evidence that detracted from her credibility, the Judge articulated a sustainable
rationale for her whole-person  analysis.  See ADP Case No. 07-13041 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Sep. 19,
2008).  See Directive ¶ 2(a) for discussion of whole-person factors. 
Applicant’s citation to favorable evidence could be construed as an argument that the Judge
did not consider the evidence or that she mis-weighed the evidence.  A Judge is presumed to have
considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ADP Case No.09-04275 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr.
18, 2011).  Given the matters addressed in the previous paragraph, we conclude that Applicant has
not rebutted this presumption.  A Judge cannot be expected to discuss every piece of evidence in the
record, which would be impossible.  Neither has Applicant shown that the Judge’s ultimate adverse
holding ran contrary to the weight of the record evidence.  
5
Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s opinion that it is too soon to conclude that she has
shown a track record of debt resolution.  She asserts that there is no evidence to justify this
statement.  However, once the Government has presented trustworthiness concerns, the burden shifts
to the applicant to demonstrate mitigation.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 07-13041, supra, at 3.  In this
case, Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR and the Government presented substantial
evidence in support of those allegations.  Insofar as the Directive presumes a nexus between proven
conduct under any of the Guidelines and an applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility (see, e.g., ADP
Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2009)), the record was sufficient to shift to Applicant
the burden of demonstrating that the concerns had been mitigated.  The challenged comment,
properly understood, means that Applicant presented insufficient evidence of a track record of debt
resolution to meet her burden of persuasion, which was consistent with the record before the Judge.
We find no error in the challenged comment.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness
cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding
security clearances: such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013).
See also  Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan             
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed; Jeffrey D. Billett                     
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                     
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
