 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09258 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esq. 
 
 
January 24, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had three delinquent debts totaling $242,625, identified on the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR). Applicant repaid one small debt. He contacted a second 
creditor and attempted to repay that debt, but was told the debt was “obsolete.” He 
failed to take actions on the largest debt of $220,128, because he believed it to be 
legally unenforceable. Reliance on the non-collectability of his remaining debts does not 
constitute a good-faith effort to resolve the debt within the meaning of the Directive.  
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on April 
20, 2012. On September 19, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on October 7, 2013, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on November 19, 2013. A notice of 
hearing was issued to Applicant on November 20, 2013, scheduling a hearing for 
December 16, 2013. Applicant’s counsel requested a continuance, and the hearing was 
rescheduled on December 9, 2013 to January 6, 2014. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted 
without objection. The Government also presented documentation, marked Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I for administrative notice and such notice was taken. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through S. Applicant’s counsel 
asked that administrative notice be taken of AE A through AE C and that AE D through 
AE S be admitted into evidence. Department Counsel had no objection to this request 
and the documents were admitted into the record for their stated purpose. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 14, 2014.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing on January 6, 2014, I made an amendment to the SOR, sua 
sponte, pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17, to correct a misspelling of the Applicant’s name 
on the SOR. Neither the Government nor the Applicant had objections to the 
amendment. (Tr. 9.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He is married and has one adult son. He has been 
employed by a government contractor since March 2012.1 Applicant served in the Army 
from 1978 to 1981. He achieved the rank of E-4. He held a security clearance while in 
the Army, without incident. (GE 1; AE E; Tr. 59-62.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified three delinquent debts totaling $242,625. Applicant’s debts appear in credit 
reports entered into evidence. Applicant denied the debts as alleged in subparagraphs 
1.a through 1.c. (Answer; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems prior to incurring the debts alleged in 
the SOR. Applicant worked for a government contractor from 1987 to 1997,2 when he 
                                                          
1 From January 2012 to March 2012, Applicant worked for his present employer as a contract employee. 
He was hired as an employee in March 2012.  
 
2 Applicant identified his previous employment with the Government contractor on his e-QIP and in his 
testimony to have occurred from 1987 to 1999. However, his Statement of Subject, dated August 31, 
 
3 
 
was laid off. He held a security clearance, without incident, during that period of 
employment. He experienced financial problems as a result of that layoff and the failure 
of his home businesses. He used credit cards to purchase items for the businesses, but 
the interest rates caused the balances to continuously increase. He stopped paying his 
mortgage “enabling [him] to maintain [his] credit card payments.” He filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in March 1997 as a result. His debts were discharged through the Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. (GE 1; GE 2.) 
 
After Applicant’s 1997 bankruptcy, his finances improved. In 1995 Applicant had 
obtained a real estate license. After his lay-off in 1997, he decided to sell real estate full 
time. He further enhanced his career in real estate by obtaining a real estate broker’s 
license in 2006. He testified that from 2001 to approximately 2007, he made a six figure 
income through his real estate business. (GE 2; Tr. 63-64.) 
 
In 2005 Applicant purchased a property that consisted of a home and a dog 
kennel. He planned to live in the home and his wife would operate the kennel. Applicant 
testified the purchase price of the property was $575,000. However, the credit reports 
reflect Applicant’s first mortgage was for $460,000 and he had a second home equity 
line of credit (HELOC) upon which he owed approximately $220,128. SOR 
subparagraph 1.b pertains to the HELOC. Applicant testified that he did not make a 
down payment when he purchased the property, but he did reinvest the commission he 
received from the sale, as the listing and buying agent. Applicant testified that the terms 
of both the primary mortgage and the HELOC required interest-only payments for the 
first two years. They would both then become variable rate loans. He planned to have 
his wife operate the kennel for two years. If the kennel business was successful, 
Applicant intended to refinance the mortgage and the HELOC. If the kennel business 
was not profitable, he intended to sell the property before the mortgage and the HELOC 
rates increased. (GE 3; Tr. 65-68.) 
 
In 2007 shortly before Applicant’s mortgage and the HELOC rates were 
scheduled to increase, he applied to refinance the mortgages. The kennel business was 
profitable and he wanted to keep the property. However, the holder of the HELOC 
reported in error that Applicant had been 30-days late on his payment. As a result, the 
refinancing was declined by the lender. The holder of the HELOC issued Applicant a 
letter of apology and eventually corrected error on Applicant’s credit report, but the real 
estate market had “crashed” in the meantime. Applicant could no longer secure a 
refinanced loan based on stated income. Applicant’s monthly first mortgage payments 
increased from $2,891.19 in April 2007, to $4,388.57 in May 2007. His payments on the 
HELOC also increased, although he did not provide documentation to show how much. 
He tried to sell the property, which he listed at $625,000 in December 2007, but he 
received no offers. (GE 3; AE F; Tr. 67-74.) 
 
At the same time Applicant’s mortgage and HELOC payments increased, his real 
estate business declined. He could no longer afford to satisfy his mortgage or the 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
1998, indicated he was laid off in June 1997. Applicant’s recital of the dates is inconsistent and confusing. 
Irrespective of the actual dates, Applicant previously discharged debt through Chapter 7 bankruptcy due 
to both unemployment and failed investment decisions. 
 
4 
 
HELOC. He made payments at the increased rates for a few months, but exhausted his 
savings and eventually defaulted on both his first mortgage and the HELOC. The home 
was foreclosed upon in approximately June 2008 by the first mortgage holder. The first 
mortgage was satisfied by the foreclosure, but the HELOC remained outstanding. 
Applicant had little contact with the creditor owning the HELOC debt. The creditor listed 
this debt as a charged off account in the amount of $220,128 on Applicant’s May 2012 
credit report. Applicant explained in his answer that his state’s “statute of limitations on 
breach of contract is 4 years.” He further noted that this debt was no longer listed on his 
credit report. At hearing, he testified that he has not had any communications with this 
creditor since 2012 when he asked the creditor “why it was still on my . . . credit report.” 
After that inquiry, the creditor removed the HELOC entry from his credit report. He made 
no request to make payments on this obligation during that communication. He 
continued, “I pretty much figured that they - - we were pretty much equal, with what – 
cause what they cost me, and compared to that.” Yet, he asserted that he would be 
willing to work out payments with them. (GE 6; AE A; Tr. 75-77, 97-115, 124-130.) 
 
After the foreclosure, Applicant and his wife moved in with his sister-in-law for 
approximately six months. Applicant worked as a sales manager with a real estate 
company, at a significantly reduced income. Most of his income went to pay for medical 
insurance. Applicant, his wife, and his son all had serious and costly medical ailments 
during this period. The $250 medical bill listed in subparagraph 1.a on the SOR was for 
an unpaid medical bill that Applicant incurred in approximately May 2009. He produced 
documentation that shows this debt was satisfied through payment of $368.22 on 
February 28, 2013. (AE G; AE H; AE L; AE M; AE R; Tr. 76-83, 103, 112.) 
 
As a result of their financial problems, Applicant returned a luxury vehicle he 
financed in 2005 to the lender when he could no longer afford the payments. The lender 
who financed the purchase listed this as a charged off account in the amount of $22,247 
on Applicant’s May 2012 credit report, as identified in SOR subparagraph 1.c. Applicant 
testified he contacted this creditor in 2012 concerning this account to work out 
payments. After the creditor was unable to locate the account, Applicant was told it was 
deleted from his credit report due to “obsolete data.” He provided a letter from this 
creditor to that effect. (GE 3; GE 4; AE N; Tr. 86-89, 95-97, 116.) 
 
After Applicant was hired by his current employer in March 2012, he began to 
address the numerous financial delinquencies he incurred between 2007 and 2012. He 
provided documentation to show he satisfied four debts totaling approximately $13,285. 
He testified that he is currently able to meet his monthly obligations. His personal 
financial statement, created on December 27, 2013, shows Applicant has a monthly net 
remainder of $1,430.85, after he satisfies his monthly obligations. Applicant has 
$17,443.43 in retirement savings. He lives in a rented apartment and is current on the 
rent. Applicant’s wife is not employed. He has not had any formal financial counseling. 
Applicant recently leased a new vehicle for his wife’s use.  (AE I; AE J; AE K; AE L; AE 
P; AE Q; Tr. 83-91, 117-119.) 
 
Applicant is respected for his honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity by both his 
professional and personal contacts. He is active within his church and participates in 
 
5 
 
outreach ministries such as feeding the homeless. He also works with youth in his 
community. His work ethic is considered to be exemplary and his work performance 
evaluations reflect he has met or exceeded all rating criterion since 2012, when he was 
hired. He presented a number of certificates of recognition for his community service. 
He served as the president of a real estate organization in 2006. (AE D; AE O; AE S; Tr. 
49-58.) 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. The relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately $242,625 in delinquent 
debt. The debts have been delinquent since 2008. While Applicant satisfied the medical 
debt for $250, he claims that the HELOC and vehicle loan are legally uncollectable. 
Given the record evidence in its entirety, the Government has established its prima facie 
case against Applicant. All of Applicant’s delinquent debts were reported on his May 
2012 credit report. The evidence shows Applicant’s “inability or unwillingness to satisfy” 
his HELOC debt and an overall “history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, but found inapplicable, including:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 In this case, events beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial 
difficulties including several years of underemployment, an error reported on his credit 
report, the economic downturn in the real estate market, and the subsequent health 
problems his family encountered. He has addressed a number of debts not listed on the 
SOR, satisfied the $250 debt listed in 1.a, and offered to make payments on the 
charged off vehicle identified in subparagraph 1.c. These actions show some 
responsibility in addressing his delinquencies. However, believing he had been treated 
unfairly by his HELOC lender, Applicant decided not to repay his legitimate debt after he 
lost the property to foreclosure. Instead, he decided to rely on the operation of his 
state’s law, which he claims deems the debt legally unenforceable. While Applicant 
receives some credit for the mitigating evidence in the record, it is not sufficient to 
overcome the concerns raised by his conduct with respect to the HELOC debt. 
 
The Appeal Board has held: 
 
Security clearance decisions are not controlled or limited by such statutes 
of limitation. A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed 
at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Accordingly, even if a delinquent debt is legally 
unenforceable under state law, the federal government is entitled to 
consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an Applicant’s conduct 
in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.3  
 
In this case, although he provided relevant case law, Applicant failed to produce 
evidence regarding the specific terms of the loan agreement, which prevents a 
“reasoned determination” as to whether the state law applies in this case.4 Further, the 
security issues raised in this case are not diminished by evidence that Applicant is 
current on his recurring financial obligations. Security clearance adjudications regarding 
financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. Rather, the purpose is to make “an 
examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination 
that the person is an acceptable security risk.”5 Applicant’s ongoing decision not to pay 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
4 ISCR Case No. 08-01122 (App. Bd. Feb. 9, 2009.) 
5 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
8 
 
his HELOC debt reflects poorly on his current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. I cannot find that financial problems are unlikely 
to recur. Applicant’s decision to renege on a financial obligation shows an unwillingness 
to take responsibility for his actions. He has not established that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control or that he made a good faith effort to repay the HELOC 
loan. None of the mitigating conditions were sufficiently established by the record 
evidence with respect to that debt and the financial history of which it is symptomatic. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a hardworking and dedicated employee who performs well on the 
job. He served honorably in the Army. He has a long, commendable history of serving 
his community. However, he has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security 
concerns. Applicant’s frustration with his HELOC lender is understandable because 
creditors have a statutory obligation to report accurate account information to the credit 
reporting bureaus. However, the error made by the HELOC lender did not negate 
Applicant’s responsibility to pay or resolve his legitimate debt. Once the foreclosure 
process on the property began, Applicant had no intention of repaying this creditor, 
despite his testimony that he is now willing to pay this debt. He has failed to take any 
actions to add legitimacy to his stated intention, and his current willingness to repay the 
debt appears to be the result of the negative effects nonpayment has had on his 
application for a security clearance. Based on Applicant’s conduct, it is not 
unreasonable to question his willingness to comply with security policies or report a 
security infraction or violation if he perceives the consequences to be unfair or contrary 
 
9 
 
to his self-interest. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
