 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-00433 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges seven delinquent, collection, or 
charged-off debts, totaling $27,525. He failed to provide sufficient documentation of 
progress resolving his financial problems. Financial considerations concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 29, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of his security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 4) On June 5, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On June 27, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived his 
right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated August 26, 2013, was provided to him on September 17, 2013.1 Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 16, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a and denied the 
remaining SOR allegations. (Item 3) He explained why he denied the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b to 1.g and why he did not pay the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. However, he did not provide 
any documentation from creditors, disputes, or other evidence of payments as part of 
his SOR response. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old, and he has worked on power plants for his current 
employer, a defense contractor, since January 2009.3 In 2003, he married, and he was 
divorced in May 2008. He does not have any children. He graduated from high school in 
1998. He attended college from September 1998 to December 1999; however, he did 
not receive a degree.   
 
From January 2000 to July 2006, Applicant worked for the Army National Guard. 
From January 2002 to July 2003, he worked as an aircraft mechanic for the Army.  
From July 2005 to December 2008, he worked on power plants for a government 
contractor. There is no evidence of unemployment or use of illegal drugs or alcohol 
abuse.  
 
When Applicant completed his August 29, 2011 SF 86, he disclosed his 
delinquent debts.  Applicant said he was not fully aware of his delinquent debts until he 
checked his credit report before he completed his SF 86.  He also described his former 
spouse’s responsibility for several delinquent debts that appeared on his credit report. 
 
                                            
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated August 26, 2013, and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
September 17, 2013. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt 
to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s August 29, 2011 SF 86 
and/or his October 20, 2011 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI) are 
the primary sources for the facts in the Statement of Facts. (Items 4, 5) 
 
3The facts in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are from Applicant’s August 29, 2011 
SF 86. (Item 4) 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s SOR and credit bureau reports, dated September 13, 2011; February 
21, 2013; and April 18, 2013, describe seven delinquent, collection, or charged-off 
debts, totaling $27,525.  
 
(1) ¶ 1.a is a medical debt ($2,799)—UNRESOLVED.  Applicant said he owed 
the debt to a hospital. He attempted to set up a payment plan; however, the creditor 
said Applicant did not qualify for a payment plan. Later, he attempted to pay the debt, 
and he learned it was transferred to a collection company. Applicant received a 
“number”, however, it “just led him to a dead end.” He did not provide the dates for 
these events. It is unclear whether he has done anything in the most recent 12 months 
to resolve this debt. (Item 3)   
 
(2) ¶ 1.b is a charged-off bank account ($1,863)—UNRESOLVED. Applicant said 
he paid the collection agent handling this debt in February 2008; however, he did not 
provide any documentation sent to or received from the collection agent. (Item 3)  
 
(3) ¶ 1.c is a charged-off department store account ($4,508)—UNRESOLVED. 
Applicant said his former spouse was responsible for this debt as indicated in his 
divorce papers.  She filed for bankruptcy shortly after the divorce. (Item 3)  
 
(4) ¶ 1.d is a military store collection account ($1,178)—UNRESOLVED.  
Applicant said he paid this debt in December 2007; however, he did not provide any 
documentation sent to or received from the creditor. (Item 3)  
 
(5) ¶ 1.e is a charged-off bank account ($10,591)—UNRESOLVED. Applicant 
said his former spouse was responsible for the debt as indicated in his divorce papers.  
She filed for bankruptcy shortly after the divorce. (Item 3)  
 
(6) ¶ 1.f is a bank charged-off account ($250)—UNRESOLVED. Applicant said 
his former spouse was responsible for the debt as indicated in his divorce papers.  She 
filed for bankruptcy shortly after the divorce. (Item 3)  
 
(7) ¶ 1.g is a debt owed to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for tax year 2008 
($6,336)—UNRESOLVED.  Applicant said he paid this debt in May 2012. (Item 3)  
 
Applicant did not provide a copy of his divorce documentation to corroborate his 
statement that his wife agreed to accept sole responsibility for paying the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f. He did not provide any corroborating documentation proving that he 
made any payments to any of his SOR creditors (such as cancelled checks or bank 
statements), settled any debts (such as correspondence from or to creditors), or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts. Applicant’s March 25, 2013 personal financial 
statement (PFS) indicated: his monthly gross salary is $5,672; his monthly net salary is 
$4,251; his monthly expenses are $1,930; his monthly debt payments are $601; and his 
monthly net remainder is $1,720. (Item 5)   
 
Applicant’s FORM noted the absence of mitigating information and explained that 
Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as 
appropriate.” (FORM at 5) He did not respond to the FORM.               
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, OPM personal subject interview (PSI), responses to DOHA 
interrogatories, and SOR response. Applicant’s file documents seven delinquent, 
collection, or charged-off debts, totaling $27,525. Several debts have been delinquent 
for more than three years. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                            
4The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or he relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of his SOR debts; however, he provided 
some mitigating information. Applicant said he was not fully aware of his delinquent 
debts until he checked his credit report in 2011. His spouse handled their finances.  
Applicant said his divorce allocated the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f to his former 
spouse. Divorce and reliance on his spouse to handle his finances are financial 
conditions largely beyond his control; however, he did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances. He failed to provide a copy of the divorce documentation to corroborate 
his assertion that his spouse accepted responsibility for these three debts. Assuming 
the debts were allocated to Applicant’s spouse, he still has the burden of enforcing 
those debt allocations in court, unless the creditors concurred with those designations 
or otherwise released him from responsibility for repayment.  
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation about his finances to establish 
his inability to pay his creditors. Applicant did not receive financial counseling, and he 
did not establish that there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
In sum, Applicant did not provide any documentation, such as checking account 
statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or 
made any payments to any of the seven SOR creditors. There is no financial 
documentation in the record relating to these seven SOR creditors showing: 
maintenance of contact with creditors;5 correspondence to or from these seven 
creditors; credible debt disputes; attempts to negotiate payment plans; or other 
evidence of progress or resolution of these seven SOR debts. There is insufficient 
evidence that his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not 
occur in the future.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                            
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or he maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant’s 
finances were adversely affected when his spouse was handling the family finances and 
when she failed to abide by the promises she made in their divorce. These two 
occurrences resulted in negative financial conditions largely beyond his control. There is 
no evidence that Applicant abused alcohol or drugs. He contributes to his company and 
the Department of Defense. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would 
intentionally violate national security.   
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. Several debts on 
his SOR became delinquent more than three years ago. He was well aware of his 
financial problems, as he disclosed them on his August 29, 2011 SF 86 and during his 
October 13, 2011 OPM PSI. He did not provide correspondence written to or received 
from the creditors showing that he attempted to settle or make any payments to resolve 
any of his seven delinquent SOR debts.  His PFS shows that he had an ample monthly 
remainder; nevertheless, he did not prove that he paid any SOR debts, even though 
one of his SOR debts was only $250. He failed to mitigate seven delinquent, collection, 
or charged-off debts, totaling $27,525. His failure to provide documentation establishing 
his financial responsibility shows lack of judgment and raises unmitigated questions 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
See AG ¶ 18. More documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security 
concerns. 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to 
classified information at this time.  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
