KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: Even pro se applicants are expected to take reasonable and timely steps to protect their
rights under the Directive.  Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 12-00270.a1
DATE: 01/17/2014
DATE: January 17, 2014
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-00270
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
May 8, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of Defense
2
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On October 25, 2013, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge applied an unreasonably
high standard in evaluating the case; whether Applicant was denied due process; and whether the
Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  He began his current employment in September
2011.  He holds two master’s degrees.  He has not served in the military.
Applicant used marijuana and cocaine “with varying degrees of frequency” between May
2006 and “at least” 2011.  During that period he also purchased marijuana.  Decision at 2.  Applicant
identified two friends who had used drugs during the same period.  He has stated that neither
continues to use illegal drugs.  Applicant has begun an exercise regiment and recently began work
on a doctorate.  Applicant has no present intent to return to the use of drugs.  “There is scant
additional evidence of any professional, social or lifestyle changes that he has accomplished since
quitting drugs and beginning his current employment.”  Id. 
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised concerns under Guideline H.
He cleared Applicant of several allegations regarding drugs other than marijuana or cocaine.
However, he concluded that Applicant failed to mitigate concerns arising from his use and/or
possession of these two drugs.  The Judge stated that there was little evidence in the record to
demonstrate that Applicant had significantly matured since his last uses of cocaine and marijuana,
that he had a support system should his desire for drugs return, or that his commitment to his job and
profession is such that he would refrain from such use.
The Judge stated that Applicant provided “no significant information” about lifestyle
changes, that he did not provide a statement of intent to refrain from future drug use, and that he
offered no character evidence, to include evidence of accomplishments, community involvement,
etc.  Id. at 4.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted evidence that Applicant had used illegal
drugs over several years and that he had provided only limited information as to mitigation, having
chosen a decision on the written record.
Discussion
Applicant contends that “the Judge has set an arbitrary standard for evidence . . . It is unclear
what sort of ‘accomplishments’ or level of ‘community involvement’ would meet the [Judge’s]
1Applicant’s reference to “evidentiary standard” might suggest a challenge to the Judge’s rulings on evidence.
However, the Judge admitted Applicant’s response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM) into the record, and
Applicant cites to nothing he wished to submit that was excluded. 
2Directive ¶¶ E3.1.7; Enclosure 2, 26(b)(4).  
3
evidentiary standard.”  Appeal Brief at 2.  The standard applicable in a security clearance decision
is that articulated by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988):  “[A] clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”   Directive ¶ E3.1.25 explicitly requires a Judge to evaluate a case according to
this standard.  The Directive also requires that “any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  In the concluding paragraph of his Decision, the Judge referenced the “clearly
consistent” standard in stating his ultimate holding.  Decision at 5.  In examining the evidence before
him, a Judge is required to evaluate the sufficiency or insufficiency of the evidence, and a paucity
of record evidence on matters relevant and material to a clearance decision is something a Judge
should address, as the Judge did in Applicant’s case.  Insofar as any doubt must be resolved in favor
of national security, evidentiary gaps may impair an applicant’s ability to meet his or her burden of
persuasion.  We find no basis to conclude that, in evaluating Applicant’s case, the Judge  mis-
applied Egan, or that he applied some other standard of his own devising.1    
Applicant contends that it was not clear to him that he could submit character evidence or
a statement of intent not to use drugs in the future.  The record demonstrates that DOHA provided
Applicant with a copy of the  FORM, consisting of Department Counsel’s summary of the case and
supporting documents.  Accompanying the FORM was a letter to Applicant, dated July 16, 2013,
advising that he could submit objections “or any additional information you wish to be considered.”
The FORM itself advised Applicant that he had 30 days from receipt to submit a documentary
response.  DOHA also provided Applicant with a copy of the Directive, which contained an
explanation of Applicant’s right to provide evidence and a description of the mitigating conditions
pertinent to Guideline H, including the one addressing a statement of intent.2  Applicant
acknowledged receipt of the letter and attachments on July 26, 2013.  Even pro se applicants are
expected to take timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.  There is no
reason to believe that Applicant was not provided with adequate information about his rights, nor
is there any reason to believe that a person with Applicant’s level of education would not have been
able to understand the information.  Applicant contends that the Judge, or Department Counsel,
should have sought more information if that was desired.  However, the Directive does not authorize
a Judge to act as investigator in a case, for either side.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06659 at 4-5
(App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2012).  Neither does it authorize a Department Counsel to serve as an investigator
for an opposing party, to advise an opposing party on how best to present his or her case for
mitigation, or otherwise to act as an advocate for an opposing party.  DOHA hearings are adversarial
in nature and a Department Counsel must avoid placing himself or herself in a conflict of interest.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-03402 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2012); ISCR Case No. 02-10215 at 4
(App. Bd. Jan. 30, 2004) .  We find no reason to conclude that Applicant was denied the due process
afforded him by the Directive.
4
Applicant challenges the Judge’s comment that the record contained insufficient evidence
of lifestyle changes to support the granting of a clearance.  He cites to his work on a Ph.D. as
evidence that he has changed since his undergraduate days.  In essence, Applicant is arguing for an
alternative interpretation of the record, which is not sufficient to show that the Judge’s treatment of
the evidence was unreasonable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-06089 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2013).
The Judge made findings about Applicant’s graduate work and discussed it in his analysis.
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the
record.  Neither has he demonstrated that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 12-02141 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2013).  Given the record before him, the Judge’s conclusions
about the paucity of mitigating evidence is supportable.
Applicant’s brief contains evidence from outside the record, that we cannot consider.
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  After considering the record as a whole, we conclude that the Judge examined
the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is
sustainable on this record.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
