Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-4, and Applicant exhibit (AE) A-C.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,2
1990), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-00609
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 19 June 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines D (Sexual
Behavior) and  E, (Personal Conduct).  Applicant timely answered, requesting a hearing2
before the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case
to me 23 August 2013, and I convened a hearing 17 September 2013. DOHA received
the transcript (Tr.) 23 September 2013.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is a 31-year-old contracts
administrator employed by a defense contractor since March 2007. He seeks to retain
the clearance he has held since approximately June 2003.
Between May 2000 and at least June 2008, Applicant intentionally viewed nude
images of underage females. Most of his pornography viewing occurred while he was in
college between August 2000 and May 2004. His pornography viewing came to light in
October 2008, when he failed a full scope polygraph examination.
When Applicant began viewing pornography in 2000, he was viewing
photographs in the teen category on the website. He assumed at the time that the
photographs were of teenagers 18 years old or older. When he underwent his polygraph
examination in October 2008, he had an adverse response to questions regarding child
pornography. Upon reflection, he realized that some of the teenagers in the
pornographic photographs were wearing braces, which he automatically associated with
age 13-14, the age at which he wore braces (GE 4). Another Government agency
(AGA) disapproved his request for upgraded access and revoked his existing access
because of these disclosures in October 2008 (GE 3). Applicant underwent a periodic
reinvestigation in August 2010 and was granted the requested clearance in November
2010 by the Defense Industrial Security Clearance Office (DISCO)(AE A). Applicant
underwent additional polygraph testing in May 2010 at a different Government agency.
That agency denied his program access in June 2011 (GE 3).
Applicant has not viewed pornography since 2008. He married in 2009, and he
and his wife are expecting their first child in April 2014.
Applicant’s supervisor and coworkers consider him honest and trustworthy, and
recommend him for his clearance (AE B). They are all aware of the circumstances that
led to the revocation of his special access in October 2008 and the denial of his re-
application for special access in June 2011. Similarly, his program manager, security
manager, and wife commend his work ethic and adherence to company policies (Tr. 27-
53).
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶ 13(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been prosecuted;4
¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse5
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information;
3
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct),
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guidelines D and
E. However, Applicant mitigated the security concerns.
At least some of the pornographic photographs Applicant viewed between May
2000 and June 2008 were of underage females, and thus contained criminal content.4
Applicant’s misconduct demonstrated immaturity and poor judgment, albeit not falling
within several adjudicative areas.  Nevertheless, that conduct was adjudicated for5
special access in both October 2008 and June 2011. While those adjudications resulted
in denials of special access, the underlying pornography issues were favorably
adjudicated by the DISCO in November 2010, based on a background investigation that
closed in August 2010. Moreover, the May 2010 polygraph examinations added no new
facts of security significance, and DoD does not apply negative reciprocity to other
agency determinations—particularly where those determinations deal with special
access and not with the underlying collateral clearance. Consequently, there is some
question whether DISCO should have revisited its favorable November 2010
determination, or reached a contrary conclusion by forwarding the case to the DoD
adjudications facility in January 2012. However, now that the case is before DOHA, I
4
see nothing in the record, before or after the favorable November 2010 DISCO
adjudication to warrant denial or revocation of Applicant’s clearance.
Finally, Applicant’s conduct occurred over five years ago, and has not been
repeated. Applicant’s personal life has changed significantly since he last viewed
pornography. He has married and is expecting his first child in the new year. His work
references remain uniformly excellent. The whole-person evidence in the record further
supports my conclusion that Applicant has mitigated the adverse security significance of
his misconduct. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline D and E for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline D: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph  a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.  
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
