 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03290 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has demonstrated financial 
rehabilitation and reform, mitigating the security concerns raised by his history of 
financial problems. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing 
convened on December 12, 2013, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through N, without objection. After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted AE O through S, which I admitted without objection.2 I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on January 2, 2014. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant received less than 15 days written notice of the time and place of the 
hearing as required under Directive ¶ E.3.1.8. Applicant waived the notice requirement, 
electing to proceed with the hearing as scheduled.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 31, has worked as an electronics technician for a federal contractor 
since December 2008. Since then, his annual salary has increased from $50,000 to 
$70,000.4  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to nine creditors for approximately 
$33,400.5 Applicant admits all but two of the alleged debts. Applicant’s financial 
problems began after his honorable discharge from the Air Force in January 2008. In 
the 12 months that followed, Applicant was unemployed or underemployed. He also 
blames his immaturity for his financial woes. In June 2008, believing that he had 
secured permanent employment, Applicant engaged a debt-consolidation company to 
help him address his delinquent debts. Applicant withdrew from the program when he 
lost his job three months later.6  
 
After Applicant secured his current job, he began to tackle his debts. In 2010 he 
repaid debt alleged in ¶ 1.a with help from his parents.7 In June 2013, Applicant re-
engaged the debt-consolidation company. The debt-consolidation plan includes six of 
the SOR debts: ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. The plan requires a $281 monthly 
payment, which Applicant voluntarily increased to $350. In addition to the monthly 
                                                          
2 Department Counsel’s e-mail regarding the admissibility of the AE F is included in the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) 1 and 2.  
 
3 Tr. 5-6.  
 
4 Tr. 20-21, 29; GE 1. 
 
5 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.h. are duplicate accounts. (Tr. 32) 
 
6 Tr. 21-22, 25-27, 33. 
 
7 Because Applicant paid this debt almost two-and-a-half years before the issuance of the SOR, he 
denied the allegation.  
 
3 
 
payment, Applicant has made additional payments to hasten the resolution of his 
delinquent accounts. So far, the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, and 1.i have been resolved 
through the plan. The debt-consolidation company is actively negotiating settlements for 
the debt alleged in ¶ 1.c, which should be resolved by March 2014. Under the terms of 
Applicant’s plan, all six debts should resolved by 2017.8 
 
Applicant has also taken steps to address the SOR debts ¶¶ 1.g and 1.j. The 
creditor alleged in ¶ 1.g declined to participate in Applicant’s debt-consolidation plan. He 
has contacted the creditor separately to establish a payment plan, which began 
December 2013.  Applicant initially denied the debt alleged in ¶ 1.j because he was 
unable to identify the creditor and the account did not appear on his credit report. After 
conducting some research, Applicant learned the creditor’s identity and discovered that 
the creditor issued an IRS Form 1099-C cancelling the debt in 2011. Applicant did not 
receive the form because the creditor did not have a correct address for him. Applicant 
plans to refile his 2011 income taxes to reflect the debt cancellation. In addition to the 
SOR debts, Applicant has resolved several non-SOR debts. Taking the advice of a 
financial counselor, Applicant liquidated the $16,000 in his retirement savings in addition 
to his cash savings to pay several non-SOR debts, including a pay-day loan, a car loan, 
and an overpayment of education benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs.9 
  
 Applicant lives within his means and he has no open consumer credit accounts. 
He is current on recurring bills and has taken on a roommate to help reduce his monthly 
expenses. Applicant considers his current finances comfortable with plenty of 
disposable income to apply toward the continued resolution of his delinquent debt.10   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
8 Tr. 27-36, 40, 46; Answer; AEs J, L, P, K. 
 
9 Tr. 30, 36-38, 40, 43; AEs E-I, O. 
 
10 Tr. 41-42, 45; GE 2; AE N. 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”11 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to nine creditors for approximately 
$33,400. The debts are also substantiated by Applicant’s credit reports.12 The record 
supports a finding that Applicant has a history of financial problems resulting in 
                                                          
11  AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 GE 3 – 4. 
 
 
5 
 
unresolved delinquent debts.13 He also demonstrated an inability to pay his debts.14 
However, Applicant has submitted sufficient information to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by his finances. Applicant has demonstrated a good-faith effort to 
resolve his delinquent debts by participating in a debt-consolidation plan, as well as 
directing his savings and disposable income toward the resolution of his SOR and non-
SOR debts.15 Although some of the SOR debts remain unresolved, Applicant’s track 
record of repayment lends credibility to his promises to repay the accounts. Applicant 
has also demonstrated that his finances are under control and has shown maturity with 
the steps he has taken to reduce his monthly expenses.  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about his suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The Appeal Board has held that, “an applicant is not 
required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given her 
circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the 
plan.16 Applicant has done so. Accordingly, his request for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
14 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
15 See, AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d). 
 
16 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009). 
