1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ADP Case No. 12-01251
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
January 30, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On July 30, 2013, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive
5220.6, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness
concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
 
On August 22, 2013, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.)
On October 22, 2013, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary exhibits. (Items 1-6.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on December 22, 2013. Applicant filed a
timely response, and the documents submitted have been entered into evidence without
2
objection as Items A, B, and C.  The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on
January 13, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to a sensitive position is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the FORM, and Items A, B, and C, and upon due consideration of
that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 64 years old.  She was first married in April 1989 and divorced in
June 1993. Her second marriage was from January 2000 to March 2004. Applicant has
four adult children. She is employed by a defense contractor, and she seeks access to a
sensitive position in connection with her employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 26 allegations (1.a. through 1.z.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. In her RSOR, admitted SOR
allegations 1.a., 1.f., 1.h., 1.i., 1.o., 1.u., and 1.v. The admitted debts are deemed to be
owed by Applicant. All of the SOR debts will be discussed below in the same order as
they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$1,105.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I do not find that
this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$210. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) Applicant’s credit
report, dated February 21, 2013, shows this debt has been delinquent since July 2007.
(Item 5.) I do not find that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$48.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since August 2010. Applicant did dispute this debt with the
credit bureau, but after an investigation by the credit bureaus the debt is still be listed as
overdue. I do not find that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$35. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since November 2009. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$55.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since July 2007. I do not find that this debt has been resolved
or reduced. 
3
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $174.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I do not find that
this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$38.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since September 2006. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $1,328.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) In her post -
FORM exhibit, she wrote that she is making monthly payments toward this debt and that
the debt will be paid off shortly. (Item A.) Item C shows that Applicant has made 3
payments of $141.75 toward this debt, but no information was furnished as to how much
is still owed on this debt. (Item C.)  I do not find that this debt has been resolved, but it
has been reduced. However, it is not clear what the amount is that is still owed. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$313.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I do not find that
this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$160.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since April 2008. I do not find that this debt has been resolved
or reduced. 
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$3,844.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since August 2010. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.l. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$160.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since May 2008. I do not find that this debt has been resolved
or reduced. 
1.m. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount
of $160.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since October 2008. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.n. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$150.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since January 2007. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
4
1.o. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$343.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since May 2009. I do not find that this debt has been resolved
or reduced. 
1.p. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$343.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since October 2008. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.q. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$520.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since April 2008. I do not find that this debt has been resolved
or reduced. 
1.r. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$110.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since January 2007. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.s. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$864.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since September 2006. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.t. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$160.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 5 shows this
debt has been delinquent since September 2006. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.u. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged off account in the
amount of $20.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I do not
find that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.v. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$409.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) I do not find that
this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.w. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $334.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.) Applicant’s credit
report, dated November 16, 2011, shows this debt has been delinquent since April
2011. (Item 6.) I do not find that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
1.x. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$260.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 6 shows this
debt has been delinquent since January 2009. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
5
1.y. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a medical account in the amount of
$130.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)  Item 6 shows this
debt has been delinquent since October 2008. I do not find that this debt has been
resolved or reduced. 
1.z. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for seven student loan accounts in the
amount of approximately $8,000.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR.
(Item 2.)  In Applicant’s December 9, 2011, security interview, she admitted that her
student loans had become delinquent in August 2004 when she had ceased payments.
(Item 4.) I do not find that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
Applicant wrote in her RSOR that she has investigated her credit report of August
22, 2013, and she has disputed errors on the report. She also explained that the
medical bills were from emergency surgery and that arrangements were made to
resolve the bills, and she claimed that she was not aware of unpaid accounts. In Item A,
Applicant wrote that she was laid off from 2004 to 2008, and her medical bills were
“supposed to be hardship addressed by the hospital.”  
During Applicant’s security clearance interview on December 19, 2011, she
admitted that she had not yet contacted her creditors or made arrangements to resolve
her overdue debts, but she promised to do so in the future. (Item 4.) In her April 25,
2013 responses to DOHA Interrogatories, she again promised to contact creditors and
begin resolving her delinquent debts. The only documentary evidence submitted by
Applicant regarding these debts shows that she has made three payments toward one
of her 26 overdue debts. (Item C.) All of the other 25 debts remain unresolved and
unreduced.   
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for access to a sensitive position, a
security clearance the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines
(AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are
useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to access to a sensitive position.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to access
to [a sensitive position] will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
6
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable access
decision. 
A person who seeks access to a sensitive position enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, most of which has been overdue
for several years. 
7
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s period of unemployment, and her emergency medical treatment, could
potentially make this condition applicable in this case. However, since there is evidence
that Applicant has made an attempt to resolve only one of the 26 overdue debts listed
on the SOR, which were all incurred several years ago, I do not find that Applicant has
acted responsibly. Therefore, this mitigating condition is not applicable in this case. 
Additionally, I do not find that AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable, since Applicant has not
“initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”
Finally, I do not find any other mitigating condition applies to this case. Therefore, I find
Guideline F against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
access to a sensitive position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the lack of evidence to
establish that Applicant has made any attempt to resolve the past-due debts listed on
the SOR, with the exception of one debt, I find that the record evidence leaves me with
significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a sensitive
position, under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under the whole-person concept.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.g.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.i. - 1.z.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: For  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to a
sensitive position.  Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
