 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05669 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dan R. Alexander, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and B (foreign influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 31, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines E and B. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On August 23, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on October 11, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 28, 2013, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on November 21, 2013. At that hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 that were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. Department Counsel also submitted a request for administrative 
notice of facts concerning Iraq that was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant had 
no objection to the administrative notice request, which was granted. Applicant testified, 
called his wife as a witness, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 3, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 63 years old. He has worked for federal contractors in Iraq and is 
seeking to continue that employment. He is married and has three children, twins who 
are 36 years old and another child who is 37 years old. This is the first time that he has 
sought to obtain a security clearance.1  
 
The SOR set forth two Guideline E allegations. The first allegation asserted that 
Applicant was terminated from a job in August 2008 after a regional security officer 
informed his employer that Applicant’s embassy badge and access had been revoked, 
and the other allegation asserted that Applicant falsified his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated September 12, 2010, by concealing that 
termination of employment. Under Guideline B, the SOR alleged that Applicant’s 
mother, six sisters, mother-in-law, two brothers-in-law, and a nephew were citizens and 
residents of Iraq and that he had a brother that was a citizen of Iraq and resident of the 
United States. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the Guideline E allegations 
and admitted the Guideline B allegations. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.2 
 
Guideline B 
 
Applicant and his wife were born in Iraq. He was a family doctor there. They 
came to the United States as refugees in 1977 and became U.S. citizens in 1985. They 
are of Kurdish descent. Their oldest son was born in Iran and is now a U.S. citizen. 
Their twins were born in the United States. They have three grandchildren who are U.S. 
citizens.3 
 
Applicant’s mother is 84 years old and in poor health. She is a resident and 
citizen of Iraq and does not work outside the home. He talks to her monthly on the 
telephone. Applicant traveled to Iraq to visit his mother from April to June 2009 and from 
October 2012 to February 2013. He does not provide financial support to his mother. 
His father is deceased and was a pastor.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. 24-26, 47, 57-59, 105-107; GE 1. When he previously worked in Iraq, Applicant may have 
had a security clearance that was issued by the Department of State. 
2 SOR, Applicant Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 23-26, 71-73, 91-95; GE 1, 2.   
4 Tr. 47-48, 64-71, 73-75, 100, 107-108; GE 1, 2.  
 
3 
 
Applicant has four sisters and two half-sisters who are citizens and residents of 
Iraq. He talks to his sisters on the telephone about once every three or four months and 
last saw them in 2012. None of them work outside the home. Each is married. His 
brothers-in-law do not work for the Iraqi government and have not served in the military. 
They work for private employers, primarily construction companies. Applicant has a 
brother who is a resident of the United States. He believes his brother is still a citizen of 
Iraq, but is not certain. Although his brother lives in a house owned by Applicant, they 
had a personal disagreement over financial issues and have not talked to each other 
since about 2003 or 2004.5 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Iraq. She is elderly, blind, ill, 
and does not work outside the home. He last saw or spoke to her in 2012. Before then, 
he would talk to her on the telephone about once every six months. His father-in-law is 
deceased and was a farmer.6 
 
Applicant’s nephew is a citizen and resident of Iraq. He works as a butcher and 
has never worked for the Iraqi government or served in the military. He is married, and 
his wife does not work outside the home. Applicant stayed at his nephew’s residence in 
Iraq for a week in 2012. He speaks to his nephew about ten to 15 times a year.7 
 
Applicant and his wife neither own property in Iraq nor have any bank accounts 
there. They have three real estate holdings in the United States. These include their 
home valued between $210,000 and $300,000, another home valued at about 
$117,000, and an investment property valued at about $150,000. At the time of the 
hearing, Applicant had about $5,000 in a checking account and about $50,000 in a 
savings account. He also has about $10,000 in a 401(k) account.8 
 
Guideline E 
 
Applicant worked for a federal contractor in Iraq from July 2004 to August 2008. 
While in Iraq, he shared a government vehicle with coworkers. On August 10, 2008, a 
coworker asked Applicant for the keys to the vehicle so that he could use it. Applicant 
advised the coworker that the vehicle had been turned into the repair shop for servicing. 
An argument ensued between the coworker and Applicant. During the argument, 
Applicant told the coworker that he was concerned about the coworker’s drinking and 
driving and told him that he should not drink and drive. The coworker became upset and 
began swearing. The coworker pulled Applicant out of the office, threatened him, and 
indicated that he wanted to engage in a fight with him. Applicant stated that he tried to 
                                                          
5 Tr. 48, 80-84, 87-90; GE 1, 2. 
6 Tr. 82-83, 100; GE 1, 2. 
7 Tr. 75-80; GE 1, 2. 
8 Tr. 69-71, 84-89, 96-97; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 
 
avoid the confrontation. Applicant and the coworker reported the argument to their 
supervisor.9 
 
Applicant’s company instituted an investigation of the incident. About two days 
after the argument, Applicant received an email from his supervisor that stated, due to 
company policy, employees involved in a verbal argument would be sent back to the 
United States. In an email, his supervisor also informed him that he handled the incident 
like a true professional. Applicant indicated that his supervisor also told him that, in 
about two weeks after being sent home, he would be allowed to return to Iraq. Applicant 
and the coworker were both sent back to the United States. Applicant stated that he 
was never informed that his job was at risk because of the incident. As Applicant was 
departing, a colleague informed him that he had to turn in his badge, but would receive 
another badge when he returned. Applicant’s wife, who was also working for a federal 
contractor in Iraq at that time, returned to the United States with him.10  
 
On August 26, 2008, Applicant’s company issued a termination letter. The 
termination letter was addressed to Applicant’s residence in the United States. The 
letter advised that the government security officer revoked Applicant’s badge and 
access, which precluded him from continuing to work as a security escort. A “personnel 
action” dated August 26, 2008, also reflected that Applicant was terminated. On 
September 2, 2008, the personnel action was signed by Applicant’s supervisor, senior 
executive manager, and human resources officer. There is a signature block on that 
document for the “employee;” however, that signature block was not signed by 
Applicant and is blank.11 
 
On August 20, 2010, Applicant received an email from his supervisor advising 
him and his wife that the supervisor received approval to bring them back to support a 
particular project. On September 2, 2010, Applicant returned to Iraq to work for the 
same company and supervisor. He worked there until about November 2, 2010, when 
he returned to the United States for a security clearance interview. Due to security 
clearance eligibility issues, he has not since returned to his job in Iraq.12 
 
In his e-QIP dated September 12, 2010, Applicant responded “No” to the 
following question: 
 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 26, 31-35, 42-43, 59-60; GE 2. 
10 Tr. 28-31, 35-36, 60-62, 100-105; GE 2; Applicant Answer to the SOR. 
11 Tr. 26-31, 50, 62-64; GE 2, 3. Applicant’s employer was affiliated with another company and 
correspondence concerning his termination of employment appears on both company’s letterhead. See 
Tr. 28-30, 37-38; GE 3. 
12 Tr. 26-27, 36-42, 104-105; GE 1, 2; AE A.  Applicant’s employer was affiliated with another 
company and correspondence concerning his termination of employment appears on both company’s 
letterhead. See Tr. 28-30, 37-38; GE 3.  
 
5 
 
Section 13C: Employment Record 
 
Has any of the following happened to you in the last 7 years?  
 
1. Fired from a job 
2. Quit a job after being told you would be fired 
3. Left a job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of  
    misconduct 
4. Left a job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory  
   performance 
5 Laid off from job by employer13   
  
At the hearing, Applicant credibly testified that he never received the termination 
letter. He stated that he was unaware of the termination letter until after he submitted 
his e-QIP. He stated that he was in Amman, Jordan on his way to the United States on 
the date that the letter was issued. Both he and his wife testified the termination letter 
was never delivered to their home in the United States. After returning home in August 
2008, Applicant called his supervisor to discuss returning to Iraq and was informed his 
security clearance needed updating before he could return. Applicant waited to hear 
from his employer, but did not hear anything until about two years later.14 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant received a certificate of appreciate from the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad 
for his outstanding support, contributions, and sacrifice during multiple indirect fire 
attacks against the Green Zone in 2008. He also received certificates of appreciation 
from senior U.S. military personnel for his help and support in Iraq.15 
 
Applicant’s wife testified that she has never known her husband to be untruthful. 
She currently works for a local governmental entity helping the needy and homeless as 
an eligibility counselor. She is very active in supporting the Kurdish community in her 
local area. She was described as a leader of that community and has been recognized 
in the media for her efforts in providing medical supplies to Kurds.16 
 
Iraq 
 
In 2003, a U.S.-led coalition removed Saddam Hussein and his Ba’ath party from 
power. While a new freely elected government took office in 2006, terrorists continue to 
                                                          
13 GE 1. 
14 Tr. 26-31, 35-42, 49-57, 59-64, 100-107; GE 2; AE C. 
15 Tr. 43-47, 95-98, 100-105; AE B. 
16 Tr. 43-47, 95-98, 100-105; AE B. 
 
6 
 
endanger the security and stability of Iraq. Foreign terrorists continue to operate in the 
country and Al-Qaeda remains a threat there.  
 
The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens of the danger of traveling 
in Iraq and recommends against all but essential travel due to the dangerous security 
situation. Numerous insurgent groups remain active throughout Iraq, despite the efforts 
of the Iraq security forces. The State Department warns of attacks that include roadside 
improvised explosive devices (IEDs), mortars, rockets, human and vehicle borne IEDs, 
and shootings. There is also the threat of sectarian violence in the country. Kidnappings 
continue to occur and the targets are Iraqi citizens and foreigners, including dual U.S.-
Iraqi citizens.  
 
There are reports of human rights abuses, including arbitrary deprivation of life; 
disappearances; torture; and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment. The Iraqi government’s effectiveness in adhering to the rule of law has 
been hampered by ongoing violence, corruption, sectarian unrest, and the lack of 
oversight, and accountability. The treatment of detainees under government authority 
has been generally poor. The judiciary is weak, and judicial independence is impaired 
by threats and killings by insurgent, sectarian, tribal, and criminal elements. Security 
threats hinder the ability of citizens to access the courts, and witness intimidation 
continues.17 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
17  HE I.  
 
7 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. A falsification must be intentional, and an omission, 
standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission.18 
  
 In his SCA dated September 12, 2010, Applicant did not disclose that he had 
been terminated from a job in August 2008. At the hearing, he testified credibly that he 
was never informed that he was terminated from that job. In August 2008, he and a co-
worker were sent back to the United States following an argument. At that time, 
Applicant was led to believe that he would be allowed to return to his job in Iraq after a 
short period. The termination letter and related personnel action were issued after he 
departed Iraq and were not signed by him. Both he and his wife testified that they never 
received the termination letter at their residence in the United States. After returning 
home, he contacted his supervisor about returning to Iraq and was informed that his 
security clearance paperwork needed updating. Two years later, he was recalled to his 
job in Iraq. Because he was still unaware of the termination letter when he subsequently 
submitted his e-QIP, he did not intentionally falsify his response to Section 13C when he 
indicated he had not been fired from a job in the past seven years. AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
applicable. Personal conduct security concerns are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable here: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
                                                          
18 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
9 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk of greater than the normal risk inherent in having a 
family member or friend living under a foreign government or owning property in a 
foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”19 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.”20 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, 
the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s foreign 
contacts are vulnerability to coercion from the government, terrorist organizations, or 
other groups.21 
 
 In this case, Applicant’s mother, four sisters, two half-sisters, mother-in-law, two 
brothers-in-law, and a nephew are citizens and residents of Iraq. Additionally, he has a 
brother who resides in the United States and may be an Iraqi citizen. Because Iraq has 
an unstable government that has committed human rights abuses and is fertile ground 
for terrorists attacks and activities, Applicant’s close family contacts in Iraq create a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Those 
relationships could also create a potential conflict of interest with his obligation to 
protect sensitive information. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. The potentially applicable mitigating conditions are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
                                                          
19 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
20 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
21 See generally, ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where family members resided.) 
 
10 
 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant continues to maintain a close relationship with his mother, sisters, half-
sisters, and nephew. He communicates with them on a regular basis and occasionally 
visits them. His wife has a close relationship with her mother. Those contacts are not 
casual or infrequent. Given his close family contacts in Iraq and the security conditions 
there, Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests 
of foreign family members and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do 
not apply. 
 
Applicant and his wife came to United States over 36 years ago. They have been 
U.S. citizens for 28 years. His children and grandchildren are U.S. citizens. He owns 
three properties in the United States that have a total value of about $500,000. He has 
no overseas financial interests. His wife works for a governmental entity in the United 
States and is actively involved in the local community. Applicant and his wife have made 
their home in the United States and have cultivated deep roots here. Considering his 
contacts and interests in the United States in comparison to those in Iraq, I find his 
sense of loyalty or obligation to his relatives in Iraq are far outweighed by his deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. He can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests. I find AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
In cases of this nature, an additional analysis is necessary. The Appeal Board 
has stated: 
 
As a general rule, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security 
procedures and regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative 
value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security 
concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct 
or circumstances. However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to 
the national security. The presence of such circumstances can give 
 
11 
 
credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to 
recognize, resist, and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or 
exploitation.22 
 
Applicant has received a certificate of appreciation from the U.S. Embassy in 
Baghdad for his contributions and sacrifices during multiple indirect fires on the Green 
Zone. While details of his compliance with security procedures in Iraq are lacking, his 
willingness to risk his life in support of U.S. interests warrants some credit under the 
quoted Appeal Board exception. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for over 28 years. He worked in Iraq in support 
of the U.S. military and State Department. Whatever potential conflicts that may arise 
from Applicant’s relatives in Iraq are more than counterbalanced by his interests, 
responsibilities, and loyalties to the United States.  
 
                                                          
22 ISCR Cases No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008) (internal citations omitted). See also ISCR Case 
No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006) citing ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. May, 30, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 
2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
 
 
12 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Considering all the 
evidence, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
guidelines for personal conduct and foreign influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph1, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
