 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-03968 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
problems. He accumulated over $35,000 in delinquent debt that remains unresolved. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with 
DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his 
eligibility for access to classified information (Answer).  
 
On October 22, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case and after coordinating 
with the parties, scheduled the hearing for November 14, 2013. At hearing, Government 
Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 5 were admitted into evidence without objection.1 Applicant testified 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel prepared an index of exhibits, which was marked Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I. 
The SOR was amended, without objection, to correct the case number. (Tr. at 14-19) 
 
2 
 
 
and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – D, which were admitted without objection. I 
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open to allow him the opportunity to 
submit additional matters, including documentary proof that he satisfied or disputed 
some of the debts listed in the SOR.2 He did not submit any matters post-hearing. The 
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on November 21, 2013, and the record closed on 
December 5, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 29, works for the U.S. military as a federal contractor. He served in the 
U.S. Navy from 2002 to 2006, at which time he was honorably discharged. He then 
worked for a private security contractor for about a year. He was working full time and 
earning a good salary until his former employer lost a significant contract. Applicant’s 
hours were sharply reduced and, by the summer of 2007, he was unemployed. It took 
him about a year to find another job, but his pay was less than half of what he had been 
earning at his former job. In February 2011, Applicant was hired by his current employer 
and submitted a security clearance application in connection with his job. His employer 
writes that he is an “outstanding employee.”(Tr. at 25-26, 38-44; Gx. 1 – 2; Ax. C)  
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 12 delinquent debts, totaling over $35,000. His delinquent 
debts range from a $61 medical account to a $19,000 debt for a repossessed car. In his 
Answer, Applicant admits six of the debts, totaling over $32,000.3 The Government 
established the other six debts through credit reports and public court records. (Gx. 3-5)  
 
Applicant claims his financial problems started in 2007, when his pay was 
reduced and he was then unemployed for a year. He further claims that he has started 
to put his financial house in order. He recently started receiving a $1,400 monthly 
stipend through the G.I. Bill, which he uses to pay his rent. He testified that this new 
stream of income allows him to set aside enough money to pay his past-due debts. He 
promised to resolve a $7,500 debt, listed at SOR ¶ 1.b, by using a portion of the funds 
from a 401k loan that he secured a week before the hearing. He also promised to 
submit documentation post-hearing to substantiate his claims of debt repayment, to 
validate his disputes of certain debts, and to provide proof of having received financial 
counseling. (Tr. at 25-34, 44-63; Gx. 2) 
 
Applicant did not submit any documents post-hearing to substantiate any of his 
claims. He previously promised during his 2011 security clearance background 
interview that he would resolve the $7,500 debt by 2012.4 Furthermore, he moved into a 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 29-32, 54-56, 67-70, 76-80. Applicant was granted three weeks after the hearing to submit 
matters, and was advised that if he needed more time that he could request such in writing. He did not 
submit any matters post-hearing, nor requested additional time.  
 
3 Specifically, SOR ¶¶ 1.a-b, e, and h-j.  
 
4 Gx. 2, Subject Interview.  
 
 
3 
 
 
more expensive apartment after he started receiving the $1,400 stipend.5 His past-due 
debts totaling over $35,000 remain unresolved as of the close of the record.  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.6  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
                                                          
5 Contrast, Gx. 2, Personal Financial Statement (lists $600 a month for rent), with, Tr. at 44-47 
(as of September 2011, when started receiving stipend, paying over $1,200 a month for rent). 
 
6 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises 
regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
maintenance of a security clearance.”) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
 
4 
 
 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.7 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of over $35,000 in delinquent debt raises this concern. 
This record evidence also establishes the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations 
require administrative judges to make predictive judgments). See also, Kaplan v. Conyers, et al., 2013 
U.S. App. LEXIS 17278 at ** 23-24, 40-51 (Fed. Cir. Aug. 20, 2013) (federal courts will generally defer to 
such predictive judgments).  
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Although Applicant’s current financial 
trouble is in part due to matters beyond his control, namely, unemployment and 
underemployment, he has not handled his financial affairs in a responsible manner. He 
has been with his current employer for nearly three years and submitted no 
documentation that he has resolved any of his past-due debts. An applicant bears the 
burden of mitigating the security concerns at issue and to establish his or her eligibility 
for a security clearance. Applicant’s failure to submit documentary proof of his efforts to 
resolve his past-due debts severely undercuts his position for a clearance, especially in 
light of his previous promise to resolve one of the SOR debts that remains unresolved. 
Furthermore, Applicant’s recent decision to increase his monthly expenses by moving 
into a more expensive apartment instead of using his new stream of income to resolve 
his long overdue debts casts doubt on his claims of financial reform. In the end, I find 
that Applicant’s financial situation is not under control and he failed to meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from his finances. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).8 I specifically considered Applicant’s military service, his 
employer’s recommendation, and that he previously held a security clearance while in 
the military. However, his accumulation of a significant amount of delinquent debt, which 
remains unresolved as of the close of the record, raises doubts about his eligibility for a 
security clearance.9  
                                                          
8 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (“[e]ven years of safeguarding national 
security information may not be sufficient to mitigate a history of ongoing, significant delinquent debt.”). 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
