 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08193 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 17, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted a notarized response to the SOR on October 14, 2013, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
December 3, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on December 11, 2013, scheduling the hearing for January 7, 2014. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were 
 
2 
 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. The record was held 
open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that were 
marked AE F through I and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s e-mail 
regarding the submission is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on January 14, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
U.S. military for 23 years before retiring in 2009 as an O-4. He held a security clearance 
in the military, but it lapsed after he retired. He has a bachelor’s degree. He married in 
1994 and divorced in 2010. He married his current wife in 2011. He has two children, 
ages 18 and 14, and he has an adult stepchild.1 
 
 Applicant was unemployed for about four months after he retired from the 
military. His unemployment, in conjunction with his divorce, placed a financial strain on 
him, and a number of debts became delinquent. Applicant has worked overseas for the 
last few years, and he has made efforts to resolve his financial problems. He paid or 
settled several delinquent debts before the SOR was issued.2 Two remaining delinquent 
debts became the focus of the SOR.3  
 
 Applicant paid the $1,399 debt to a brokerage firm in October 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
He paid $3,100 to the collection company handling the $10,639 department store debt 
on January 2, 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant and the collection company agreed to settle 
the remaining balance of $8,574 for $3,952. Applicant paid $1,000 on January 9, 2014. 
The remainder of the settlement amount is to be paid in 12 monthly installments of 
$246.4 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that he will continue with his settlement payments. He 
is committed to becoming completely debt free. He earns a good living. With his salary 
and military retirement pay, he is able to pay all his debts. He also has an excess that 
can be used for savings, investments, retirement accounts, and emergencies. He has 
not received financial counseling.5 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-24, 35-38, 42; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-25, 38-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE B. 
 
3 The SOR alleged three delinquent debts, but two of the debts are duplicates. The department store 
credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was transferred to the collection company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
4 Tr. at 25-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A-D, F-I. 
 
5 Tr. at 33-38, 41; AE B, E. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or 
unwilling to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of 
the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 
03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). SOR ¶ 1.c is 
concluded for Applicant.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by his divorce and a period of 
unemployment. Those events were beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 
20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant has been working to resolve his financial problems for a few years. He paid 
several debts that were not alleged in the SOR. Of the two remaining debts, he paid one 
debt, and he paid $4,100 toward the settlement of the second debt.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 I find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and made a 
good-faith effort to pay his debts. There are clear indications that his financial problems 
are being resolved and are under control. They occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) is not 
completely applicable because Applicant is still in the process of paying the settlement 
owed on the last debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable military service, the factors that led to his 
financial problems, and the steps he has taken to remedy those problems. As indicated 
above, an applicant is not required to establish that he has paid every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant establish a plan to resolve the financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. I find that Applicant has 
established a plan to resolve his financial problems, and he has taken significant action 
to implement that plan.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findingsqas 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
