KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  A party’s disagreement
with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge erred. 
Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 12-12301.a1
DATE: 01/29/2014
DATE:  January 29, 2014
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-12301
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 14, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case be
decided on the written record.  On November 6, 2013, after the close of the record, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.  
2
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
Department Counsel requested that the Judge take administrative notice regarding certain
facts about the nation of Afghanistan.  The Judge granted the request and made the following
findings of fact:  Despite progress made since the Taliban was deposed, Afghanistan still faces
challenges like defeating terrorists and insurgents, recovering from over three decades of civil strife,
and rebuilding shattered physical, economic, and political infrastructure.  Afghanistan’s human
rights record has remained poor, and the Afghan-Taliban dominated insurgency has become
increasingly sophisticated and destabilizing.  Overall, the State Department has declared that the
security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical as no part of Afghanistan is
immune from violence.  
The Judge made the following additional findings of fact: Applicant is 48 years old.  She was
born in Afghanistan.  She came to the United States and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1999.
Her current husband, mother, father-in-law, mother-in-law and three sisters-in-law are citizens and
residents of Afghanistan.  She is currently in the process of sponsoring her husband to come to the
United States.  His paperwork has thus far been stalled for unknown reasons.  Applicant’s husband
does not entirely understand the type of work she does for a living.  Applicant speaks to her husband
by phone only about once a month because of the expense of calls to Afghanistan.  Applicant’s
mother has always been a homemaker and has no known affiliation with the Afghani government,
Applicant speaks to her mother by phone about once a month.  Applicant’s mother has no plans to
come to the United States.  Applicant’s in-laws manage a farm and have no known nexus to the
Afghani government.  Applicant has contacts with her in laws about 8-15 times a year by telephone.
None of Applicant’s sisters-in-law have any known connection to the Afghani government.
Applicant converses with her sisters-in-law about 8-15 times a year by phone.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant maintains regular telephonic contact
with all of her Afghani resident-citizen relatives.  Under these facts, a third party coercion concern
potentially exists.  Terrorist groups and other criminal organizations operate within Afghanistan.
They participate in nefarious activities.  These facts are sufficient to find a heightened risk exists
with regard to Applicant’s Afghani relatives.  Applicant has the burden to demonstrate evidence
sufficient to refute or mitigate the allegations in the SOR.  Here, the primary concern is Applicant’s
relationships with her husband and her mother.  While they, like Applicant’s in-laws, initially seem
unlikely candidates for third-party manipulation, the evidence available regarding these kin is too
scant to make a thorough assessment.  Similarly, the available evidence reveals little about Applicant
and both her life in and ties to the United States.  More information is needed to assess her
relationship to the United States, as opposed to any remaining loyalties she may have to her place
of birth.  With so few facts upon which to assess both Applicant and her kin, Applicant failed to
meet her burden, and security concerns are left unmitigated.  
Applicant asserts that she has no foreign interests, including financial interests.  She states
that her loyalties are not divided and that her loyalties lay with the United States and her two
3
daughters in America.  She argues that she has many coworkers that also have family ties in
Afghanistan, and she is not sure why she is the one deemed to be in a heightened risk situation.
Applicant states that, although she has in-laws in Afghanistan, they will be immigrating and will not
be a risk.
 
Applicant’s brief includes statements of fact  that are not part of the record below.  The
Board cannot consider new evidence in the process of deciding appeals.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29
The gravamen of the Judge’s decision is his conclusion that the record contained insufficient
evidence on Applicant’s behalf to overcome the Government’s security concerns.  This conclusion
is sustainable.  The Board finds no reason to believe that the Judge did not properly weigh the
evidence or that he failed to consider all the evidence of record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06622
at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012).  We have considered the totality of Applicant’s arguments on appeal
and find no error in the Judge’s ultimate conclusions regarding mitigation.  The only record evidence
submitted by Applicant was her answer to the SOR, and the Judge accurately noted the very brief
nature of her answers to the allegations.
 As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed:  Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
