 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10857 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding handling protected 
information and personal conduct, but he failed to mitigate the security concerns 
regarding financial considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 14, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application (1st SF 86).1 On August 31, 2012, Applicant submitted 
another e-QIP version of a Security Clearance Application (2nd SF 86).2 On February 
27, 2013, Applicant submitted another e-QIP version of a Security Clearance 
Application (3rd SF 86).3 On March 29, 2011, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 (1
st
 SF 86, dated September 14, 2010). 
 
2
 Item 12 (2
nd
 SF 86, dated August 31, 2012). 
 
3
 Item 13 (3
rd
 SF 86, February 27, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
him a set of interrogatories. Applicant received the interrogatories on April 4, 2011, but it 
is unclear when he responded to the interrogatories as the response is undated and 
unsigned.4 The DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him on July 1, 2013, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), Guideline K (Handling Protected Information), and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 10, 2013. In a sworn statement, dated July 
22, 2013,5 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on November 5, 2013, and 
he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the FORM on November 18, 2013, but, as of January 10, 2014, he had not 
submitted a response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 14, 
2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.) of the SOR. He denied the 
remaining factual allegations. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since June 
1999, has been serving as a computer graphics illustrator. He has never served in the 
U.S. military.6 He was granted a secret security clearance in about December 2000, and 
a top secret security clearance on an unspecified date, but his eligibility for a security 
clearance was subsequently denied and his security clearance was revoked.7 Applicant 
claimed the revocation action occurred in May 2011 because of financial issues and his 
                                                          
 
4
 Item 7 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, undated). 
 
5
 Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated July 22, 2013). 
 
6
 Item 13, supra note 5, at 11-12. 
 
7
 Item 9 (Security Violation Report, dated September 15, 2011). 
 
3 
                                      
 
father’s criminal record.8 Applicant has attended a university on a part-time basis since 
June 2007, but has not yet received a degree. He was married in 2000, and he and his 
wife have one child, born in 2009.9  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until the period between 
2006 and 2009, when two events involving his father and father-in-law occurred. In June 
2006, his father was charged with child molestation and sexual assault with a minor - a 
5-year-old female foster child – and Applicant and his wife purportedly assisted him 
financially with his legal fees of between $3,000 and $6,000 during the entire criminal 
process. His father’s attorney advised him that, in order to avoid imprisonment, he plead 
guilty to a lesser charge – indecency with a minor. Applicant’s father did so and was 
eventually sentenced to seven years’ probation and registration as a sex offender.10 
During the same period, Applicant’s father-in-law lost his job and had his leg amputated 
following several unsuccessful surgeries. Applicant and his wife purportedly assisted 
him financially by paying medical bills of between $20,000 and $30,000.11 Because 
those expenditures left him with insufficient funds to maintain all of his accounts in a 
current status, several of them became delinquent. A variety of accounts were placed 
for collection or charged off.  
 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling or debt consolidation 
counseling.12 It appears that he had contacted only one or possibly two of his creditors 
or collection agents in an effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  Applicant indicated 
an intention to address his delinquent accounts once his “current commitments to [one 
specific SOR account] are finalized by the end of [2013]. I do not wish to be further 
overextended and will repay once finances allow.”13 Despite being requested to do so, 
Applicant failed to submit any documentation to support his contentions that he had 
made any payments on behalf of his father or father-in-law, or to any of his own 
creditors, or that he had established repayment plans with any creditors.14  
 
When he was interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in October 2010, Applicant stated he had sufficient available funds 
                                                          
 
8
 Item 13, supra note 5, at 26-27. 
 
9
 Item 13, supra note 5, at 13-14, 17. 
 
10
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 2; Item 11 (Letter, dated October 28, 2012); Item 7 (Personal Subject Interview, 
dated October 28, 2010), at 4. 
 
11
 Item 11, supra note 10; Item 7, supra note 7, at 4. 
 
12
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
13
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 1-2; Item 11. 
 
14
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 3-4. Applicant was informed that among the acceptable documentation would be 
recent statements or vouchers from creditors, credit consolidation indicating payment history, cancelled checks, and 
bank statements.  
 
4 
                                      
 
to meet his monthly financial obligations. He cited monthly bills, including mortgage, 
utilities, vehicle insurance, mobile phone, satellite, internet, and credit cards totaling 
$1,599. However, he failed to state his net monthly income, or indicate if he had any 
money left over each month for discretionary spending or savings.15 In March 2011, 
when asked to complete a personal financial statement reflecting a net monthly income 
and monthly expenses, he failed to complete the blank form that had been furnished to 
him to do so.16  
 
The SOR identified nine purportedly continuing delinquencies, totaling 
approximately $15,590. There are delinquent credit cards, a past due mortgage, and 
various delinquent retail accounts with varying balances from $30 to $2,002 that were 
past due, placed for collection, charged off, or transferred or sold to debt purchasers 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.).17 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant contended he had 
entered into a repayment arrangement with one creditor (SOR ¶ 1.f.) and settled one 
other account (SOR ¶ 1.i.), but he failed to submit any documentation to support his 
contentions. In the absence of any documentation to support his contentions, I conclude 
that none of the accounts have been resolved. 
 
Handling Protected Information 
 
During a security interview conducted by the Defense Security Service (DSS) in 
August 2011, it was reported that a classified document, with a secret classification, 
was printed by a third party on an unaccredited automated information system (AIS). 
The individual printing the classified document, identified as someone other than 
Applicant, “went through proper security channels and was not aware of any equipment 
violations,” and it was determined that the person printing the document had no 
culpability in the violation. The former facility security officer (FSO) was deemed solely 
responsible for the incident, but because she had already terminated her employment 
with the company, no disciplinary action could be taken.18 Applicant was not identified 
as having any culpability for the incident. It was determined that the reproduction 
incident was done in violation of DoD 5220.22-M, the National Industrial Security 
Program (NISPOM) Operating Manual (February 28, 2006), §§ 5-600, 5-601, 5-602, 
and 5-603.19 The former FSO indicated she thought the copier had been cleared for 
                                                          
15
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
16
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 15. 
 
17
 Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, Equifax Credit Report, dated October 20, 2010); Item 14 
(Combined Experian, TransUnion, Equifax Credit Report, dated March 1, 2013);  Item 15 (Equifax Credit Report, 
dated May 14, 2013); Item 16 (Equifax Credit Report, dated October 30, 2013);  Item 3, supra note 5, at 1-2.  
 
18
 Item 10 (Report of Investigation, undated), at 1-3. 
  
19
 NISPOM, § 5-600 states:  
 
Contractors shall establish a control system to ensure that reproduction of classified material is 
held to the minimum consistent with contractual and operational requirements. Classified 
reproduction shall be accomplished by authorized personnel knowledgeable of the procedures. The 
use of technology that prevents, discourages, or detects the unauthorized reproduction of classified 
documents is encouraged. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
classified reproduction based on the Common Criteria Data erase kit. She believed a 
former DSS representative considered such action as a non-issue.20  
 
A DSS Industrial Security Specialist (ISS) followed up the investigation with her 
own investigation into the incident. The ISS concluded that since two cleared 
employees (the former FSO and Applicant, who was the Information System Security 
Manager (ISSM)) had access to the hard drives while they were in the copier, and both 
denied ever accessing the material, they were both deemed culpable.21 The ISS noted 
that as the ISSM, Applicant should have known that what he had done was contrary to 
established policy.22 Applicant denied culpability. He indicated that the former FSO 
requested classified copies be made on an unauthorized machine which both she and 
Applicant believed was appropriate because of the security kit that had previously been 
installed, and such action had never been deemed by DSS to be an issue. He also 
explained that he played no part in the incident, and was merely the ISSM when it 
occurred.23 
 
The file does not contain an Individual Culpability Report. The file is silent as to 
whether or not the violation involved a deliberate disregard of security requirements; or 
if it involved gross negligence in the handling of classified information; or if the violation 
involved was not deliberate in nature, but involved a pattern of negligence or 
carelessness.24 Also missing was a statement that indicated the graduated scale of 
disciplinary actions that might have been taken against Applicant for the violation, and 
what administrative actions were actually taken against Applicant.25 It does not appear 
that Applicant’s security clearance was revoked because of this incident, because such 
revocation action occurred before the investigation was completed. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
When Applicant completed his 1st SF 86 in September 2010, he indicated that his 
financial problems stemmed from assisting his family members, including his father, 
with medical and legal issues, without specifying what those legal issues were.26 He 
discussed the issue with his FSO because his father had entered a plea of guilty only to 
avoid imprisonment, even though he was innocent of the charge. The FSO advised 
Applicant to respond “no” to the question of associating with known criminals, and to 
clear up the issue when interviewed by OPM.27 During Applicant’s OPM interview, the 
                                                          
20
 Item, 10, supra note 18, at Encl. A-1 (FSO Notes of former FSO Interview, dated August 11, 2011). 
 
21
 Item 9 (Security Violation Report, dated September 15, 2011), at 2. 
 
22
 Item 9, supra note 21, at 2. 
 
23
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 2. 
 
24
 See NISPOM, § 1-304. 
 
25
 See NISPOM, § 1-304. 
 
26
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 40. 
 
27
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 2. 
 
6 
                                      
 
investigator asked him if he associated with anyone involved or suspected in criminal 
conduct or activities, and Applicant responded “no.”28 He also added that his financial 
problems were, in part, due to his father’s sexual assault on a minor as well as his legal 
fees stemming from that criminal charge. When the investigator referred to Applicant’s 
initial denial to the question, Applicant said he was only following the guidance he had 
received from his FSO.29 Applicant then volunteered all of the information regarding his 
father’s criminal situation.30 Applicant denied any intent to lie or deceive anyone about 
his father’s activities.31 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”32 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”33   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
28
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 2. 
 
29
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
30
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
31
 Item 3, supra note 5, at 2-3. 
 
32
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
33
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”34 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.35  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”36 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”37 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
                                                          
34
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
35
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
36
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
37
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. Commencing between 2006 and 2009, Applicant had insufficient 
funds to make all of his monthly account payments. As a result, some accounts started 
to become delinquent, and were placed for collection or charged off. His delinquent 
debts remain largely unresolved. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and19(c) apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Evidence 
that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.38 In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
                                                          
38
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that she or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(e) do not apply. The nature, frequency, and relative 
recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since 2006 make it difficult to 
conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” In light of his substantial 
period of continuing financial problems, the repeated promises to resolve his delinquent 
debts, and the inaction that followed those promises, it is unlikely that they will be 
resolved in the short term, and they are likely to continue. Applicant has never received 
counseling in money management, debt management, debt repayment, or budgeting. 
Furthermore, considering Applicant’s general inaction following several promises, over 
several years, to resolve his accounts, the indications are that the financial problems 
have not been resolved and are not under control. He has not formally disputed any of 
alleged debts except to claim that he had paid one off. Under the circumstances, 
Applicant’s actions do cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) and 20(d) might have applied, but despite being requested to do so, 
Applicant failed to submit any documentation to support his contentions that he had 
made any payments on behalf of his father or father-in-law, or to any of his own 
creditors, or that he had established repayment plans with any creditors. There is no 
documentary evidence to indicate that Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to repay his 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. Applicant’s statements regarding his 
future intent to resolve his debts, without corroborating documentary evidence 
supporting actual action to do so, are entitled to little weight. Those declarations of 
future intention to resolve his debts, after so much time where no positive efforts were 
taken, do not qualify as a “good-faith” effort. Under these circumstances it is unclear if 
Applicant acted responsibly.39  
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information 
is set out in AG ¶ 33:       
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 34(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information is potentially disqualifying. Department Counsel has identified this 
as the sole condition of this particular guideline possibly pertinent to this case,40 and I 
                                                          
39
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
40
 FORM, at 6. 
 
10 
                                      
 
concur. Applicant purportedly violated four sections of the NISPOM, but with the 
exception of NISPOM § 5-600, there is little evidence that the other cited provisions (§§ 
5-601, 5-602, and 5-603) apply in this instance. There is no evidence that the copied 
documents were marked top secret, or that classification markings were not placed on 
the classified material being reproduced. In addition, there is no evidence that the 
copied documents were not in furtherance of a prime contract; part of a bid, quotation, 
or proposal to a Federal agency or prospective subcontractor; or part of patent 
applications.41 Instead, the investigation concluded that the former FSO was deemed 
solely responsible for the incident, but because she had already terminated her 
employment with the company, no disciplinary action could be taken. Applicant was not 
identified as having any culpability for the incident.  
A follow-up investigation by the ISS concluded that since two cleared employees 
(the former FSO and Applicant, who was the ISSM) had access to the hard drives while 
the documents were in the copier, and both denied ever accessing the material, they 
were both deemed culpable. There was no explanation as to how or why the conclusion 
regarding Applicant differed from the first investigation. Applicant denied culpability. 
When there are two possibilities, without more, it is impossible to properly determine if 
there is substantial evidence that one of the two probable “suspects” actually performed 
the prohibited act. In simply making her determination of Applicant’s culpability, based 
on the record submitted, in the absence of an Individual Culpability Report, a 
confession, or more evidence of culpability, the finding of the ISS is unsupported and 
unreasonable. I find Applicant’s statements to be consistent and credible. Because of 
the paucity of evidence contradicting him, and the fact that the Government evidence is 
internally inconsistent, I find that AG ¶ 34(g) is essentially refuted. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from handling protected information. Under AG ¶ 35(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where so much time has elapsed since the 
behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that 
it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
In this instance, I will assume the purported “security violation” occurred in 
August 2011—nearly two and one-half years before the date of this decision. However, 
as noted above, the file is silent as to whether or not the violation involved a deliberate 
disregard of security requirements; or if it involved gross negligence in the handling of 
classified information; or if the violation involved was not deliberate in nature, but 
involved a pattern of negligence or carelessness. Also missing was a statement that 
indicated the graduated scale of disciplinary actions that might have been taken against 
Applicant for the violation, and what administrative actions were actually taken against 
Applicant. It does not appear that Applicant’s security clearance was revoked because 
of this incident, because such revocation action occurred before the investigation was 
completed. Considering the totality of the evidence, I find that, assuming AG ¶ 34(g) is 
established, then AG ¶ 35(a) applies to mitigate the security concerns. 
                                                          
41
 See NISPOM, §§ 5-601, 5-602, and 5-603. 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:       
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, and 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(b), deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant 
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other 
official government representative is potentially disqualifying. Applicant’s FSO advised 
him to respond “no” to the question of associating with known criminals, and to clear up 
the issue when interviewed by OPM. During that OPM interview, the investigator asked 
him if he associated with anyone involved or suspected in criminal conduct or activities, 
and Applicant responded “no.” He added that his financial problems were, in part, due to 
his father’s sexual assault on a minor as well as his legal fees stemming from that 
criminal charge. When the investigator referred to Applicant’s initial denial to the 
question, Applicant said he was only following the guidance he had received from his 
FSO. Applicant then volunteered all of the information regarding his father’s criminal 
situation. Applicant denied any intent to lie or deceive anyone about his father’s 
activities. Because Applicant had initially acknowledged, at least in part, the issue 
involving his father, and denied intending to lie or provide false or misleading 
information, AG ¶ 16(b) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
12 
                                      
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.42       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He purportedly 
financially assisted his father and father-in-law with their respective legal and health 
issues, and has acknowledged responsibility for his delinquent debts and promised to 
resolve them. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling or debt consolidation counseling. It 
appears that he had contacted only one or possibly two of his creditors or collection 
agents in an effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  Despite being requested to do 
so, Applicant failed to submit any documentation to support his contentions that he had 
made any payments on behalf of his father or father-in-law, or to any of his own 
creditors, or that he had established repayment plans with any creditors. In October 
2010, Applicant stated he had sufficient available funds to meet his monthly financial 
obligations. However, he failed to state his net monthly income, or indicate if he had any 
money left over each month for discretionary spending or savings. In March 2011, when 
asked to complete a personal financial statement reflecting a net monthly income and 
monthly expenses, he failed to complete the blank form that had been furnished to him 
to do so. Applicant’s continuing inaction under the circumstances confronting him does 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. His reputation in 
the workplace is unknown. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:43 
                                                          
42
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
43
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
13 
                                      
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated the absence of a “meaningful track record” of debt 
reduction and elimination. There are delinquent debts, repeated promises of action to 
resolve those debts, and inaction by Applicant to do so. Overall, the evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through 
AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against  Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against  Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against  Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against  Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For  Applicant 
 
14 
                                      
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For  Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
