1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-10358
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Allegations of criminal conduct are resolved for Applicant. However, Applicant
failed to mitigate the security concerns about his finances and personal conduct. He
repeatedly and deliberately misrepresented adverse information in his background, and
he has accrued significant delinquent debt that he has not attempted to resolve.
Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On June 6, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his
employment with a defense contractor. The results of the ensuing  background
investigation, which included his responses to interrogatories from Department of
Defense (DOD) adjudicators, did not support a finding that it is clearly consistent with
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 SOR 2.b - 2.d alleged that Applicant executed his e-QIP on May 31, 2012. However, he actually signed and3
submitted the document on June 6, 2012. At hearing, I amended SOR 2.b - 2.d to reflect the latter date. (Tr.
24 - 26)
2
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified information.  On1
May 17, 2013, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guidelines  for criminal2
conduct (Guideline J), personal conduct (Guideline E), and financial considerations
(Guideline F).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on October 23, 2013, and I convened a hearing on November
19, 2013. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 6, which were
admitted without objection. (Tr. 19 - 25) Applicant testified but offered no documents.
DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on November 27, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline J, the Government alleged that on October 14, 2009, Applicant
was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana, to which he pleaded guilty and
was fined $1,000 (SOR 1.a); and that on November 19, 2011, he was arrested and
charged with domestic battery (SOR 1.b). Applicant admitted both allegations.
Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that during a July 31, 2012 interview
with a Government investigator, Applicant deliberately falsified details of the drug-
related arrest described in SOR 1.a (SOR 2.a); that by answering “No” to e-QIP
question 23 regarding illegal use of drugs in the last seven years, he deliberately made
a false statement to the Government (SOR 2.b); that by answering “No” to e-QIP
question 23 regarding illegal purchase, sale, possession, or trafficking of drugs in the
last seven years, he deliberately made a false statement to the Government (SOR 2.c);
and that by answering “No” to question 22.a regarding arrests in the last seven years,
he deliberately made a false official statement to the Government because he omitted
the domestic battery arrest described in SOR 1.b (SOR 2.d). Applicant admitted each of
these allegations.3
At hearing, I asked Applicant if he understood the gravamen of each Guideline E
allegation to which he had admitted; namely, that he intentionally provided false
statements to the Government in his e-QIP and in his interview. He indicated that he
understood that he had provided incorrect information in his answers and at the
interview, but he denied doing so intentionally. Accordingly, I entered denials on his
 See Directive E3.1.14.4
3
behalf as to SOR 2.a - 2.d (Tr. 11 - 13), and the burden or proving those controverted
allegations remained with the Government.4
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $18,802 for 20
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 3.a - 3.t). Applicant admitted all of these allegations.
In addition to his admissions, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 26 years old. He has never been married, but has one child, age two,
whom he supports through weekly child support payments of $123. (Tr. 53) 
After graduating from high school in 2006, Applicant attended a 14-month
training program for certification in various aviation industry maintenance and repair
skills. After a brief period working as a dishwasher, Applicant applied for work with a
large aviation manufacturing and maintenance corporation. He was not hired because
he disclosed his 2009 arrest for marijuana possession (more fully discussed, below)
when he applied. In 2010, Applicant was hired as an aviation maintenance technician by
a non-defense industry contractor, where he worked until February 2011. In April 2012,
Applicant was offered a position with the defense contractor sponsoring his application
for a security clearance, but the job is contingent on his obtaining eligibility for that
clearance. Since April 2011, he has been working for a different aviation company while
his clearance application is pending. (Gx. 1; Tr. 45)
Applicant disclosed several delinquent and past-due debts in his e-QIP. Credit
reports obtained during his background investigation reflect the debts alleged in SOR
3.a - 3.t. Applicant financed his vocational education through a combination of grants
and student loans. The total cost of his education was about $21,000. Of that, he
received about $9,000 in grants. The remaining student loans came due, after a brief
grace period, in early 2011. However, Applicant has not yet been able to make any
payments on his student loans. Applicant began, but did not complete, the process of
consolidating his student loans into a single account in 2011. As alleged in SOR 3.j - 3.l,
and 3.o - 3.s, Applicant’s student loans are either in collection or more than 120 days
past due. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 5; Gx. 6; Tr. 42 - 43, 64 - 65, 68 - 70)
Applicant also has been working without medical insurance since at least 2010.
As a result, he incurred several unpaid debts for medical services. Those debts, now
delinquent as alleged at SOR 1.a - 1.c, 1.e - 1.h, and 1.t, total almost $2,000. They
remain unpaid. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 5; Gx. 6; Tr. 58 - 61)
Applicant’s current position pays $23.50 hourly. However, he often travels and
must pay all of his own expenses, including medical or other insurance costs. Applicant
also pays weekly child support of $123, and he is helping support his parents, because
his father is physically unable to work and his mother earns less than $20,000 annually.
4
As a result, he has very little money remaining each month after expenses with which to
repay his student loans and other debts. (Tr. 39 - 40, 54 - 57, 102)
When Applicant applied for a security clearance, he disclosed most of his past-
due debts, including medical bills, delinquent student loans, and at least three unpaid
personal credit accounts. Credit reports obtained during the ensuing background
investigation documented the debts alleged in SOR 3.a - 3.t. Applicant has not entered
into any repayment plans or otherwise acted to resolve his financial problems. He also
has not sought professional financial counseling or other assistance in trying to resolve
his debts. Applicant plans to start paying his debts when he starts working for the
defense contractor that has sponsored his application. That job will pay about $63,000
gross annually, and will provide medical insurance and other benefits, as well as  travel
expense reimbursement. (Gx. 1; Gx. 5; Gx. 6; Tr. 101 - 102)
In Applicant’s e-QIP, he disclosed that he was charged with possession of
marijuana on October 14, 2009. He stated in his answer to e-QIP question 22 (Police
Record) that he was in a car with someone who had marijuana, but who did not want to
admit it was theirs. When Applicant was asked about his arrest during a July 31, 2012
background investigation interview with a Government investigator, he stated that the
possession charge arose when marijuana was found during a traffic stop of a car in
which he was a passenger. Applicant further stated that his friend, the driver, was on
probation, so Applicant told police the marijuana was his to spare his friend another
arrest. In response to interrogatories from DOD adjudicators, Applicant reviewed the
summary of his interview, agreed that it was accurate, and adopted it as his own
statement. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2)
However, the police report of Applicant’s arrest differs significantly from
Applicant’s version. According to the report, part of which Applicant provided in
response to DOD interrogatories, the arresting officer stopped Applicant, who was
walking away from a house at which police had arrived to execute a search warrant
because it was a suspected point of sale for illegal drugs. Applicant was found in
possession of two small bags of marijuana on his person – one in his shirt and one in
his shoe. He admitted to the officer that he had just purchased the marijuana. Applicant
was cited for misdemeanor possession and released. On November 10, 2009, he
appeared in court and was assessed a $500 fine plus court costs. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 4)
At his hearing in this matter, Applicant was evasive about the details of his
October 2009 drug possession charge. He initially stated that he was arrested “at a
house known as a drug house.” On cross-examination, he again admitted being on the
property, which he characterized as a house where on-line gamers gathered for
competitions, when police arrived to execute a search warrant. His testimony indicated
that he was not in a car, as he had stated in his e-QIP and in his July 2012 interview.
However, he denied that he told police he had “just purchased” drugs, as reflected in
the police report. He also claimed that the account he gave in his July 2012 interview
was true because he had been in a car with his friend, and because he was holding the
two bags of marijuana for that friend. However, he was not holding them to protect his
 See Directive. 6.3.5
5
friend, but because his friend was selling marijuana and Applicant was helping him, as
he had on two previous occasions. Applicant also averred, alternatively, that the police
report of his arrest was inaccurate, or that he had told the arresting officer he had just
purchased the marijuana because he thought that is what the officer wanted to hear.
(Gx. 2; Tr. 37, 79 - 89) I found Applicant’s testimony about his drug possession arrest to
be completely lacking in credibility.
When Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he answered “no” to question 23 regarding
use of illegal drugs in the last seven years. However, in response to interrogatories from
DOD adjudicators, Applicant stated that he used marijuana once in 2011. In his
testimony, he rationalized the omission of his drug use from the e-QIP by explaining that
he did not consider a one-time use of marijuana to be within the scope of e-QIP
question 23. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 90 - 92) I did not find his testimony about his omission to
be credible.
On November 19, 2011, Applicant and his girlfriend, the mother of his child, got
into an argument that escalated to the point that the police were called. No physical
contact was made by either party during the argument. Applicant left the premises
before the police arrived, and he later turned himself in at the police station on a charge
of domestic battery. After having his picture and fingerprints taken and spending the
night in jail, Applicant appeared in court the next morning. All charges were dropped at
the request of his girlfriend, and Applicant later completed an anger management class.
Applicant did not disclose the arrest as required by e-QIP question 22, because he
thought the question only addressed convictions or “going to jail.” However, he did not
explain why he disclosed his 2009 citation for marijuana possession, for which he did
not go to jail, but failed to report his 2011 arrest for battery, for which he was jailed
overnight. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 39, 90 - 91, 102, 105)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).8
6
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Since 2009, Applicant has accrued significant unpaid debt consisting mostly of
unpaid medical bills and unpaid or past-due student loans. He has not made any
payments on those debts, or on other delinquent personal credit accounts. This
information is sufficient to raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances. That
concern is expressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
7
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations).
Applicant’s debts are still not being addressed in any meaningful way, and he
does not currently have the means to pay his debts. His income is earned from a
company that does not reimburse his travel expenses or provide medical insurance.
Most of Applicant’s money is used to support his child and his parents. He started the
process of consolidating his student loans into a single payment in 2011, but he never
submitted the application. Applicant has not sought financial counseling or other
assistance in resolving his debts, and he does not contest the validity of any of the
debts alleged. Available information does not support any of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating
conditions, and this guideline is resolved against the Applicant. 
Personal Conduct
Available information shows that Applicant repeatedly provided false information
to the Government in his e-QIP and in his background interview. Such conduct is
disqualifying if done intentionally. I conclude from all of the facts and circumstances
presented that Applicant knowingly and willfully falsified or withheld relevant information
required by the Government to accurately assess his suitability for access to classified
information. His conduct raises a security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct
addressed at AG ¶ 15 as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, the following AG ¶ 16 disqualifying conditions apply:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative.
8
Applicant’s version of what happened in his 2009 drug-related arrest differs
significantly from what he disclosed in his e-QIP, from what he told a Government
investigator during his background investigation, and from his testimony in this hearing.
After being denied employment in 2010 because he disclosed that arrest in a job
application, Applicant decided that he should conceal the true scope of his actions by
claiming the drugs were not his and by trying to disassociate himself from the house
police had identified as a source of illegal drug activity. 
Applicant also did not disclose his use of marijuana in 2011. When asked at the
hearing why he omitted that information, he provided a convoluted explanation about
what he considered to be “use” of an illegal drug. His rationalization for his omission did
not persuade me that it was appropriate for him to withhold that information from the
Government. 
Finally, Applicant was obligated to disclose his 2011 domestic battery arrest even
though the charge was dismissed the next day. Applicant’s own explanation that he
thought he only had to disclose instances involving incarceration is directly at odds with
his own account of what happened; that is, that he spent the night in jail before the
charge was dismissed. By itself, this omission might be considered a misunderstanding
of the question asked. However, when taken together with Applicant’s other
falsifications, the record as a whole reflects a pattern of deliberate falsification intended
to protect his own interests at the expense of the Government’s need for sufficient
accurate information in assessing his suitability for access to classified information.
I have considered the AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions and conclude that none
apply. There is no record of any prompt, good-faith attempt to correct his falsifications.
Instead, Applicant’s testimony, which included further attempts to skew the information
about his arrest in 2009, was inconsistent with the other evidence presented and was
simply not credible. Nor can his conduct in this regard be considered minor. The
Government has a substantial and compelling interest in obtaining accurate information
about Applicant’s background, his judgment, and his candor. Applicant’s deliberate
failure to provide candid and complete answers to questions asked, in order to protect
his own interests, completely undermines any confidence that he will protect the
national interest as required. His falsifications are multiple, recent, and reflect adversely
on his trustworthiness and reliability. The security concerns under this guideline remain
unresolved. 
Criminal Conduct
Applicant’s arrest for marijuana possession constitutes criminal conduct which
raises a security concern, stated at AG 30, as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
9
However, his domestic battery charge in November 2011 was dismissed less
than 24 hours after Applicant turned himself in. Available information is not sufficient to
show that Applicant actually struck, threatened, or tried to harm his girlfriend. That event
was likely the result of two young parents and their inexperience getting the better of
them.
Nonetheless, Applicant’s drug-related arrest requires application of the
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses) and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted). By
contrast, the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the
criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) also is supported by the record. 
Applicant was arrested when he was 21, but before he attended an aviation
vocational institute, and before he embarked on his career in the aviation industry.
Despite the other issues of concern raised by this record, I am confident Applicant is
unlikely to engage in criminal conduct in the future.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guidelines E, F, and J. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context
of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 26 years old and presumed
to be a mature, responsible adult. In many respects, he is leading a lifestyle that
supports such a presumption. He has learned a trade and started a career in aviation
maintenance and repair. He is supporting his child, and he is helping his parents
because his father is unable to work. Unfortunately, Applicant has financial problems
that continue to place him at risk of improper conduct to pay his debts. As shown by his
failure to consolidate his student loans, he has not demonstrated initiative and good
judgment in trying to resolve his financial challenges. Finally, Applicant deliberately and
repeatedly attempted to obfuscate details about his past conduct, particularly his drug
use and arrest. His lack of candor indicates his willingness to place his own interests
ahead of the Government’s. Such a fundamental flaw in judgment and trustworthiness
sustains doubts about his suitability for access to classified information. Because
protection of the national interest is the principal goal of these adjudications, those
doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
10
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.t: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
