 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00304 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, 
personal conduct and Guideline G, alcohol consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 17, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct and Guideline G, alcohol consumption. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 2, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 14, 2013. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
 
November 19, 2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 11, 2013. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record was held open so Applicant could provide documents. He 
submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into evidence without 
objection.1 Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on December 19, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the allegations in SOR except ¶ 1.e. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 23 years old. He was born in Afghanistan. Applicant’s father worked 
for an American company in Afghanistan. In approximately 1998, his father was taken 
captive by the Taliban. In 2000, Applicant and his family fled to Pakistan where they 
were refugees. In 2002, they immigrated to the United States. During his father’s period 
of captivity, Applicant and his family were unaware if their father was alive. In 2004, 
Applicant’s father joined his family in the United States. Applicant has six brothers and 
sisters. He is the eldest son. He did not graduate from high school, but later earned a 
General Equivalency Diploma. Applicant became a naturalized citizen of the United 
States in 2007. Applicant’s father became ill with cancer and passed away in 2009.2  
 
Applicant disclosed on his 2011 security clearance applications (SCA) that he 
was arrested in 2007, 2008, twice in 2009, and in 2010, for being a minor in possession 
of alcohol. He also was arrested in 2008 for disturbing the peace. He was suspended 
from school for 180 days for this incident. Applicant denied the SOR allegations as 
written. The allegations were based on Applicant’s disclosure on his 2011 SCA. He 
admitted he was arrested in October 2010 for possession of alcohol by a minor. The 
charge was reduced to littering and he paid a $150 fine. He admitted he was charged 
twice more for possession of alcohol as a minor. For the 2008 charge, he was placed on 
probation for two years. For the July 2009 charge he pled guilty and was fined $500. He 
admitted that all of his alcohol-related charges were committed before he was 21 years 
old. He stated he had a difficult time recalling the different incidents that took place 
when he was younger.3  
 
 Applicant attributes his repeated failures to comply with the alcohol consumption 
laws to his difficulty adjusting to the United States, he was associating with the wrong 
people, and he was under a lot of pressure from his father. He and his father had a 
tumultuous relationship. Applicant explained that he changed while his father was away, 
and when his father returned, they did not get along. Applicant felt he could never be 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is the Department Counsel’s memorandum indicating he had no objection to AE A. 
 
2 Tr. 47, 55-56, 78-81. 
 
3 Tr. 25, 30-36; 42-49, 74-76; GE 1, 4, 5. 
 
3 
 
 
the son his father wanted. His father was very critical of Applicant, expecting him to be 
an “A” student and set an example for his siblings. He also expected him to be 
responsible for taking care of the family. He explained it was a difficult period in his life 
and he found comfort in being around his friends. He understands now that he made 
poor choices and these friends were not helping him. He no longer has regular contact 
with these friends. Some are attending college or have gotten married.4  
 
On Applicant’s 2010 and 2011 SCAs he disclosed that in 2007, while working 
part-time in high school, he had been terminated from employment at a restaurant chain 
for being tardy and unreliable. He was employed at other part-time jobs and left by 
mutual agreement with the employer agreeing that it might not be the right place for 
him. He disclosed that he felt that the boss at one job was being too critical of him and 
they agreed it was not the right place for him to work. Applicant disclosed in his counter-
intelligence focused security screening questionnaire that he had been fired from two 
other jobs. He testified he could not recall other instances of when he may have lost a 
job. He worked at other jobs, but only for a few weeks before he decided the job was 
not right for him. He did not list these jobs because they were for short periods of time. 
He explained it was a difficult period in his life, and he was not intentionally failing to 
disclose information.5 
 
 Applicant recently became engaged to be married. His fiancé is from 
Afghanistan, and he has known her most of his life. He is trying to live a good life. He 
has not consumed alcohol in over a year because of his fiancé. She has had a positive 
influence on his life. He plays on a select sports team and is committed to physical 
fitness. Applicant recently enrolled in a technical college with the goal of becoming an 
orthodontist.6  
 
 Applicant worked in Afghanistan for a month and a half in 2010. He deployed 
again from April to October 2011 and was stationed with an international Special Forces 
unit. Applicant has extensive language skills and served as a linguist. Although there 
were many linguists, due to his skills, he was often one of only three who could listen 
and translate conversations. His assignments were often dangerous and required that 
he be out in the field on patrol for two to four weeks at a time. He volunteered for many 
assignments. He excelled at remaining calm and translating conversations. He did not 
carry a weapon, but wore body armor and carried 40 to 50 pounds of gear. He traveled 
by helicopter and vehicles with the constant threat of being attacked and coming in 
contact with mines. He stated he was good at what he did and left on patrol more than 
any of the other linguists. He stated while serving in Afghanistan he always followed 
orders.7  
                                                          
4 Tr. 25-29, 49-54, 57-61, 76. 
 
5 Tr. 29, 61-68; GE 7. 
 
6 Tr. 25-29, 77-78, 81. 
 
7 Tr. 68-74. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant accepted full responsibility for the mistakes he made when he was 
younger. He believes he has matured and learned from his mistakes. He understands 
the gravity of his conduct. He wants to be a good role model for his family, now that his 
father is no longer alive.8  
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from a Chief Warrant Officer of the Task 
Force he was deployed with in Afghanistan. The letter stated: 
 
[Applicant’s] exceptional performance and steadfast dedication to duty 
ensured critical intelligence flowed to the Task Force commander, tactical 
war fighters, government agency leaderships and United States forces 
deployed in harm’s way fighting the Global War on Terrorism. 
 
* * * 
 
His assistance and ability to react to any given situation allowed for a 
more thorough exploitation process. [Applicant] assisted above and 
beyond his normal duties as an interpreter, working exceptionally long 
hours, often taking the initiative to integrate himself and to maximize his 
linguist and cultural skills. His unwavering dedication, professionalism, and 
linguistic skill are unparalleled and led to mission accomplishment and 
were directly responsible for enhancing the capabilities of the Task Force 
Headquarters and subordinate strike forces to function at peak levels of 
efficiency.9  
 
Another military coworker provided a character letter stating:  
 
I feel confident in saying that he is capable of handling any situation with 
thoughtfulness and maturity. He frequently relayed critical information to 
our team in a very timely manner which was influential in the 
Commander’s decision process. He is always quick on his feet, with 
sensible reactions in all the circumstances I’ve seen him in.  
 
[Applicant’s] knowledge of the area and people was an extreme asset to 
our team. He is organized, efficient, extremely competent, and has an 
excellent rapport with people of all ages which was essential in the work 
that we did. His communication skills, both written and verbal, are 
excellent. [Applicant] is intelligent, capable, dedicated, and [a] personable 
person.10 
 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 52-54, 83-84. 
 
9 Answer to SOR, character letter.  
 
10 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22, and the 
following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the person is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent. 
 
 Appellant had six alcohol-related arrests from 2007 to 2010. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23, and the 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and  
  
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if alcohol abuser). 
 
 Applicant acknowledges he was abusing alcohol and was associating with the 
wrong people when he was younger. He has not had any alcohol-related incidents since 
December 2010. He credibly testified that he no longer drinks alcohol because he is 
engaged to be married. He has not consumed alcohol for approximately a year. 
Applicant’s alcohol-related incidents occurred when he was a minor. He is now 23 years 
old and has established a pattern of abstinence. Applicant attributes his alcohol issues 
to a period of his life when he had a tumultuous relationship with his father. A sufficient 
 
7 
 
 
period of time has passed and Applicant has overcome his alcohol problems. The 
above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following potentially apply:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but when considered as a whole, supports a whole person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant disclosed on both his 2010 and 2011 security clearance applications 
that he had been fired from a job in 2007. There were other instances when he was 
working part-time during high school when he left jobs because they were not the right 
fit for him for a variety of reasons. He also disclosed on a counter-intelligence security 
screening questionnaire that he had been fired from two jobs. I found Applicant’s 
testimony credible and do not believe he intentionally omitted his job history. He willingly 
disclosed derogatory information about it to put the Government on notice of such 
issues. The above disqualifying conditions do not apply to SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant had six arrests for possession of alcohol by a minor over a four-year 
period. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant acknowledged he repeatedly made poor decisions by consuming 
alcohol under age. He repeatedly was arrested for his offenses and did not alter his 
behavior for several years. It has now been three years since he was last arrested. He 
has been working in Afghanistan in a dangerous environment. He is engaged to be 
married and no longer consumes alcohol. He has received exemplary reports for his 
efforts with the international Special Forces. Applicant attributed some of his problems 
to stress and the relationship he had with his father. Applicant has matured and is now 
making responsible decisions. Although Applicant’s offenses were minor, it is the 
repeated conduct that raised a security concern. It appears Applicant has grown and 
changed his ways. He is attending school and has a career goal. He is involved in 
physical fitness and plays on a sports team. He has taken positive steps to change his 
behavior. I believe his irresponsible conduct is unlikely to recur. I find the above 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
9 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 23 years old. He was arrested numerous times as a minor for alcohol 
consumption and alcohol-related conduct. He comprehends the gravity of his past 
actions. He has been working in Afghanistan assisting international forces. He has 
earned high praise from those who worked with him. Reliable military personnel serving 
with him in Afghanistan laud his duty performance and contributions to mission 
accomplishment. He has put himself in harm’s way, working alongside United States 
and allied forces. He has made contributions to national security, fully aware of the risks 
to himself. All these circumstances demonstrate Applicant’s maturity and recognize his 
commitment to the mission. Applicant has matured and grown into a responsible young 
man worthy of a second change. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
the alcohol consumption and personal conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
