 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00915 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 21, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Appellant answered the SOR on November 7, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 19, 2013. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
January 6, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 14, 2014. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit A. The record was 
held open until January 28, 2014, to provide Applicant the opportunity to present 
additional documents, which he did. It was marked AE B and admitted into evidence 
without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 23, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR with explanations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He graduated from high school in 1983. He served in 
the Navy from 1986 to 1992 and was honorably discharged. He was married from 1987 
to 2004. He has a grown son. 
 
 In 2006 Applicant relocated for a job. He purchased three properties in his new 
location, one was his primary residence. All three houses were foreclosed. He financed 
the properties with no down payments and with 80% and 20% mortgage loans. His plan 
was to fix up the two properties and rent them. He was able to rent one property for 
about six months.2 
 
 In 2007, Applicant was in a serious motorcycle accident when a vehicle did not 
stop at a red light and hit him. The driver did not have insurance and was driving on a 
suspended license. Applicant was out of work from March through August. When he 
returned to work he was only able to work part-time due to his physical therapy. He 
worked part-time for about a month. He held a security clearance at the time but lost it 
because he began having financial problems when he was unable to work. He did his 
best to pay his monthly expenses and was able to pay his truck and motorcycle 
payments. He attempted to make partial payments on his mortgage loans, but the 
mortgage companies would not accept partial payments. The properties were 
foreclosed and sold. The laws in the state where Appellant lives does not allow for a 
deficiency on a primary residence. After foreclosure, the other two properties were sold. 
The 80% mortgage loans were satisfied. The 20% mortgage loans are the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($72,438) and 1.b ($39,462).3  
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment for short periods of time in 2008 and 
2009. He was unemployed about 30 days in 2010; six weeks in 2011; four months in 
2012; and seven months in 2013.4  
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memoranda. 
 
2 Tr. 17-18, 23-24, 33-36. 
 
3 Tr. 18-19, 22-25, 30, 36-38. 
 
4 Tr. 21-22. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In 2010 Applicant contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a to provide a partial 
payment, but it would not accept the partial payment. He recently was able to negotiate 
a settlement plan with the creditor. He will make five monthly payments of $200 to show 
good faith and then the creditor will provide a settlement offer. He intends to settle the 
debt.5 
 
 Applicant contacted the creditor for the mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.b. It has agreed to 
refinance the loan so Applicant can make affordable payments. The creditor agreed to 
accept $200 monthly payments. The creditor has agreed to provide a settlement offer in 
the future. If Applicant cannot pay the settlement the creditor will continue to accept 
$200 a month payments. Applicant has arranged an automatic payment through his 
bank account for the payments.6  
 
 Applicant is current on all of his bills. He withdrew money from his 401K account, 
paid the taxes, and used the remaining money to pay his bills.7  
 
 Applicant understands he took a risk when he purchased two rental properties, 
but at the time the real estate market was robust. It collapsed in 2008. He admitted he 
made a poor decision at the time. He was living within his means until he was in the 
motorcycle accident.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 19-20, 25-27, 39; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. 26-27; AE A, B. 
 
7 Tr. 28-29. 
 
8 Tr. 35, 42. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has two delinquent debts relating to mortgage loans that are unpaid. I 
find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s inability to meet his financial obligations initially occurred due to an 
accident that was not his fault. These circumstances are unlikely to recur and do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. However, 
because Applicant is still resolving the two mortgage loan debts they are still current. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 20(a) only partially applies.  
 
 Applicant was financially solvent until he was involved in accident where a 
person who was uninsured and driving on a suspended license hit him on his 
motorcycle after running a red light with her vehicle. He was unable to work and began 
having financial problems. This caused him to lose his security clearance and his ability 
to maintain steady well-paying employment. Applicant’s financial problems were beyond 
his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant withdrew money from his 401K retirement account 
to catch-up on his bills. His only remaining delinquent debts are the two 20% mortgage 
loans on two rental properties that were foreclosed. Applicant has negotiated affordable 
monthly payments with the creditors with a promise from one creditor to provide a 
settlement amount in the future. He has an automatic monthly payment plan with the 
other creditor. He hopes to receive a settlement offer in the future, but if not, he will 
 
6 
 
 
continue to make monthly payments. Applicant has acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. 
 
 Applicant has no other delinquent debts. There is no evidence he has received 
financial counseling, but there are clear indications his financial problems are under 
control. He has initiated a good-faith effort to repay his creditors and resolve the 
remaining two debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He began having financial problems when he was in an 
accident and was unable to work. This caused him to lose his security clearance, which 
made it more difficult for him to work in his area of expertise. Prior to his accident he 
had purchased three real estate properties that were later foreclosed. He has two 
remaining mortgage loans that he is resolving. He has payment plans with the creditors 
and is hopeful he will receive settlement offers in the future to resolve the debts. 
Applicant admitted that he took a risk when he purchased the real estate, but at the time 
the market was booming. Although the market eventually collapsed, it was the accident 
and loss of his job that caused his financial problems. He is now financially solvent, 
except for the remaining two 20% mortgage loans. I found Applicant credible that he 
intends to continue to make monthly payments to the two remaining creditors and 
resolve these debts. His finances are not a security concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
 
7 
 
 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
