Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-5, and Applicant exhibit (AE) A.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-00369
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 5 April 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the2
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 31
July 2013 and I convened a hearing 29 August 2013. DOHA received the transcript 5
September 2013.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations except for SOR 1.a and SOR
1.c-e. He is a 67-year-old vice president for operations for a U.S. defense contractor
since May 2012. He previously retired from the U.S. military after 20-years service in
paygrade E-8. 
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits substantiate, nine delinquent
accounts totaling nearly $117,000. Nearly $107,000 of that debt is for delinquent first
and second mortgages. Applicant admits five debts totaling about $3,500.
The $6,500 tax lien at SOR debt 1.a was released in April 2008, before the SOR
was issued (AE A). Applicant made arrangements with the creditor at SOR debt 1.b to
satisfy the debt by September 2013. He received a mortgage modification from the
lender for SOR debts 1.c and 1.d in August 2012 and has been current in his payments
since. He paid SOR debt 1.e in June 2009. SOR debt 1.f was a medical bill improperly
coded by the provider to exclude insurance coverage. Applicant paid SOR debt 1.h in
May 2013, and made arrangements to pay SOR debts 1.i and 1.g in August and
September 2013 respectively.
 Applicant’s financial problems were largely related to periods of unemployment
he experienced from September 2002 to March 2003, March to September 2006, May
to September 2007 and December 2007 to May 2012. In each instance, he began
addressing his debts as soon as he was re-employed.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;4
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications7
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. 21 May 2008).9
3
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, but
Applicant mitigated the security concerns. Applicant’s four periods of unemployment
between September 2002 and May 2012 created financial problems for him.4
          
The mitigating factors for financial considerations give Applicant substantial aid.
While his financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, Applicant’s employment is
now stable;so the circumstances that caused them are less likely to recur.  Further, his5
financial problems were largely due to circumstances beyond his control, and he began
addressing his delinquent debts once he obtained stable employment in May 2012. He
has continued to address his other delinquent debts since then.  While there is no6
evidence that Applicant has had any financial counseling, he has clearly acted to get his
finances under control.  The only debts not completely resolved total under $2,500 and7
are expected to be resolved by September 2013. Having addressed his other financial
obligations, I am confident these final obligations will also be addressed. Overall,
substantial progress has been made addressing his delinquent debt.  The Appeal Board8
has stated that an Applicant need not have paid every debt alleged in the SOR, need
not pay the SOR debts first, and need not be paying on all debts simultaneously.
Applicant need only establish that there is a credible and realistic plan to resolve the
financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement the plan.9
Applicant’s efforts to date constitute such a plan, and his consistent payments reflect
significant actions. I conclude Guideline F for Applicant.
4
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-i: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
   
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR.
Administrative Judge
