 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 13-00252 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2013, the Defense of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline B. This action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On July 6, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.1 On September 28, 2013, Department 
Counsel compiled a File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 10. The FORM also included a request that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan and provided official U.S. 
documents as reference materials.  
 
On October 1, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
forwarded to Applicant a copy of the FORM with instructions to submit any additional 
information and objections within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant submitted a timely 
response that has been marked as Item 11. The case was assigned to me on 
November 25, 2013. 
 
On December 19, 2013, Department Counsel requested to reopen the record to 
submit an additional document. The additional document, which has been marked as 
Item 12, was forwarded to Applicant for comment or objection. On January 18, 2014, 
Applicant submitted additional comments and a performance evaluation that have been 
marked as Items 13 and 14.  
 
Neither Department Counsel nor Applicant submitted any objections to the 
proffered documents. Items 1 through 14 are admitted into the record, and the 
Department Counsel’s request for administrative notice is granted. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in the findings of fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
SOR and Applicant’s Answer 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations. The allegations assert that Applicant has a 
grandmother, aunt, and two uncles who were citizens and residents of Afghanistan 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.g); that he sent money to his grandmother (SOR ¶ 1.b) and his 
aunt (SOR ¶ 1.d) in the past; that he has two brothers who are citizens of Afghanistan, 
but reside in the United States (SOR ¶ 1.e); that his deceased father was a senior 
officer in the Afghan National Army and was killed by Mujahideen fighters in the early 
1990s (SOR ¶ 1.f); and that his two uncles served in the Afghan military (SOR ¶ 1.h). In 
his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five of the allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e 
through 1.h) and denied the other three. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact.2 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Item 4.  
 
2 Items 1, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s Background and Foreign Contacts 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since October 2010. He was born in Afghanistan. He 
and his immediate family fled Afghanistan in January 1996 to escape the Taliban rule. 
They then lived in Pakistan until coming to the United States as refugees in December 
2000. He received a high school diploma in the United States in August 2001 and 
attended college from January 2003 to May 2012, but has not yet earned a degree. He 
became a U.S. citizen in April 2006. He has never been married and listed no children 
in his security clearance applications.3  
 
 Applicant’s mother, two brothers, and two sisters are citizens and residents of the 
United States. The SOR alleged that his grandmother was a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan, but Applicant submitted evidence showing she became a permanent 
resident of the United States in May 2011. He has two other brothers who are citizens of 
Afghanistan and permanent residents of the United States. He indicated that his two 
brothers are too lazy to apply for U.S. citizenship. He noted that they value their green 
cards and have not traveled outside the U.S. since their arrival here. One of his brothers 
who is not a U.S. citizen owns a home in the United States.4  
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased. He served in the Afghan National Army for about 
13 years and was a senior officer. He was killed by unknown assassins in the early 
1990s.5 
 
 Applicant’s aunt and two uncles are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. He 
has close ties to his aunt and uncles. He noted that his aunt and uncles do not have 
government or military jobs. His aunt is disabled, and he has periodically sent her about 
$50 for medicine, but not on a regular basis. His uncles work in a local market. His 
uncles performed two years of mandatory Afghan military service during the Soviet 
regime. His aunt and uncles have applied to immigrate to the United States.6 
 
Applicant traveled to Afghanistan in 2006, 2010, 2011, and 2012. He took most 
of those trips to assist his grandmother in applying for U.S. permanent resident status 
and to facilitate her move to the United States. In Afghanistan, his grandmother lived 
with his aunt and uncles. When he traveled there to help his grandmother, he also had 
contact with his aunt and uncles. Prior to his grandmother’s arrival in the United States, 
he and his other family members periodically sent $500 or more to his grandmother for 
her support.7 
                                                          
3 Items 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11. 
 
4 Items 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11. 
 
5 Items 4, 8, 10, 11. 
 
6 Items 4, 8, 11. 
 
7 Items 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant owns no property in Afghanistan. In September 2013, he purchased a 
house in the United States with his sister. He indicated that he is looking forward to 
getting married and establishing a family in the United States.8 
 
Applicant served as a linguist in Afghanistan from March 2010 to February 2011. 
In 2006, 2010, and 2012, he went through counterintelligence and force protection 
(CI/FP) screenings. The 2010 screening found that Applicant did not present a CI/FP 
risk. His 2012 screening indicated that his record checks were incomplete and his 
records warranted further investigation. The records warranting further investigation 
were reports that Applicant, while working as an employee of a defense contractor, 
refused to go on two patrols in Afghanistan. One report indicated that Applicant refused 
to go on a patrol because he was being forced by a military team to carry a firearm in 
contravention to his employer’s policy and that he tendered his resignation. As a result 
of that incident, a linguist coordinating officer submitted a letter requesting Applicant be 
terminated from his job and not be allowed to be rehired. Applicant’s resignation was 
accepted.9 
 
 In Item 13, Applicant addressed the reports that he refused to go on the two 
patrols and denied those accusations. He noted the first incident occurred in April 2010 
when he was waiting in a transit tent in Afghanistan with other linguists for his military 
point of contact (POC) to transport him to his assignment. The POC did not come to 
pick him up but instead sent other military members to get him. The other military 
members did not know Applicant or his name, and Applicant did not know them. 
Applicant did not realize until after they left that he was supposed to go with them. He 
indicated that his failure to connect up with those military members on that occasion 
was a misunderstanding as opposed to a refusal to go. The second incident occurred in 
about February 2011 when his POC indicated he was going to be armed with a rifle on 
a mission. His company had a policy that precluded its employees from possessing 
firearms. Because he was concerned that he would lose his job by possessing a 
firearm, he told his POC that he needed to contact his company to clarify this issue 
before going on the mission. The POC apparently reported Applicant’s statements as a 
refusal to go on the mission. Applicant stated:  
 
I did not refuse the mission because it was too dangerous. I worked with 
[military teams] for almost 10 months in [a named province] and performed 
my job as a linguist very well in multiple missions in multiple districts of 
that province from foot patrols to convoy missions [on a] daily basis. I 
accepted all dangers and harsh conditions . . . and I had no fear of going 
on missions and had no physical or mental weaknesses. The only concern 
was the training and issue of fire arms. 10 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
8 Item 8, 11.   
 
9 Items 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.  
 
10 Item 13.  
 
5 
 
 
Of note, the SOR does not contain any allegations concerning Applicant’s reported 
refusal to go on patrols. Additionally, his current employer is the same employer he 
worked for when he submitted his resignation in February 2011.11  
  
 Applicant provided a letter of recommendation dated July 12, 2010, from a 
veterinarian who served with him in Afghanistan.  The veterinarian stated that Applicant 
“never refused a patrol, regardless of the potential for insurgent attack or improvised 
explosive devices.” He described Applicant as trustworthy and reliable.12 
 
Afghanistan13 
 
 On May 2, 2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed the Enduring 
Strategic Partnership Agreement. It is a 10-year strategic partnership agreement that 
demonstrates the United States enduring commitment to strengthen Afghanistan’s 
sovereignty, stability, prosperity and continue cooperation to defeat al-Qaida and its 
affiliates. The United States has supported the elected Afghan government by providing 
development aid and assisting in the stabilization of the country. The United States 
supports the Afghan government’s goals of increasing security, combating corruption, 
improving the government, and providing better services to its people. Despite some 
progress, Afghanistan still faces daunting challenges in defeating terrorists and 
insurgents.  
 
No part of Afghanistan is immune from targeted or random attacks against U.S. 
and other Western nationals. Various groups oppose the establishment of a democratic 
government and will use violence to achieve their goals. U.S. citizens who are also 
citizens of Afghanistan may be subject to laws that impose special obligations.  
 
There are serious human rights problems in Afghanistan that include widespread 
violence from armed insurgent groups against persons affiliated with the government. 
There are indiscriminate attacks on civilians. There are credible reports of torture and 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
11 Items 2.  
 
12 Items 11 and 14.  
 
13 The official U.S. Government documents contained in the FORM to provide the factual summary on 
Afghanistan are: U.S. Department of State, Fact Sheet, U.S. Relations With Afghanistan, September 6, 
2012 (2 pages); U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Specific Information: 
Afghanistan, August 28, 2013 (9 pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices for 2012, undated (50 pages); Director of National Intelligence, Statement for the Record on the 
Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community for the Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence, March 12, 2013 (34 pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2012, 
Chapter 5 – Terrorist Safe Havens, May 30, 2013 (2 pages); U.S. Department of State, Bureau of 
Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Afghanistan, August 23, 2013 (3 pages); U.S. Department of State, 
Country Reports on Terrorism 2012, Chapter 2 – South and Central Asia, May 30, 2013 (4 pages); 
Statement of Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff before the Senate Armed Forces Committee on Afghanistan 
and Iraq, September 22, 2011 (8 pages); and U.S. Department of State, U.S. Declares Haqqani Network 
a Terrorist Organization, September 7, 2012 (3 pages). 
 
6 
 
 
abuse of detainees by security forces. There is pervasive corruption, endemic violence, 
and societal discrimination against females.  
 
The Department of State has warned U.S. citizens against traveling to 
Afghanistan because of the threat of violence. Extremist networks and groups have 
conducted suicide attacks and assassinations against government leaders. These 
terrorist groups operate within Afghanistan and also in nearby Pakistan.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
7 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them, and the following disqualifying conditions 
potentially apply: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone could 
be sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in 
the compromise of classified information. Applicant’s aunt and two uncles are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. He maintains contact with them and periodically provided 
financial support to his aunt. Two of his brothers and his grandmother are also Afghan 
 
8 
 
 
citizen, but live in the United States. Applicant’s contact with his foreign relatives is 
sufficient to raise a security concern.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an unstable government or subject to 
terrorist activity. Insurgency operations are being conducted in Afghanistan against 
Afghan and U.S. forces. There is also evidence that Afghanistan has a poor human 
rights record and has active terrorist groups operating within its borders. This places the 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his contacts in Afghanistan do 
not pose a security risk, and he is not in a position to be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the U.S. and his family members. Of note, Applicant’s father was killed by 
unknown assassins in 1993 and Applicant and his immediate family fled Afghanistan as 
refugees. The dangerous circumstances that exist in Afghanistan create a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. I find both 
of the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s aunt and two uncles are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. In the 
past, he has sent money to his aunt and has visited her while visiting his grandmother. 
His contact with his aunt is not casual, infrequent, or minimal. Given his close family 
contacts in Afghanistan and the security conditions there, Applicant could be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of foreign family members and the 
interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply to his Aunt and Uncles. 
AG ¶ 8(a) applies to his brothers and grandmother who reside in the United States. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant came to United States in December 2000 and became a U.S. citizen in 
April 2006. His mother, two brothers, and two sisters are citizens and residents of the 
United States. Although two of his brothers and grandmother are not U.S. citizens, they 
are permanent residents of the United States. Applicant is half-owner of a house in the 
United States and has no property in Afghanistan. He plans on living permanently in the 
United States. His aunt and uncles have submitted applications to immigrate to the 
United States. Considering his contacts and interests in the United States in comparison 
to those in Afghanistan, I find his sense of loyalty or obligation to his aunt and uncles 
are far outweighed by his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
United States. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. 
interests. I find AG¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
In cases of this nature, an additional analysis is necessary. The Appeal Board 
has stated: 
 
As a general rule, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security 
procedures and regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative 
value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security 
concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct 
or circumstances. However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to 
the national security. The presence of such circumstances can give 
credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to 
recognize, resist, and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or 
exploitation.14 
 
While working as a linguist in Afghanistan, Applicant was described as reliable 
and trustworthy and as “never refus[ing] a patrol, regardless of the potential for 
insurgent attack or improvised explosive devices.” On the other hand, records indicate 
that Applicant refused to go on two patrols, but his repudiation of the assertions in those 
records is plausible and reasonable. Although details of his compliance with security 
procedures on patrols in Afghanistan are unknown, his participation in those patrols 
under dangerous conditions merits some credit under the quoted Appeal Board 
exception. 
 
 
 
                                                          
14 ISCR Cases No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008) (internal citations omitted). See also ISCR Case 
No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006) citing ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. May, 30, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 
2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2 were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States for 13 years and has been a U.S. citizen 
for over seven years. He worked as a linguist in Afghanistan in support of the U.S. 
military. His close family ties in Afghanistan are outweighed by his interests and 
relationships in the United States. He can be expected to resolve any potential conflicts 
in the interests of the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the foreign influence 
guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
