 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 13-00988                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                               Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 21, 2013. On October 1, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 26, 2013, Applicant signed a notarized answer to the SOR. On 
October 29, 2013, he elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on 
November 21, 2013. I convened a hearing on December 23, 2013, to consider whether 
 
2 
 
 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through Ex. 5 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant 
testified, called no witnesses, and offered no exhibits. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on January 3, 2014.                                                 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains six allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.) In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). He 
denied the SOR allegation at ¶ 1.f. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old and employed as an internet technology specialist by a 
government contractor. He earned a high school diploma in 1999. He was first granted 
a security clearance in 2007. He has worked full time for his current employer since 
November 2012.  (Ex. 1; Ex. 5.) 
 
 Applicant has never been married. When he completed his e-QIP in March 2013, 
he listed a cohabitant. At his hearing, he stated that the relationship had ended and the 
cohabitant and her child no longer lived with him. Earlier, Applicant had a relationship 
with a woman with whom he had a child, who is now three years old. The woman died, 
and Applicant assumed responsibility for raising his son. The child resides with 
Applicant, and his mother cares for the child while he works. (Ex. 1; Tr. 23, 33, 50-51, 
72-74.)  
 
 In response to questions on his e-QIP that sought specific information on his   
financial record, Applicant denied any financial delinquencies in the past seven years. 
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling approximately $19,193. Three of the 
delinquencies are in collection status: SOR ¶ 1.a. ($150); SOR ¶ 1.b. ($150); and SOR 
¶ 1.c. ($317). The remaining three debts are in charged-off status: SOR ¶ 1.d. ($3,907); 
SOR ¶ 1.e. ($13,000); and SOR ¶ 1.f. ($1,669.). (SOR; Ex. 1; Ex. 5.)  
 
 At his hearing, Applicant stated that the delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
and 1.b. arose when he was treated twice at a hospital in October 2011. At the time, 
Applicant was covered by health insurance, and the debts represent co-pays for 
medical services. Applicant recalled receiving bills from the hospital for the services. He 
stated that he had not contacted the hospital to discuss payment. The debts are 
unresolved. (Tr. 20, 24-29.) 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. At 
his hearing, Applicant stated that he did not recall specifics about the $317 debt. The 
debt is listed on Applicant’s credit bureau reports of March and September 2013. The 
debt is unresolved. (Ex. 3; Ex. 4; Tr. 29-30.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In July 2013, Applicant was interviewed about his financial issues by an 
authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). 
Applicant identified the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. as a loan for the purchase of a 
motorcycle. He stated that he had opened the account in 2008, and the original amount 
of the loan was $7,000. He stated that he made monthly payments of $171 on the loan, 
and he asserted that he had not been late in making his payments. Applicant’s credit 
bureau report of March 2013 shows the last payment action on the debt as occurring in 
August 2012, and it lists the debt in charged-off status as of January 2013. At his 
hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he was no longer making payments on the debt, 
had not contacted the creditor to discuss making a reduced payment, and had 
attempted to sell the motorcycle through an auction web site. Additionally, he stated he 
had spoken to the creditor about the status of the debt, and he speculated that the 
creditor had turned the debt over to a collection company. The debt is unresolved. (Ex. 
3; Ex. 5; Tr. 30, 34-37.) 
 
 Applicant identified the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. as a purchase loan on an 
automobile that was stolen from him in November 2012 and declared a total loss by the 
insurer. He stated that the loan was originally for $25,000 and was used to finance the 
stolen vehicle and another vehicle Applicant had owned. The amount alleged on the 
debt on the SOR is $13,000. Applicant stated that he had not contacted the creditor to 
discuss payment. He also stated that he planned to seek the services of a debt 
consolidation firm to resolve the debt and others for which he was responsible.  (Ex. 5; 
Tr. 21, 37-42.) 
 
 Applicant denied knowledge of the $1,669 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. He 
asserted that he never had a debt with the bank creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.f. 
Applicant also denied the debt when he was interviewed by the OPM investigator. 
However, the debt appears on Applicant’s credit bureau reports of March and 
September 2013. His credit bureau report of March 2013 shows that the account was 
opened in October 2005. He did not provide any evidence that he had disputed the debt 
with the creditor or the credit bureau. (Ex. 5; Ex. 3; Tr. 21-22, 42-44.)    
 
 Applicant’s current annual salary is $65,000. His monthly net income varies 
between $3,400 and $4,000. He also receives $800 each month in Social Security 
death benefits for the support of his son. He keeps $400 of the Social Security benefit 
for his son’s support, and he gives $400 to his mother, who provides care for the child. 
(Tr. 45-48, 55-56.) 
 
 Applicant identified the following additional monthly expenses: rent, including 
utilities, $1,530; groceries, $150 to $200; cable for himself and his mother, $300; 
gasoline, $200; rent and utilities for his mother, $250; and $600 each month on his 
vehicle insurance and his mother’s vehicle and home insurance. Applicant’s net 
remainder each month appears to vary between $745 and $1,345.1 (Tr. 56-58.)  
                                            
1
 Applicant stated that he frequently has large unanticipated cash expenses, such as repairs on his 
automobile and furniture purchases. (Tr. 56-57, 65-66.) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he does not have money in a savings account. He has a 
401(k) account but was not sure of its balance. He does not have a monthly budget, and 
he has not had financial credit counseling. (Tr. 63-64, 70.) 
 
                                                 Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
 
6 
 
 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant’s gross annual income from his employment is $65,000, and he 
estimates that his take-home pay each month is between $3,400 and $4,000. In 
addition, he receives $800 each month in Social Security death benefits for his minor 
son.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial difficulties and inattention to his financial 
responsibilities. He acknowledged that five of the six debts alleged on the SOR 
remained unresolved. He denied responsibility for the sixth debt: $1,669 owed to a bank 
creditor. The debt appears on two of Applicant’s credit reports. In ISCR Case No. 08-
12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), DOHA’s Appeal Board explained: “It is well-settled 
that adverse information from a credit report can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard and the government’s obligations under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent 
allegations. At that point, the burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] 
she is not responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply.” (Internal citation 
omitted). Applicant failed to establish that he was not responsible for the debt he denied 
or that mitigating circumstances applied. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts total approximately $19,193. He failed to provide 
documentation showing that his debts were resolved or otherwise satisfied. The record 
reflects that the delinquencies alleged on the SOR are ongoing and have occurred 
under circumstances that are likely to recur. There do not appear to be circumstances 
beyond Applicant’s control that prevented him from paying his creditors in a timely 
manner. Applicant has not had financial counseling, and he lacks a clear and timely 
strategy for resolving his delinquent debts.   
 
At his hearing, Applicant stated that he had not contacted his creditors because 
he was considering consulting with a debt consolidation firm to resolve his debts. In 
determining an individual's security worthiness, the Government cannot rely on the 
possibility that an applicant might resolve his or her outstanding debts at some future 
date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999). Accordingly, I conclude that 
none of the Guideline F mitigating conditions fully applies to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 33 
years. He has held a security clearance in his work as a government contractor since 
2007. His financial problems began several years ago and are ongoing. He has not 
taken affirmative action to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. His lack of attention to 
his financial delinquencies continues to raise security concerns. He has failed to 
develop a budget to satisfy his debts, three of which are for amounts of less than $325, 
and he has not sought credit counseling.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment as well as his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial delinquencies.  
 
                                                   Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.f.:            Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
