 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX )       ISCR Case No. 13-00375 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ms. Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 26, 2010, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On August 1, 2013, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 29, 2013. Applicant 
admitted the two allegations. Applicant requested his case be decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On October 23, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on October 29, 2013. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
November 18, 2013. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time 
allowed that would have expired on December 18, 2013. Department Counsel had no 
objection to the inclusion of these documents in the case, which I marked as Exhibit A 
to the Response. 
 
I received the case assignment on December 12, 2013. Based upon a review of 
the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
On my own motion I amended Subparagraph 1.a of the SOR to add the second 
sister Applicant listed in his e-QIP. The sentence now reads, “Your brother and sisters 
arer citizens and residents of Afghanistan.” I made this amendment to conform the SOR 
allegation to the evidence present in the document in the case file. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Afghanistan. The request and the attached documents were 
submitted as part of the FORM. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters 
of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b. (Items 1, 4-7)  
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He was born in Afghanistan in 1964. Applicant 
immigrated to the United States in 1988. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1995. 
Applicant has a high school education. He has worked for a defense contractor as a 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
linguist since 2010. Applicant is fluent in three foreign languages. (Items 1, 4-7; 
Response) 
 
Applicant’s parents are deceased. He is married and has four children. His wife 
and children live in the United States. His wife and children are U.S. citizens by 
naturalization (his wife and oldest child) and by birth (the younger three children). 
Applicant has one living brother and two living sisters. Two brothers are deceased. His 
sisters were born in 1951 and 1954. His parents-in-law are also deceased. (Items 5, 7) 
 
Applicant admits in his Answer that his brother and two sisters are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan (the SOR alleges one sister but the e-QIP lists two sisters). He 
also admits that his sister-in-law is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that his brother is over 50 years of age, having been born in 1962. 
He also declared his sisters are more than 60 years old. All of his siblings were born 
and raised in Afghanistan. Applicant asserts none of his siblings have any foreign 
contacts, financial issues, or any foreign entanglements. They also allegedly have no 
political affiliation. Applicant speaks with them by telephone every two months. He also 
indicated that he speaks with one of his sisters about every 30 days, according to his 
information disclosed on his interview form. (Items 4-7) 
 
Applicant states his sister-in-law is married to his brother. Applicant claims she 
does not have any political affiliation or foreign connections.  He speaks with her every 
three months. (Item 4)  
 
Applicant submitted a recommendation dated September 22, 2013, from his 
team leader stating he has high integrity. This author supports Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant also submitted nine additional recommendation letters with his 
Response. These letters were from medical personnel with whom he worked in 
Afghanistan translating for them in clinics with Afghan Army personnel and patients. 
These nine authors all attest to Applicant’s competency, integrity, and hard work. They 
recommend him for continued employment as a linguist.  He included six certificates of 
service and/or appreciation from military organizations for his work in Afghanistan for 
the U.S. Army. (Item 4; Response’ Exhibit A) 
 
I could not judge Applicant’s credibility or his assertions about his family 
member’s non-involvement in local politics, political affiliation, foreign entanglements, or 
foreign contacts because he did not appear before me at a hearing. He made these 
statements in his various documents submitted as part of his Answer and Response. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Afghanistan  
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Afghanistan documents.  
Afghanistan is a country in southwestern Asia. Pakistan borders it on the east and the 
south.  Iran borders it on the west and Russia in the north.  It is a rugged and 
mountainous country, which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. It 
has about 18 million people.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic that has had a turbulent political 
history, including an invasion by the Russians in 1979.  After an Accord was reached in 
1989 and Russia withdrew from the country, fighting continued among the various 
ethnic, clan and religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and 
controlled 90% of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies. In October 
2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the country, forcing 
the Taliban out of power by November 2001.  
 
The new democratic Government took power in 2004 after a popular election. 
Despite that election, terrorists and the Taliban continue to assert power and 
intimidation within the country.  
 
The country’s human rights record remains poor and violence is rampant. 
According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to 
plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. Travel 
warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence. The 
U.S. Department of State Human Rights 2010 Report states that 20 schools were 
attacked from March to October 2009 and 126 students killed by the Taliban. Teachers 
are threatened by the Taliban. (Source documents include U.S. Department of State 
2011 and 2012 country and human rights reports, 2012 U.S. Department of State 
Afghanistan Fact Sheet, 2012 Country Report on Terrorism from the National 
Intelligence Office and U.S. Department of Defense reports) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His brother, two sisters, and one sister-in-
law are citizens of and live in Afghanistan. Living in Afghanistan creates a heightened 
risk for his relatives because he is a U.S. citizen who speaks with them frequently each 
year. He works for the U.S. Army as a linguist in Afghanistan. Such people as his 
relatives could be primary targets of the Taliban insurgent attacks. 
 
 These family members who reside in Afghanistan raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) because of the heightened risk caused by Applicant’s work.  
 
AG ¶ 8 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.1 
 
 Applicant’s siblings and one spouse live in Afghanistan. Afghanistan raises a 
security concern because of the Taliban insurgency. The conditions in Afghanistan are 
volatile and dangerous. This situation exists because of the significant terrorist presence 
and threat there. The security situation in Afghanistan is tenuous, according to the U.S. 
State Department. Applicant’s connection to his brother and sisters could place 
Applicant in a position to have to choose between that relationship and his duty to the 
United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has worked for the past three years as a linguist for a U.S. Army 
contractor. His services are used in the medical care and training field. His work is 
highly recommended by nine colleagues or superiors who submitted recommendation 
documents.  
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1988. He became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1995. While his family is living in the U.S., there is no information about any 
other close connections with the U.S. to counterweigh Applicant’s familial ties with his 
siblings in Afghanistan. Therefore, AG ¶ 8 (b) does not apply fully. 
  
 Contact by Applicant with his relatives in Afghanistan every 30 to 60 days is not 
casual or infrequent, so there is a risk of foreign influence. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
                                                          
1
 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant has 
contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 
2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Several factors weigh against granting 
Applicant a security clearance. First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and human 
rights abuses in Afghanistan. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists hostile to 
the United States actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly 
governments, could attempt to use Applicant’s brother and sisters, to obtain such 
information. Finally, his family members with whom he maintains frequent contact are 
resident citizens of Afghanistan. 
 
The Directive provides that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” (AG 
¶ 2 (b)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence. I conclude the whole person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
