1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-00643
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on November 11, 2011. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 16, 2013, detailing security
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG),
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
2
Applicant received the SOR on October 3, 2013. He submitted a notarized,
written response to the SOR allegations dated October 13, 2013, and he requested a
decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on November 4, 2013. Applicant received the FORM on
November 18, 2013. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a response dated
November 23, 2013, which DOHA received on December 2, 2013. DOHA assigned this
case to me on January 6, 2014. The Government submitted five exhibits, which have
been marked as Items 1-5 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to the
SOR has been marked and admitted as Item 3, and the SOR has been marked as Item
1. His written response to the FORM is admitted into the record as Applicant Exhibit A
(AE A).
       
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a request that I take administrative notice of
certain facts relating to Afghanistan. The request and the attached documents were not
admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 1, I-IX. The
facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters
not subject to reasonable dispute, and they are set out in the Findings of Fact below. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and
1.c of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied
the factual allegations in ¶ 1.b of the SOR with explanation.  His explanation reflects1
that one-half of the allegation is denied and one-half of the allegation is admitted. He
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 57 years old, works as a linguist for a DOD contractor.
Applicant began his current employment in November 2010. He has been deployed to
Afghanistan to work as a linguist. He worked in dangerous areas of Afghanistan during
his deployments between 2010 and 2013. Applicant has never served in a military. Prior
Item 4; Item 5.2
Item 5.3
Item 4; Item 5.4
Item 3; AE A.5
Item 4; Item 5.6
3
to working as a linguist, Applicant worked in the computer industry for many years. He
was laid off from his last computer position in 2009, when the company downsized.2
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan. In 1981, Russia invaded
Afghanistan. Shortly thereafter, Applicant fled his homeland to Pakistan, as he feared
conscription into either the Russian or Afghan army to fight in the war between Russia
and Afghanistan. While living in Pakistan, Applicant applied for refugee status in Europe
or the United States. Seven months later, the United States granted him refugee status
and issued him an entry visa. Applicant immigrated into the United States in September
1981, and he became a U.S. citizen in 1993. He holds a U.S. passport, which he uses
for foreign travel.3
Applicant and his wife married in the United States in 1988. His wife was born in
Afghanistan, and she is a naturalized United States citizen. They have two sons, ages
24 and 14, and a 22-year-old daughter, who were born and raised in the United States.
Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. His mother is a naturalized
citizen and resident of the United States. His four brothers and two sisters were born in
Afghanistan. All are residents of the United States, and with the exception of one sister,
all are naturalized citizens of the United States. The non-citizen sister is still a citizen of
Afghanistan. His mother-in-law is a citizen of Afghanistan, who is a resident of the
United States with alien registration number. His father-in-law died in 2003.4
Applicant’s father retired. His father has a fruit farm in Afghanistan, and he does
not have any political activities or connections. Applicant and his family talk with his
father twice a year by telephone. Applicant last spoke with his father in April 2013. He
does not have any other communication with his father. There is no evidence of any
other contacts with extended family or friends in Afghanistan. Applicant does not own
property in Afghanistan. He does not have bank accounts or other assets in
Afghanistan. Since his arrival in the United States in 1981, he returned to visit
Afghanistan once in 2004. He has worked in Afghanistan for the last three years on
behalf of the United States, but he has no desire to live in Afghanistan.5
Applicant’s sister who is still a citizen of Afghanistan lives with Applicant’s mother
and a brother in the United States. She does not work outside the house. Applicant’s
mother-in-law lives with Applicant and his family in the United States. She does not
work outside the home. Applicant has not explained why they have not obtained U.S.
citizenship.6
HE 1.7
4
Afghanistan
I take administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts. Afghanistan is an
Islamic Republic and emerging democracy. With the support of the United States and
other nations, its new government endeavors to build a new system of government and
to rebuild the country’s infrastructure. Its Army and police force are well trained. It
continues to face significant challenges from the insurgency and terrorist organizations
supported by the ousted Taliban and Al Qa’ida. Security and violence remain a serious
issue. The government is not complacent about the terrorist threat, the insurgency, or
security issues; rather it actively seeks to eliminate all with the assistance of the United
States and NATO. The new government is working to reverse a long legacy of serious
human rights abuses, but serious problems remain. Afghanistan is now an active
member of the international community, has signed a “Good Neighbor” declaration with
six nations bordering it, and promotes regional cooperation. The United States supports
the emergence of a broad-based government in Afghanistan and has made a long-term
commitment to help Afghanistan rebuild itself. Sometime ago, the leaders of both
countries concluded a strategic partnership agreement committing to a long-term
relationship between both countries, which was signed on May 2, 2012. Despite its
differences with the United States, Afghanistan continues to seek U.S. support as it
moves forward towards democracy and stability. None of the documents offered in
support of the request for administrative notice indicate whether Afghanistan is an active
collector of intelligence information.7
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
5
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. I
have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
6
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and    
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.
Applicant’s wife, three children, four brothers, mother, and one sister are citizens
and residents of the United States. Thus, no security concern is raised by these family
members. Applicant’s mother-in-law is a permanent U.S. resident, who lives with him.
His non-citizen sister is also a permanent U.S. resident who lives with his mother and a
brother in the United States. There is no evidence that they travel to Afghanistan.
Neither his sister nor his mother-in-law work outside the home. Applicant’s father is a
citizen and resident of Afghanistan. He is Applicant’s only relative in Afghanistan.
Applicant and his immediate family members talk by telephone with his father twice a
year. Applicant maintains a normal familial relationship with his father in Afghanistan.
His family relationship with his father is not per se a reason to deny Applicant a security
clearance, but his contacts with his father must be considered in deciding whether to
grant Applicant a clearance. The Government must establish that this family relationship
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion by terrorists or would create a potential conflict of interest between his
obligations to protect sensitive information and his desire to help his father who may be
threatened by terrorists. 
In determining if such a heightened risk exists, I must look at Applicant’s
relationships and contacts with his father, as well as the activities of the Government of
Afghanistan and terrorist organizations within Afghanistan. The risk that an applicant
could be targeted for manipulation or induced into compromising classified information
is real, not theoretical. Applicant’s relationship and contacts with his father in
Afghanistan raises a heightened risk and a security concern because of the activities of
terrorists organizations, particularly the Taliban. The evidence of record fails to show
that the Afghan Government targets U.S. citizens in the United States or in Afghanistan
by exploiting, manipulating, pressuring, or coercing them to obtain protected
information. Thus, the concern that the Afghan Government will seek classified
information is minimal. The same cannot be said for terrorist organizations.
Under the guideline, the potentially conflicting loyalties must be weighed to
determine if an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S.
interests. In determining if Applicant’s contacts in Afghanistan cause security concerns,
I considered that Afghanistan and the United States have a relationship, which includes
working together on international security issues and trade. There is no evidence that
the Afghan Government targets U.S. citizens for protected information, but the terrorist
threat is real. The human rights issues continue to be a concern. While none of these
7
considerations by themselves dispose of the issue, they are all factors to be considered
in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to pressure or coercion because of his father in
Afghanistan. Applicant’s contacts with his father raise a heightened risk under AG ¶¶
7(a) and 7(b).
The Foreign Influence guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 8(a) through ¶ 8(f),
and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.; and
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.
Applicant has a normal relationship with his father. He last spoke with his father
in April 2013. His communications with his father in Afghanistan are limited and create
little likelihood for foreign influence or exploitation. His father is retired. He does not
work for the Afghan government, nor does he have any contact with Afghan government
officials. It is unlikely that the Government of Afghanistan would target his father to
pressure Applicant for classified information, and thus, Applicant would not be placed in
a position of having to choose between the interests of Afghanistan and the interests of
the United States. Applicant has lived and worked in the United States since his arrival
in 1981. He has built a solid life for himself and his family in the United States. He has
no desire to return to live in Afghanistan. For more than 30 years, Applicant has lived
and worked in the United States. He married a U.S. citizen and raised his children in the
United States. Except for his father, his family lives near him in the United States. He
has put his life at risk while working as a linguist in dangerous areas of Afghanistan.
Given his father, his only relative in Afghanistan, is retired and now operates a small
fruit farm, it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position to chose between the
interests of a foreign group, individual, organization, or government and the interests of
the United States. Outside of his father, his ties to Afghanistan are nonexistent as
Applicant does not own property, bank accounts, or other assets in Afghanistan. He
does not receive any benefits from Afghanistan. His contacts in Afghanistan do not
show that he would chose the interests of Afghanistan over the interests of the United
States. In reviewing all the evidence of record, there is little likelihood that Applicant’s
father in Afghanistan are a security risk. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns
about his father in Afghanistan under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b).
8
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
was born and raised in Afghanistan. As a young man, he fled Afghanistan to avoid
conscription into either the Russian or Afghanistan army to fight in their war. The United
States granted him refugee status in 1981. He immigrated to the United States in 1981
and has lived in the United Sates for the last 32 years. He met and married his wife
since arriving in the United Sates. His children were born and raised in the United
States. Except for one sister and his mother-in-law, his family members living in the
United States and he are now citizens of the United States. All these family members
are residents of the United States. His father is his only family member who continues to
live in Afghanistan. He is retired and now operates a small fruit farm. Applicant talks
with him twice a year. His father is not involved in Afghan politics. Rather, he lives
quietly. There is little likelihood that his father will be a target for terrorists. Applicant
does not have any other contacts with Afghanistan nor does he own property or hold
assets in Afghanistan.
9
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence
under guideline B.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
