 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00383 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 30, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
Applicant owns office space in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) valued at $181,000. He 
traveled to the UAE eight times between 2005 and 2012. Applicant fully mitigated the 
Foreign Influence and Personal Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 26, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons on August 13, 2013 (Item 3). In 
his Answer, Applicant elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on October 10, 
2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was received by 
Applicant on December 4, 2013. He was afforded 30 days to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant submitted a 
response (Response) on December 7, 2013. Department Counsel did not have any 
objections to Applicant’s Response, and it was admitted into the record. The case was 
assigned to me on January 13, 2014. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Request to take Administrative Notice 
 
 In the FORM, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of the 
facts, with citations to nine Government documents pertaining to Afghanistan. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, and not subject to reasonable dispute. They 
are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 59 years old. Applicant was born in Afghanistan. From 1975 to 1979 
he studied at a language institute in several other nations. In 1979 Applicant immigrated 
to the United States after he sought and was granted political asylum due to the 
Russian invasion of Afghanistan. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in January 1986. 
In April 2010 Applicant was hired an interpreter for a U.S. government contractor. He 
seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment. (Response; Item 4; Item 
15.) 
 
Applicant has extensive family in the United States. He is married and has two 
children, ages 20 and 14. His wife and children are citizens and residents of the United 
States. His wife is a school teacher and his children are both students. Of his five 
brothers and two sisters, four of Applicant’s brothers and both of Applicant’s sisters 
reside in the United States and are U.S. citizens. All of these siblings are married to 
U.S. citizens. Applicant’s mother also is a U.S. citizen residing in the United States. 
Applicant’s father is deceased.1 Applicant is close to his mother and has daily 
communications with her. (Response; Item 5; Item 6; Item 11; Item 15.) 
 
Subparagraph 1.a of the SOR alleged that Applicant has a brother and sister-in-
law that are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant admitted this allegation. 
This brother served in the Afghan Army from 1972 to 1996, and reached the rank of 
Colonel. He fled the Afghan Army when the Taliban took control of the area of Kabul. At 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s father served as a senior officer in the Afghan Army. He was imprisoned for two years 
“during the Soviet conflict.” He fled Afghanistan and immigrated to the United States. He passed away in 
the United States in 2001. (Item 7; Item 12; Item 16.)  
 
3 
 
that time, he fled Afghanistan and moved to Pakistan. He returned to Afghanistan in 
2004. Applicant’s brother currently lives in Kabul with his wife and four children. He is 
retired and does not work. His wife, Applicant’s sister-in-law, is a school teacher. 
Applicant traveled to Afghanistan to visit his brother in April 2005, after not having seen 
him for 26 years. He estimated he communicates with this brother once a month 
currently, and does not discuss work related subjects. (Answer; Response; Item 5; Item 
6; Item 7; Item 8; Item 11; Item 15; Item 16.) 
 
In 2006 Applicant purchased office space in Dubai, UAE, as an investment, for 
approximately $181,000, as alleged in subparagraph 1.b. He financed the purchase with 
a home equity loan and his personal savings. All payments for the purchase were 
completed before he was hired by the government contractor. The office space was 
under construction at the time of investment, but construction was completed in 2010. 
He is unable to rent it or sell it at this time due to a decline in the real estate market in 
Dubai. This is the only foreign property, account, or investment Applicant possesses. 
(Answer; Response; Item 15; Item 16.) 
 
The government alleged, in subparagraph 1.c, that Applicant has traveled to 
Dubai, UAE, 8 times between 2005 and 2012. Applicant traveled to Dubai in April 2005 
and May 2005 in transit to-and-from visiting his brother in Afghanistan, as identified 
above. He traveled again to Dubai in August to September 2006 to purchase his 
investment property. In January-February 2010 Applicant traveled to Dubai to walk 
through his completed office space and receive the keys to the space. His travels to 
Dubai in July 2011, August 2011, May 2012, and June 2012 were in transit, as he 
traveled for his work as a translator in Afghanistan. (Answer; Response; Item 4; Item 13; 
Item 15; Item 16.) 
 
Applicant earns a salary of approximately $185,000 per year. He owns a home in 
the United States. Applicant has approximately $70,000 in savings. (Item 15.) In his 
Response, he indicated: 
 
I understand all my duties as a responsible citizen of the U.S. and have a 
very deep and longstanding relationship and loyalty for the U.S. being a 
U.S. citizen and wife and children living in the country, I will always do my 
best to protect the interest of the United States and my family living there. 
I will never take any decision which would jeopardize the lives of my wife, 
children, friends or any U.S. citizen nor would let anyone else to do so. 
And I always comply with existing agency requirement to report any threat 
or suspicious activity. (Response.) 
 
Applicant is highly respected by those who know him professionally. A USMC 
brigadier general who wrote a letter of support on Applicant’s behalf indicated Applicant 
“is extremely dedicated to the mission” and “provides sound judgment and initiative.” 
(Response.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Afghanistan 
 
 In May 2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed a 10-year strategic 
partnership agreement that demonstrates the United States commitment to 
strengthening Afghanistan’s sovereignty and stability. The signing of this agreement 
marks the culmination of 10 years of United States involvement in Afghanistan, during 
which the U.S. led coalition attempted to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaida and its 
affiliates in Afghanistan.  
 
 Despite the progress made since the Taliban was deposed, Afghanistan still 
faces many challenges including fighting of insurgents, preventing the return or 
resurgence of al-Qaida, recovering from decades of civil strife, and rebuilding 
infrastructure. No parts of Afghanistan are immune from violence. Even the capital, 
Kabul, and its suburbs, are considered at high risk for militant attacks, including rocket 
attacks, vehicle-borne IEDs, direct-fire attacks, and suicide bombings. Extremist 
organizations have staged attacks on Afghan and U.S. troops in Afghanistan, including 
the September 13, 2011 attack on the U.S. Embassy in Kabul. Further, U.S. citizens, 
who are also citizens of Afghanistan, may be subject to other laws that impose special 
obligations. The Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan.  
 
 Additionally, human rights problems continue to exist in Afghanistan. Those 
include reports of torture and abuse of detainees by Afghan security forces; widespread 
violence and indiscriminate attacks on civilians; pervasive official corruption; and 
endemic violence. Among the many human rights concerns are reports of extrajudicial 
killings; poor prison conditions; allegations of abuses and torture by local security 
forces; arbitrary arrests and detentions; judicial corruption and ineffectiveness; and 
violations of privacy rights. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
5 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The Government argues that the following guidelines note conditions that could 
raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7.   
 
 
6 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
  
  AG ¶ 7(a) requires the presence of both family members (or business or 
professional associates, friends, or other persons) who are citizens and/or residents of a 
foreign nation and substantial evidence of a heightened risk. Applicant’s brother and 
sister-in-law are citizens and residents in Afghanistan. The heightened risk required to 
raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk 
denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. Terrorist groups 
and other criminal organizations operate within Afghanistan. Further, the government of 
Afghanistan has been identified as committing human rights violations. In this instance, 
a heightened risk is present. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(a), with respect 
to Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law.  
 
  Applicant’s connections to his brother and sister-in-law could create a potential 
conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and his desire to help his brother or sister-in-law by providing that 
information. AG ¶ 7(b) applies. 
 
  To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 7(e) requires the not only the presence of a 
substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, but also requires 
evidence of a heightened risk associated with that foreign interest. Applicant admits he 
owns office space in the UAE, which he purchased in 2002 for $181,000. His travel to 
the UAE in 2006 and 2010 in association with the property’s purchase, was prior to 
becoming a government contractor. His subsequent travel to UAE in July 2011, August 
2011, May 2012, and June 2012, were only for transit in relationship to his employment 
with the government contractor. While Applicant owns property in the UAE, the 
Government failed to produce evidence to support administrative notice or otherwise 
indicate that owning property in the UAE could subject him to any type of heightened 
risk of foreign influence or exploitation. Security concerns under AG ¶ 7(e) were not 
established. 
 
 
7 
 
  AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests.  
 
Applicant has submitted evidence that shows he has substantial family ties in the 
United States that outweigh his relationship to Afghanistan and his relatives there. He 
left Afghanistan at age 25 to escape the Russian invasion. He has lived in the United 
States much longer than he lived in Afghanistan. His wife, two children, mother, and six 
of his seven siblings all reside in the United States as U.S. citizens. His friends are in 
the United States. He owns a home and has savings here. His wife works for a local 
school system and they are entrenched in their local community. On the other hand, his 
ties to Afghanistan are limited to his continuing relationship to his brother and sister-in-
law. Since leaving Afghanistan in 1979, he has visited his brother once in 28 years. 
While he cares about his brother in Afghanistan, he has worked hard to build a life in the 
United States. His allegiances are to his chosen nation, not that of his birth, as 
evidenced by his strong recommendations from the military leadership that utilizes him 
as an interpreter for the U.S. forces. Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interests or attempted coercion in favor of the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The Government argued the following disqualifying condition is potentially 
applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
8 
 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
 The allegation under Guideline E, SOR subparagraph 2.a, states, “That 
information set forth in allegations 1.a. through 1.c. above,” and suggests that 
Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law in Afghanistan; his property in the UEA; and his 
travel to the UAE raise personal conduct concerns. The Government failed to articulate 
an argument in the FORM regarding the application of this specific disqualifying 
condition, except to simply state, “these facts also support Guideline E disqualifying 
condition DC 16(d).”  
 
 The allegations, when combined with all available information, fail to support “a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information.” Applicant purchased the property in the UAE prior to becoming an 
employee of a government contractor. He visited the UAE twice in relation to this 
property, also prior to being hired as a translator. His other visits to the UAE were in 
transit on his way to Afghanistan to visit his brother in 2005, and later to work as a 
translator for the government contractor in 2011 and 2012. There was no evidence of 
any risks of coercion identified in the record evidence with respect to the UAE. The risk 
pertaining solely to Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law was “explicitly covered” under 
Guideline B and do not add any additional security significance when considered in light 
of the entire record under Guideline E. AG ¶ 16(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
9 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a patriotic American citizen, whose work has been of particular value 
to our military mission in Afghanistan. He presented considerable evidence showing that 
his allegiance is to the United States and not Afghanistan or the UAE. Accordingly, I find 
that there is little or no “potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress” as set 
forth in AG ¶ 2(a)(8). Using the whole-person standard, Applicant has mitigated the 
security significance of his foreign connections. He is eligible for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
 
10 
 
Administrative Judge 
