 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06702 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Angela Dougherty, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 7, 2011, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. DoD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 27, 2011, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on October 23, 2012. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 13, 2012, and the 
 
2 
 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled on December 3, 2012. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record was left open for Applicant to submit post-hearing 
evidence. He did so in a timely manner and AE D was admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 14, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations under Guideline 
H; however, he disputed several factual statements within some of the allegations. After 
a thorough and careful review of the evidence submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He has been married for seven years. This is his 
second marriage. He does not have any children from either marriage. He has a high 
school diploma. He has worked for various defense contractors since 2006. He worked 
for other contractors since 1993 who were not defense contractors at the time. He has 
no military service and has held a security clearance since 2006.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes using marijuana from 
1974 through 1985. He denied an alleged use of marijuana in 1993, but admitted uses 
in about 2006 and about August 2009 while holding a security clearance. He also 
admitted being arrested and charged with delivery of a controlled substance in 1985, a 
felony, for which he received a sentence of probation. (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c). 
  
 Applicant stated that he began using marijuana when he was about 20 years old. 
He used it about once or twice a week up until about 1985 when he was arrested. He 
also purchased marijuana about one to two times per month. In 1985 he was arrested 
for distributing a half an ounce of marijuana to a friend. He was charged with felony 
intent to deliver drugs, of which he was convicted. He was sentenced to 60 months of 
probation. He received an early discharge from probation in January 1992 because he 
completed a residential substance abuse program and remained drug free according to 
the drug screening tests he was required to take between 1989 and 1992. When 
interviewed by an investigator in February 2011, Applicant described his 1985 arrest, 
conviction, and resulting probation as “a wakeup call for him in his life.”2 
 
 Applicant claims he did not use marijuana in 1993 even though he listed that date 
in his answers to DOHA interrogatories as a date he used marijuana. In his hearing 
testimony, he stated that his inclusion of that date in the answers to interrogatories was 
a mistake. He stated that the next time he used marijuana was in 2006. He was working 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 62, 87-88; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 62-66; GE 3, 4; Applicant’s answer (Answer). 
 
 
3 
 
 
as a government contractor at the time in a foreign country. Over a weekend, he visited 
another foreign country where he bought and smoked marijuana. He held a security 
clearance at the time. He was alone when he used the marijuana and did not tell 
anyone about his use of marijuana when he returned to his job site. His next uses of 
marijuana were in 2009. Once again, he was working for a government contractor in a 
foreign country. On four or five occasions, he visited a different foreign country and 
while there purchased and smoked marijuana on each visit. He held a security 
clearance at the time of these marijuana uses. He did not report his use of marijuana 
when he returned to his job site. He knew his use of marijuana was prohibited. He did 
not tell his wife about his marijuana use until 2011.3  
 
 Applicant did not fully disclose the extent of his drug use during the course of his 
security clearance investigation. In his January 2011 security clearance application, he 
failed to list his 2006 marijuana use. He listed his multiple 2009 uses of marijuana, but 
he answered “no” to a question asking whether he ever used illegal drugs while holding 
a security clearance. When he was interviewed by an investigator in 2011, he again 
failed to bring up his use of marijuana in 2006. He listed both his 2006 and 2009 
marijuana use in his answers to DOHA interrogatories completed in October 2011.4  
 
 Applicant testified that his last use of marijuana was in 2009. When faced with 
the allegations in the SOR, he requested and received a substance abuse evaluation in 
December 2011. The evaluating counselor indicated that Applicant showed no 
indications of substance abuse or dependence. He also offered several drug screening 
results for the following dates: March 28, 2008; January 23, 2009; December 16, 2011; 
December 20, 2011; April 17, 2012; and December 10, 2012. Although none of the tests 
were random (all the tests were conditions of employment tests when he started 
working on a new contract), they all indicated negative results for the presence of illegal 
drugs.5 
  
 Applicant indicated that he had many personal issues impacting him in 2009 that 
may have made him susceptible to using marijuana. His parents were both hospitalized 
for periods of time and he was helping them pay their bills. He was also having 
difficulties in his marriage because he was out of the country so much with his work.6 
 
 Applicant presented the testimony of the operations manager for his current 
employer. He testified that Applicant has worked for him off and on since 1993. He 
described Applicant as an excellent performer who is reliable, exercises good judgment, 
and is someone who he can trust. Applicant also presented letters of support from his 
pastor and several work colleagues who noted his hard work, superior attitude, 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 68, 70-71, 73, 75-76, 79; GE 1, 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 52, 73; GE 1, 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 46; AE B, C, Answer. 
 
6 Tr. at 42-43. 
 
 
4 
 
 
professional demeanor, job knowledge, and work ethic. He also presented a signed 
statement of automatic security clearance revocation in the event he violates any 
provision of Guideline H in the future.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 24-26; AE A, C; Answer. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
 (c) illegal drug distribution; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a number of occasions from 1974 to 1985, and 
2006 and 2009. He also used marijuana after being granted a security clearance in 
2006. He was convicted of drug distribution in 1985 and sentenced to 60 months’ 
probation. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
 
6 
 
 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant was a regular marijuana user from 1974 to 1985, until he was arrested 
for felony distribution of marijuana. He called this arrest a “life changing” event for him. 
He stopped using marijuana until 2006 and again in 2009. On both these occasions he 
held a security clearance. His “life changing” arrest in 1985 did not deter him from using 
marijuana years later after he gained the trust of the government and obtained a 
security clearance. Under these circumstances, his use of drugs was frequent and 
recent (last use in 2009). Given his long history of marijuana use, and his resumption of 
use after an extended period of claimed abstinence (1985-2006), his period of recent 
abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent not to use in the future. 
Applicant is not a young individual experimenting with drugs for the first time. He made 
a conscious lifestyle choice at various times over more than thirty years to use 
marijuana, despite its illegality. He claims he has changed his lifestyle and he no longer 
intends to use marijuana. Although his 1985 conviction is dated, his recent uses of 
marijuana have made that action timely again. He submitted a letter of intent to not use 
illegal drugs in the future. His past actions demonstrate more about his intent than a 
statement about his future intent. I am not convinced that he has a demonstrated intent 
not to use marijuana in the future. Moreover, his affirmative decision to repeatedly use 
marijuana after receiving a security clearance casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply, and AG ¶ 26(b) 
partially applies. 
 
 In December 2011, Applicant was evaluated by a drug abuse counselor who 
stated that there was no indication of substance abuse or dependence. Although this 
evaluation has some probative value, it does not constitute “completion of a prescribed 
drug treatment program” as contemplated by AG ¶ 26(d). This mitigating condition 
partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s statement 
of intent to not use illegal drugs in the future, his positive character witness and 
statements, and his drug evaluation. However, I also weighed his age when he last 
used marijuana, that he held a security clearance when he last used marijuana, that he 
was not candid in his 2011 security clearance application, or when he talked with an 
investigator about his 2006 marijuana use. This shows a lack of rehabilitation and 
reflects poorly on him. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
