 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-06259 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esquire 
                For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On December 31, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
In a response notarized on March 11, 2016, Applicant answered the 17 
allegations raised under Guideline F by admitting in part and denying in part each 
allegation, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on June 29, 2016. 
The matter was scheduled on September 7, 2016, for an October 13, 2016, hearing. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered three documents, which were accepted without 
objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-3. Applicant offered testimony. The record was held open 
through October 18, 2016, in the event the parties wished to submit additional material. 
On that date, one document was received and admitted without objection as Applicant’s 
exhibit (AEx.) A. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 20, 2016 and the record 
was closed. After review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old contractor who has served in his present position as a 
cyber security analyst since 2009. Applicant honorably served in the United States 
military for nine years. He has earned a bachelor’s degree in network communication 
management. He is presently single and has no children. Applicant has no retirement 
accounts and his stock market investments have been stagnant. (Tr. 22) He has not 
had formal financial counseling, but has had some on-line financial assistance. (Tr. 50) 
 
In 2008, Applicant’s now-former wife was running her own moving company and 
pregnant when she was in a car accident. She was then put on bed rest before suffering 
a miscarriage. Around the same time, her mother suffered from a heart attack, required 
by-pass surgery, and needed the help of Applicant and his wife for home care. 
Applicant’s former mother-in-law was supported by the couple until her death the 
following year. The former spouse’s absence from her company adversely impacted the 
business as a recession started a general economic decline. Reliance solely on 
Applicant’s income was insufficient. Debt was acquired. The couple separated in 2012, 
and was divorced in 2013. In 2015, Applicant studied his credit report. (Tr. 29) That 
motivated him to solicit the help of a law firm to verify and dispute credit report entries. 
(Tr. 30, 39-40) 
 
 In February 2016, Applicant worked with a debt resolution entity to develop a 
client action plan (CAP) to address multiple delinquent debts. (Tr. 16; SOR Response, 
Ex. F (unsigned CAP) and Ex. Ex. C (signed Creditor Payout Forecast Management, 
Policies, and Terms)) Under that plan, Applicant was to pay a monthly sum of $1,222 to 
address those debts, although that amount has since been reduced to $873 by the 
entity despite his income and expenses remaining the same. The reduction was related 
to the withdrawal of one creditor from the plan for a delinquent car loan. He was unsure 
whether that debt was the one noted at either SOR allegation 1.d or SOR allegation 1.i, 
both of which involve the same creditor. (Tr. 21) The credit report at Ex. 2 from 2011 
indicates the debt at SOR allegation 1.i for $7,147 is related to a charged-off auto loan, 
but no documentary confirmation as to whether this was the removed debt was 
provided. Payments on the plan were to begin on March 11, 2016, but no evidence that 
such payment was commenced was provided. 
  
The debts at issue in the SOR are reflected as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
1.a - $34,311 past due on a total mortgage balance of $370,716 - Applicant 
stated that his ex-wife took responsibility for this mortgage account as part of their 
divorce. (Tr 23) Applicant submitted a March 2013 divorce agreement showing that he 
agreed to convey ownership of the property to his wife within 30 days of the signing of 
the divorce agreement. (SOR Response, Ex. A) The property is or was in the process of 
being sold as a short sale. (SOR Response, Ex. B) The short sale listing is from 
February 2016, reflecting both Applicant and his ex-wife as sellers. Applicant testified 
that he had arranged that he will not be responsible for any deficiency after the short 
sale, but no documentary evidence to that effect was presented. (Tr. 24)  
 
1.b, 1.d, 1.i, 1,l, and 1.q - $27,793, $10,205, $7,147,1 $4,800, $4,022 – These 
delinquent consumer debts are noted as part of Applicant’s CAP. Applicant has no 
documentation showing the listed creditors have agreed to this plan. (Tr. 30) There is no 
evidence payments began in March 2016, as contemplated under the plan. (SOR 
Response, Ex. C) 
 
1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.p - $11,560, $8,818, $8,329, 
$8,166, $8,143, $5,791, $5,161, $4,278, $3,986, 1,063. These accounts first became 
due in 2013 and immediately became delinquent. (Tr. 33) They are for delinquent 
Federal student loans. Applicant spoke with his consolidator in August 2015 about these 
delinquent accounts. They were placed under a repayment plan with payments set at 
$223 a month. Applicant provided documentation noting payments made from October 
15, 2015, through January 2016. (Tr. 42; SOR Response, Ex. D) That paperwork notes 
Applicant was, at that time, enrolled in a repayment plan, but it also indicated that he 
had not returned the loan rehabilitation agreement paperwork needed to complete that 
plan. (SOR Response, Ex. D) 
  
Applicant testified that payments on the student loans continued until August 
2016. The plan then “lapsed.” (Tr. 31) Future payments were set for a larger amount 
($449). Applicant has not paid anything toward those debts since that time. He stated: “. 
. . I’m calling [the plan] back and was trying to rework and try to get a lower payment.” 
(Tr. 31) The Federal student loans still require a payment higher than Applicant can pay. 
(Tr. 43-44) His “back-up” plan for addressing these debts is to get a second job, but he 
finds getting a second job is hard in his area without a security clearance. (Tr. 44) 
 
1.o - $1,233. This account was charged off. Applicant denies that this is his debt. 
(Tr. 34-36) He has not disputed the account entry on his credit report or contacted the 
creditor. He thought it was added to his CAP, but it is not reflected on that document. 
(Tr. 37-38; SOR Response, Ex. F) 
 
Applicant submitted multiple letters of reference. (SOR Response, Exs. L-P) He 
is thought of as a reliable, trustworthy man and employee. He is regular with his rent 
and considered to be a reliable tenant.   
                                                          
1 This appears to be the account Applicant believes was dropped from the plan, although there is no 
documentary evidence to that effect. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 
10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
 
 
 
 
5 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts, consisting of over $150,000 delinquent debt. He 
acknowledges most of the debts at issue. This is sufficient to invoke financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
  
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
In 2008, Applicant’s wife at the time was injured in a car accident. Her 
recuperation away from managing her business, and splitting time with Applicant as 
they cared for her mother for the next year or so, adversely impacted her income. As a 
result, Applicant became the sole wage-earner for the family. His income was 
insufficient to cover all of their bills, and debts were acquired. Several years later, the 
couple separated in 2012, and was divorced in 2013. Little is known as to what, if any, 
efforts Applicant expended to ward off the acquisition of delinquent debt during these 
times. Consequently, AG ¶ 20(b) only applies in part.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
The debts at issue are multiple in number and are still outstanding to date. 
Applicant has not received formal financial counseling. Although he denies responsibility 
for the debt at SOR allegation 1.o ($1,233), he has not sought verification of the account 
or disputed the balance with the creditor or a credit reporting bureau.  
 
Applicant testified that the debt at SOR allegation 1.a, concerning a past-due 
mortgage, is not his responsibility. He introduced documents showing the property was 
to be transferred within 30 days of his signing a divorce agreement, and paperwork 
showing it was to be listed for short sale. These documents tend to show the debt cited 
is not owed by him. However, I do note that there is no documentation reflecting 
Applicant conveyed the property in the given timeframe. Moreover, while the listing 
agreement for a 2016 short sale shows little more than intent to sell, Applicant’s name 
on the document as a seller raises questions without clear and documented answers.  
 
Applicant showed that he had made payments on his Federal student loans for 
under a year, but he has discontinued them because the new monthly rates are too 
high. He testified he is willing to take a second job, but thus far none has been attained. 
At present, however, the rehabilitation and repayment of these student loans is aborted. 
Based on Applicant’s testimony, and his tight financial situation, the situation appears to 
be at a standoff.  
 
As for the CAP repayment strategy, Applicant has no documentation showing the 
listed creditors have agreed to this plan, and he did not establish a documented and 
established record of payments on the plan. The plan indicates repayment was to begin 
in March 2016. If payments had been shown as made from that time to the October 
2016 hearing, a meaningful track record of timely repayment could have been 
established. Without such documentary proof, however, little progress can be ascribed. 
Considering all of these factors, only AG ¶ 20(d) applies in full. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant is a 39-year-old contractor who has served in his present position since 
2009. He honorably served in the United States military for nine years. He has earned a 
bachelor’s degree, is divorced and has no children.  
 
From 2008 through about 2009, Applicant became the main wage-earner when 
his wife’s recuperation from an accident and her need to help care for her mother side-
tracked her from her business. During this period, debts were acquired. He was 
divorced in 2013. Applicant has multiple financial issues and scant financial reserves. 
He has not had formal financial counseling. He began assessing his credit in 2015, 
when he employed a law firm to dispute questioned entries on his credit report and 
began payments on his delinquent Federal student loans. 
 
While incomplete, and given the ultimate disposition in this matter, the evidence 
regarding the delinquent debt at SOR allegation 1.a appears to have been adequately 
addressed, if not necessarily satisfied. The two repayment plans, however, remain 
troublesome. The “lapsed” Federal student loan repayment plan appears, based on the 
excerpts provided, to have been part of, or an extension of, a student loan rehabilitation 
program.  Regardless, necessary paperwork requested by the lender was apparently 
not submitted and, once the temporary repayment plan had “lapsed,” a higher monthly 
sum was needed to continue the plan. Applicant cannot afford the sum and the plan 
was essentially aborted. At present, it remains unaddressed and his efforts to establish 
a meaningful track record of their repayment rebuffed.  
 
The CAP plan was instituted to address all but one of the remaining debts at 
issue. Documentary evidence establishing record of repayment, however, is lacking. 
Moreover, while credit must be given to efforts made to address delinquent debts, the 
measure of good-faith here is diminished to some extent by the fact the plan was 
initiated after the issuance of the SOR. 
 
This process expects that an applicant employ a reasonable strategy or plan to 
address his delinquent debts. It then requires documentary evidence that such a plan 
has been successfully implemented. Applicant presented documentary evidence of 
plans to address his debts, but his documentary evidence fails to demonstrate they 
were implemented or continue to be implemented. Therefore, they cannot be said to be 
under control. Part of this is based on the fact Applicant’s income is presently 
inadequate for addressing all the debts at issue. More documentation and, with regard 
to the student loans, negotiation or reconciliation, is needed to meet that standard. At 
present, under these facts, financial considerations security concerns remain 
unmitigated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.q:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
