 
 
 
 
1 
          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 12-05894 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial security concerns raised as a result of 
delinquent debts, unpaid sales taxes, and court ordered restitution. He failed to mitigate 
personal conduct security concerns related to his failure to disclose requested 
information in a security clearance application, and other issues involving his conduct. 
He mitigated the security concerns raised under foreign influence. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
 
 
 
2 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on September 28, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On October 27, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me, and issued a Notice 
of Hearing that same day. The case was heard on November 17, 2016, as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 16 into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 15 into evidence. All 
exhibits were admitted. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 29, 
2016. The record remained open until December 20, 2016, to give Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. No additional documents were submitted.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, which is a written request 
that I take administrative notice of certain facts about Iraq. Applicant did not object, and 
I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that are 
supported by source documents from official U.S. Government publications.1 (Tr. 11.) 
The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
      
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 2.a to change “1.g through 1.i” to 
“1.h through 1.j.” Applicant did not object to the amendment. The motion was granted. 
(Tr. 10.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all allegations contained in the SOR, except ¶ 2.k, which he 
admitted with an explanation. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old and married for 31 years. Applicant and his wife were 
born in Iraq. He earned a bachelor’s degree from an Iraqi university. He immigrated to 
the United States in 1981. His wife arrived before he did. They married in 1986. She is a 
U.S. citizen. They have three children, all born in the United States. Applicant became a 
U.S. citizen in 1993. (Tr. 30-31; GE 1, 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents were citizens and residents of Iraq before their death. He has 
three brothers and a sister, who were born in Iraq. They are U.S. citizens and residents. 
(Tr. 28-30.)  
 
                                            
1Department Counsel provided Applicant with the supporting documents on December 1, 2016, via email. 
He did not file an objection to any of the documents.   
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant owned a grocery store from 1993 to 1995. From 1995 to 2002, he 
worked as a part-time interpreter for a company (Company 1). From 1997 to 2005, he 
worked full-time for an immigration court as an interpreter. He was terminated from this 
position for allegations of intimidating an immigration applicant, and was subsequently 
disqualified from working for the court in the future. From April 2005 to October 2005, he 
worked full-time training soldiers before they deployed. From May 2007 to July 2007, he 
worked part-time for a company (Company 2) at a military base. From September 2007 
to February 2008, he worked full-time as a linguist for a federal contractor (Company 3) 
in Iraq. He involuntarily forfeited his contract because he accompanied an officer to 
another country without obtaining permission to leave Iraq. He has been unemployed 
for three or four years. He does some volunteer translation work for attorneys, and 
works periodically as a telephonic interpreter. (Tr. 36, 84; GE 1, 2, 3, 4, 6.2)     
 
 Applicant has submitted four security clearance applications (SCA). He submitted 
his first SCA in 2002. He subsequently learned that he was denied a security clearance 
because he was not truthful about events in his life. He said he was too embarrassed to 
disclose information about a previous Operating While Intoxicated (OWI) arrest. (Tr. 33, 
85.) He submitted a second SCA prior to his deployment to Iraq in 2007. He 
subsequently received an interim clearance. (Tr. 63.) In 2010, he submitted a third SCA. 
In 2015, he submitted a fourth SCA, which is the basis for this hearing.3 (GE 1, 2, 4.)   
 
Financial 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems that began prior to his filing a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2010. He explained that he was not working and did not have 
enough money to pay his mortgage and other bills, which included delinquent credit 
card accounts, and medical bills for which he did not have insurance. He continues to 
have delinquent debts today. (Tr. 39-40; GE 4.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from April 2016, April 2015, and 
December 2010, the SOR alleged 6 delinquent debts, a 2010 Chapter 7 bankruptcy, a 
felony involving fraud, unpaid state sales taxes, and a failure to disclose earned income. 
The delinquent debts began in 2009 and continue to date. (GE 6, 7, 8.) The status of 
those 10 allegations is as follows: 
 
1. (SOR ¶ 1.a) Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in January 2010, which was 
dismissed in May 2010. Applicant said he requested dismissal of the case after 
he obtained a job. The court documents listed an unpaid state sales tax liability of 
$19,767 from 1995, and about $12,000 in delinquent debts. (Tr. 39; GE 9.) The 
status of said sales tax remains unresolved.   
 
                                            
2 These exhibits contain information pertinent to Applicant’s employment history. The dates throughout 
the documents are not consistent. My summary of dates and employers is an approximate chronology of 
said history.   
3 This 2015 SCA did not disclose that he had been investigated for a clearance in 2007 or earlier. 
 
 
 
 
4 
2. (SOR ¶ 1.b) The $9,346 judgment entered in October 2010 was not 
Applicant’s debt, as confirmed by a letter from his attorney. (Tr. 40; AE 2, 3.)  
It is resolved. 
 
3. (SOR ¶ 1.c) The $4,431 judgment entered in October 2010 is owed to 
Applicant’s former attorney for fees related to his representation of Applicant 
before a state revenue department in a case involving unpaid sales taxes for 
1994 and 1995. Applicant has not paid the judgment because he said he 
does not owe it to his attorney. (Tr. 43-45.) It is unresolved. 
 
4. (SOR ¶ 1.d) The $693 medical debt from 2009 is unresolved. Applicant 
submitted a paid receipt for a bill, which does not reference this debt. (Tr. 26-
47; GE 7.) It is unresolved. 
 
5. (SOR ¶ 1.e) The $1,460 debt is owed to a bank for a credit card. Applicant 
asserted that it is not his debt and he disputed it with the credit bureaus. He 
supplied no proof confirming his position. (Tr. 47-48; GE 7.) It is unresolved.  
 
6. (SOR ¶ 1.f) In October 2015, Applicant paid and resolved the $4,392 debt, 
owed to a credit card company. (Tr. 49; Answer.) It is resolved. 
 
7. (SOR ¶ 1.g) Applicant asserted that he paid the $3,429 debt owed to a credit 
card company in 1989. However, the December 2010 CBR listed the last 
activity as 2008. (Tr. 50-51; GE 8.) It is unresolved. 
 
8. (SOR ¶ 1.h) In 1998, a U.S. agency arrested and charged Applicant with  
Federal Program Fraud, a felony. In December 1998, he signed an 
Agreement for Pretrial Diversion (Agreement), in connection with false 
statements he made in order to obtain a $75,000 loan from the Small 
Business Administration for a grocery store he owned. According to the 
Agreement, the prosecution on the felony was deferred for 12 months. 
Applicant was required to start, on January 15, 1999, making restitution 
through monthly payments of $20 on the $75,000 loan. The payments were to 
increase when Applicant secured employment. Applicant denied that he was 
responsible for that amount of money. He said that the court ordered him to 
repay $1,500, and placed him on probation for 12 months. He said he 
satisfied the court-imposed conditions. He agreed to submit documentation 
verifying his assertion, post-hearing. He did not do so. Applicant admitted that 
from 1997 to 2002 he had a gambling problem. (Tr. 52-56; GE 3, 10.) This 
allegation is unresolved. 
 
9. (SOR ¶ 1.i) Applicant has not paid the $16,269 lien owed to a state for sales 
taxes on the grocery store he owned. He presented a September 2009 
document from the state indicating that the tax lien expired, but made no 
mention of it having been paid. Based on that letter, Applicant asserted he 
does not owe the taxes and stated he paid them. He presented no proof of 
 
 
 
 
5 
payment. An investigative report from June 2015 notes that the taxes are 
unpaid. (Tr. 57-58; GE 14; AE 1.) This allegation is not resolved. 
 
10. (SOR ¶ 1.j) This paragraph alleged that Applicant’s wife failed to report 
income she earned from tips in her cosmetology work. Applicant denied that 
allegation and testified that his accountant told him that her additional income 
was offset by expenses not reported. Hence, he did not need to report the 
tips. (Tr. 59-60.) During a May 2015 interview with a government investigator, 
Applicant told the investigator that his wife did not report tips. He believed 
they were non-reportable but had not confirmed it with his accountant at that 
time. (GE 3.) This allegation is unresolved.     
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.a) The SOR alleged that Applicant’s arrest and charge for making false 
statements to a federal loan program in 1998 to 1999, and his failure to report income, 
as alleged in ¶ 1.h through ¶ 1.j, raised personal conduct security concerns. 
 
 Under this guideline, the SOR also alleged eight instances in which Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose information in his 2015 SCA, related to specific areas of 
inquiry. (GE 1.) The allegations are as follows: 
 
  (SOR ¶ 2.b) Applicant did not report the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 
1.e, and 1.f. He reported the 2010 bankruptcy. Applicant said the SCA was too long and 
he was in a hurry to finish it. He thought the SCA went to his potential employer, who 
did not care about those details. He acknowledged that his financial issues were 
embarrassing, as were other facts in his background. (Tr. 60-62, 66.)    
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.c) Applicant failed to disclose that he and his brother traveled to Iraq 
in September 2010, in order to negotiate a deal to sell Brazilian sugar to Iraq. They 
were there until the end of October 2010. Applicant stated that his brother is a 
businessperson, who is paralyzed and uses a wheelchair. Applicant strongly asserted 
that he went on the trip to assist his brother in personal hygienic matters. He also drove 
him to places, helped him with a wheelchair, and took him to meetings. Applicant had 
dinner with his brother and others after a meeting, but stated that he did not discuss 
business with anyone. He denied having any participation in business meetings. He 
testified that he did not disclose this information because no business materialized as a 
consequence of this visit. He denied that he was trying to hide information from the 
Government. (Tr. 68-70.)   
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.d) Applicant failed to disclose that he and his brother researched the 
possibility of acquiring and shipping vehicles to Iraq for a profit. Applicant denied that he 
was involved in any discussions regarding selling vehicles to buyers in Iraq. He said 
another person spoke to his brother about the potential opportunity in Iraq. Applicant 
stated he did not disclose this information because nothing materialized after 
communications related to this topic. (Tr. 73-74.) 
 
 
 
 
6 
 (SOR ¶ 2.e) Applicant failed to disclose that he and his brother attended a 
meeting in a U.S. city about using his brother’s business to provide industrial equipment 
to an Iraqi company. Applicant said he took his brother to a meeting with Iraqi nationals, 
who became U.S. citizens, about an opportunity in the oil business in Iraq. Applicant 
denied attending the meeting, although he had two business cards from people 
attending that meeting. He did not disclose this interaction or communications with 
foreign nationals because a business proposal did not materialize. (Tr. 72-74.) 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.f) Applicant failed to disclose the civil judgments filed against him in 
2010 as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. He said he did not disclose them because they 
were resolved. (Tr. 74-75.) 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.g) Applicant failed to disclose his arrest and charge involving the 
federal program fraud, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant said he did not disclose the 
felony because he forgot about it and was in a hurry to finish the 2015 SCA. (Tr. 75-76.) 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.h) Applicant failed to disclose his conviction for domestic violence in 
1990. He said he did not disclose this conviction because he was rushing to complete 
the SCA and he does not think of himself as a violent person. (Tr. 77-78.) During a May 
2015 interview, Applicant was asked why he did not disclose this case. He told the 
investigator that he did not list the incident because he was embarrassed about it. He 
admitted that he intentionally answered no, but said he intended to disclose it during a 
background interview. (GE 3.) 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.i) Applicant failed to disclose his arrest for operating a vehicle while 
impaired (OWI) and for failure to report an accident in December 2000. Applicant said 
he did not realize he was arrested for an OWI the night of the accident. He admitted that 
he had consumed alcohol before the arrest and took a field sobriety test at the time of 
the arrest, but he did not consider it an alcohol-related incident. He said alcohol was not 
a “big factor in that accident.” (Tr. 80.) His lawyer told him to plead guilty to failing to 
report an accident. (Tr. 79-81.) 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.j) Applicant admitted he was terminated from Company 3 in January 
2008 for leaving Iraq without authorization, but denied any wrongdoing. Applicant said 
he was assigned to personally assist a colonel when he arrived in Iraq. When the 
colonel traveled to a nearby country, Applicant accompanied him. After returning to Iraq, 
his employer informed him that he forfeited his contract and sent him home. Applicant 
disputed the circumstances underlying the termination and believed that he had been 
authorized to leave the country because he was assigned to work with the colonel. (Tr. 
82-84.) According to his employer, Applicant was told on two occasions that the colonel 
was not in Applicant’s chain-of-command, and that Applicant had been assigned to work 
with a different person. The employer had informed Applicant that he would need 
permission to leave the base before traveling to another country, which Applicant did 
not secure. (GE 16.) 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 (SOR ¶ 2.k) In July 2005, Applicant was terminated from his employment, as a 
contracted interpreter, and disqualified from working for the immigration court in the 
future. He allegedly intimidated an immigrant during the translation process. Applicant 
denied the basis for the termination. He did not disclose this information on the 2015 
SCA. (Tr. 84; GE 3.)  
 
 Applicant repeatedly stated that he did not intentionally mislead the Government 
when he completed the 2015 SCA. He said he did not read the questions carefully, and 
rushed to finish it. (Tr. 74, 78, 88.)  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 The United States Department of State warns that U.S. citizens in Iraq are at 
high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence. It is recommended that they avoid all but 
essential travel to Iraq. The threat to U.S. Government personnel in Iraq is serious and 
requires them to live and work under strict security guidelines.  
 
 The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) controls a significant portion of 
Iraq’s territory. Within areas of ISIL control, the Iraqi government has little or no ability to 
control and ensure public safety. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias may threaten U.S. citizens 
and western companies throughout Iraq. Violence and attacks by improvised explosive 
devices (IED) occur frequently in many areas of the country. There are numerous 
methods of attack including human and vehicle-borne IEDs, mines, mortars, and 
rockets. Such attacks take place in public venues.  
 
 Iraq continues to witness a surge in terrorist attacks, primarily as a result of ISIL. 
It continues to be the greatest terrorist threat globally, maintaining formidable forces in 
Iraq, including a large number of foreign terrorist fighters. Despite Iraq’s efforts to 
combat ISIL, there remains a security vacuum in parts of the country.  
 
 Human rights violations are predominantly carried out by ISIL. These include 
attacks on civilians, especially members of other religious and ethnic minorities, women 
and children. The acts of violence committed by ISIL included killings by suicide 
bombers, IEDs, execution-style shootings, public beheadings, and other forms of 
execution. Sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, and lack of transparency at all 
levels of government and society weakened the Iraqi government’s authority and 
worsened human rights protections. 
 
 (SOR ¶ 3.a) The SOR alleged that Applicant considered, researched, and/or 
supported his brother and his business in obtaining or attempting to obtain business 
contacts or contracts with Iraq and Iraqi businesses. Applicant denied this allegation 
and said that he was not involved in any business dealings for his brother. He said he 
only provided personal assistance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Character References 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from a project manager for the 
company that hired Applicant in July 2005 to train soldiers before their deployment. The 
manager said Applicant was a valued member of his team. (AE 9.) The colonel, with 
whom Applicant traveled to a nearby country, highly complimented Applicant on his 
translation skills. (AE 8.) Applicant also submitted four certificates of appreciation for his 
work with the U.S. Army. (AE 11, 12, 13, 14.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
 
 
 
9 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse 
decision shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.4 
 
AG ¶ 19 sets out three disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise 
security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee theft, 
check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive loan 
statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
 
Applicant has a history of not satisfying debts that began in 2009 and continues 
to the present. The debts include unpaid sales taxes, and restitution for a federal crime 
involving fraudulent loan statements. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 
 
10 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant established partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), as there is some evidence 
that Applicant’s financial delinquencies were attributable to a lack of income during 
some periods, which may have been circumstances beyond his control. There is 
insufficient evidence demonstrating that he attempted to responsibly manage the 
delinquent debts during those periods, which is necessary to establish full mitigation 
under this condition. 
 
Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling. He did not submit 
a budget. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. He presented evidence that he made a good- 
faith effort to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f. He established mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(d), as to those two debts. Although he stated that he resolved several   
other debts, he never submitted proof confirming those assertions, including the largest 
debt of $73,000 owed for restitution for a 1998 criminal act, and the 1995 unpaid sales 
taxes. Applicant disputes several debts, but failed to provide evidence that he has 
reasonable bases to dispute their legitimacy. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
  
 AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
  
(e) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other    
employer's time or resources. 
 
Applicant denied that he intentionally omitted information from his 2015 SCA 
regarding: delinquent debts; interactions with foreign nationals about his brother’s 
business; attempts to solicit or arrange foreign business transactions; civil judgments; a 
felony; a conviction for domestic violence; and an alcohol-related offense, an OWI. 
 
 
 
 
12 
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the government has the burden 
of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred.5  
After listening to Applicant, observing his demeanor, and reviewing all 
circumstances involved in the numerous falsification allegations, I find that Applicant’s 
denial of any intention to mislead the Government when he completed the 2015 SCA is 
not credible. His admissions that he was embarrassed over some items in his history is, 
in all probability, the honest underlying reason for his non-disclosures, compounded by 
his concerns about obtaining a position. In particular, his denial that he was involved in 
securing or helping his brother secure business in Iraq is not credible. He was in close 
contact with his brother during the periods alleged, including dinner in one instance. It 
strains credulity to believe that Applicant was not aware of or participating in some 
aspect of the business discussions alleged. Additionally, he knew that he did not obtain 
a position that he previously applied for, because he lied on the application. The scope 
of Applicant’s omissions about so many incidents is significant and concerning. The 
evidence established the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16(a), as to SOR ¶¶ 2.b 
through 2.i. 
Applicant engaged in personal misconduct when he submitted fraudulent 
statements in order to obtain monies through a federal loan program. He failed to 
demonstrate that he paid outstanding state sales taxes, but rather argued that he was 
not required to pay them because the tax lien expired. He is an intelligent man, and his 
explanation for not reporting income, namely that his accountant told him it was not 
necessary to report tips as income, is unreasonable. Applicant has exhibited a pattern 
of dishonesty, rule violations, and a failure to fulfill legal obligations. The evidence 
established the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16(d)(3), as to SOR ¶¶ 1.h through 
1.j.  
Applicant was terminated from positions working with an immigration court, and a 
federal contractor, for violating rules. The evidence established the disqualifying 
condition under AG ¶ 16(d)(3), as to SOR ¶¶ 2.j and 2.k.  
AG ¶ 17 includes two conditions that could mitigate the security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
                                            
5See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-
23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
  
 
 
 
 
13 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to establish either mitigating condition. Applicant 
did not make a prompt effort to correct his omissions before being confronted with the 
facts about items he had failed to disclose. His numerous omissions, pattern of 
dishonesty, and rule violations are not minor infractions and occurred less than two 
years ago. They did not happen under unique circumstances, and were not shown to be 
unlikely to recur. Applicant’s behavior casts doubt on his trustworthiness and good 
judgment.  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to 
help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in 
U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the 
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country 
is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” 
required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member 
living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of 
Applicant’s ties or connections to a foreign country must be considered.  
 
In 2010, Applicant traveled with his brother to Iraq. During that trip, they explored 
business opportunities with a private Iraqi company. They subsequently researched 
possible business contracts with the Iraqi government. These activities and the terrorist 
threats present in Iraq, as set out in HE I, create a heightened risk of foreign 
 
 
 
 
14 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. There is enough 
evidence to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns arising under 
this guideline: 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
There is sufficient evidence to establish the above mitigating condition. 
Applicant’s pursuits with people in Iraq or its government never materialized into a 
business endeavor or a contract. Hence, communications or contacts with foreign 
nationals or organizations have ceased.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an educated 57-year-old 
man, who was born in Iraq, and became a proud U.S. citizen in 1993. His wife and 
children are U.S. citizens. He has used his linguistic abilities to support U.S. troops in 
the United States and Iraq. He submitted letters of recommendation from officers with 
whom he worked in Iraq between late 2007 and early 2008. These are some positive 
factors in his favor. 
 
However, substantial evidence of questionable behavior and judgment preclude 
the granting of Applicant’s security clearance. First, there are ongoing concerns related 
to his finances and delinquent debts, which he has not adequately addressed, including 
 
 
 
 
15 
unpaid state sales taxes and court-ordered restitution. Although he was given an 
opportunity to submit evidence to corroborate his statements about the status of the 
alleged debts, he did not do so. He has not established a reliable record of managing 
his finances. Second, he has a history of being untruthful, starting in 1998 or 1999, 
when he submitted fraudulent statement to the federal government in order to secure a 
$75,000 small business loan. In 2002, he was denied a security clearance for not 
disclosing requested information. Third, when he completed his 2015 SCA, he 
continued to withhold information about his employment record. He was terminated from 
his work with the immigration court in 2005 for misconduct; and in 2008, he forfeited his 
contractual work with the U.S. Army for violating rules. 
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Based on the record evidence, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns, but failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial considerations and personal 
conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c through 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:                 For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g through 1.j:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.k:     Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 3, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:                           For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   _________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
