                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )   ISCR Case No. 12-09865
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L’ei Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 20 June 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing; however, Department Counsel requested a hearing before the Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 11 April 2016 and I
convened a hearing 18 May 2016. DOHA received the transcript 26 May 2016.
Consisting of the transcript (Tr. I), Government exhibits (GE) 1-4, hearing exhibit (HE) I-II, and Applicant1
exhibits (AE) A-B. AE A-B were timely received post hearing. The record closed on 10 June 2016, when
Department Counsel stated no objection to AE B.
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted SOR financial allegations 1.a-1.d. She denied the remaining
allegations. She is a 46-year-old project administrator employed by a defense contractor
since September 2009. She has not previously held a clearance. She married in April
2002, separated from her husband in May 2006, and divorced him in November 2009
(GE 1; Tr. 32). She discovered a year into their marriage that he had not filed his taxes
for the last six years (Tr. 31). In 2010, she was treated for cancer.
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (GE 1-4) substantiate, and Applicant
admits, filing for bankruptcy protection on four occasions (SOR 1.a-1.d). Applicant first
filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in September 2009 (SOR 1.a). The petition
was dismissed in October 2011, although Applicant received the mandatory financial
counseling during the pendency of this bankruptcy (GE 4). Applicant filed for Chapter 7
bankruptcy in September 2012 (SOR 1.b), and was discharged of about $20,000 in
marital, post-divorce, and medical debt. She asserts that SOR debts 1.g-1.k, 1.aa, and
1.cc-1.dd were discharged in this bankruptcy (Tr. 33-35).3
However, it appears that not all of her debt was included in her Chapter 7
petition, and she acquired new debt. She filed again for Chapter 13 protection in August
2013, and the petition was dismissed in October 2013 (SOR 1.c). She re-filed a Chapter
13 petition in November 2013 (SOR 1.d), but the case was dismissed in June 2014
when she could not keep up the payments (Tr. 36-38). She tried again in September
2014 but the petition was dismissed in February 2015 because she did not start the
required automatic payments once she received notification that her plan had been
confirmed (Tr. 38). Finally, she filed another Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in March
2016, with about $10,000 in debt, $5,000 of which was from her marriage (Tr. 39).4
Applicant documented that the February 2011 state tax lien (SOR 1.e) was
released in January 2015 (Tr. 40041; AE B). She claimed that she was unable to locate
SOR creditors 1.f and 1.l (Tr. 43), but provided no evidence of her efforts to locate the
creditors. She stated that she could provide proof of payment for SOR 1.bb (Tr. 45), but
did not do so.
 Applicant received credit counseling through her bankruptcies. She claimed to
have, but did not provide, a budget to document her claimed $700 positive monthly cash
flow. She provided no work or character references, or any evidence of community
involvement.
Applicant did not supply a copy of her Chapter 7 bankruptcy, so it is impossible to confirm that claim. Her3
June 2016 credit report (AE A) confirms that SOR debts 1.i, 1.k, 1.m-1.n, and 1.r-1.s were discharged in a
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The remaining debts were not so clearly resolved.
Although not alleged in the SOR, these latter two bankruptcy petitions are relevant on the merits to4
demonstrate Applicant’s ongoing problems getting her finances in order. Although not a complete record of
the debts included in these petitions, Applicant’s June 2016 credit report reflects several debts that were
included in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition (AE A).
2
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.5
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and 
Applicant failed to fully mitigate the security concerns. Assuming for a moment that her
financial situation coming out of her divorce warranted her first two bankruptcy filings,
Applicant obtained a Chapter 7 discharge in December 2012, giving her a new financial
start. Yet, she has filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection four times since August
2013, at least two of which were dismissed for her failure to make her plan payments.
She provided no documentation of her March 2016 filing, undertaken two months before
her hearing.
Beyond that, her documentation (AE A) only confirms the discharge of seven of
the 22 SOR debts. She also documented the release of the February 2011 state tax
lien. However, she has not documented three other debts that were not in her Chapter 7
petition.
Applicant only partially meets the mitigating factors for financial considerations.
Her financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, and have not ended, so how can
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
they be considered unlikely to recur.  Even assuming that her initial financial problems6
were due to circumstances beyond her control, and the first two bankruptcies a
responsible means of dealing with those debts, she has not demonstrated that her
ongoing problems are due to circumstances beyond her control, and having not yet
begun a successful Chapter 13 plan, she cannot be said to be dealing with the later
debt responsibly.  Although Applicant has received credit counseling, she has not7
established that all the debts she claims were in her Chapter 7 petition were resolved,
and certainly the debts that have comprised her Chapter 13 petitions after August 2013
have not been resolved.  Moreover, she did not provide any documentation of her8
March 2013 petition to show what the plan might look like to constitute a good-faith
effort to satisfy them.9
The Appeal Board has stated that an Applicant need not have paid every debt
alleged in the SOR, need not pay the SOR debts first, and need not be paying on all
debts simultaneously. Applicant need only establish that there is a credible and realistic
plan to resolve the financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement
the plan.  Applicant’s efforts to date might have constituted such a plan, but for the10
shortcomings of her documents. Moreover, the absence of work or character references
precludes a “whole-person” analysis arguing for granting her clearance notwithstanding
her financial issues. I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs  a-d: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs e, i, k, m-n, r-t For Applicant
Subparagraphs f-h, j, l, o-q, u-dd Against Applicant
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications8
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.9
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. 21 May 2008).10
4
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                                 
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR.
Administrative Judge
5
