 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10545 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant should have been more diligent in taking action to resolve his financial 
problems. Under the totality of the circumstances of this case, Applicant’s evidence is 
insufficient to establish his financial responsibility. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.   
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 16, 2012. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on April 30, 2015, issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 23, 2015 (Answer), and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 30, 2015. The case was 
assigned to me on March 3, 2016. Applicant was deployed overseas and requested a 
hearing in August 2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 11, 2016, scheduling 
the hearing for August 3, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. Government exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 3, and Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A through S, were admitted into evidence 
without objection. AE S was received post-hearing. GE 4 was marked and made part of 
the record, but not as evidence. On August 12, 2016, DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he denied all of the SOR allegations. He also made some 
partial admissions to some of the SOR factual allegations and provided extenuating and 
mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing 
are incorporated into my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 36 years old. He graduated from high school and attended college 
where he received an associate’s degree in 2004. He also served honorably in the Air 
Force Inactive Reserve from 2000 to 2004. While in the Air Force, he was granted a secret 
clearance in 2002. Applicant married his wife in 2012. She is a registered nurse with a 
current income of around $60,000. His current income is around $61,000.  
 
Applicant initially claimed that after his discharge, he had difficulty finding a full-
time job. He testified that most of his SOR delinquent debts originated during this two-
year period of underemployment. He also claimed his financial problems were due to him 
providing financial assistance to his then girlfriend with whom he used to gamble at least 
twice a year. Additionally, he claimed that between 2000 and 2015, he provided 
substantial financial support to his mother in another country.  
 
The evidence shows that between November 2004 and April 2007, Applicant 
worked for a hiring agency and was assigned to work full time as a temporary employee 
with his current employer. Applicant was hired by his current employer, a federal 
contractor, in 2007. (Tr. 24)  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2012. In response to Section 26 
(Financial Record) of the SCA, Applicant disclosed he had been either disciplined, 
counseled, or warned about failing to make timely payments on an employer-provided 
credit card. He averred he had paid the debt. Applicant also disclosed other delinquent 
debts including credit cards, a medical debt, and student loans. He hired the services of 
three different debt settlement, counseling, or disputing companies to help him pay or 
resolve some of his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant’s security investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed 
the seven SOR debts, totaling over $67,000. Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is 
documented in his credit reports, his SOR response, and his testimony. The status of his 
SOR debts is as follows: 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant’s delinquent energy bill from 2010 for $63. Applicant 
claimed he left for an overseas assignment in 2009 without receiving the final bill. He 
claimed he paid the bill over the phone in April 2010. He submitted a notice of delinquency 
from the creditor with a handwritten note indicating the alleged payment date and a 
payment confirmation number. (AE S, Tab D) The debt still shows as a charged-off 
account in Applicant’s 2014 credit report. (GE 2)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a 2010 tax lien filed against Applicant by his state for the 
overpayment of unemployment benefits for $2,700. Applicant initially claimed he was 
underemployed between 2004 and 2007. He further claimed he was disputing the total 
amount of the state’s tax lien. Under cross-examination, Applicant admitted that although 
he was employed through a hiring agency, he was working full-time and had no periods 
of unemployment after his discharge. Applicant further admitted he received 
unemployment benefits while working full time. His then employer, the hiring agency, filed 
a complaint against Applicant with the state authorities disputing Applicant’s 
unemployment claims. The state then initiated legal action against Applicant to recover 
for overpayment of unemployment benefits. 
 
Applicant claimed he learned about the 2010 state tax lien against him when he 
started the process to renew his security clearance in 2012. When asked about the efforts 
he has taken to resolve or dispute SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant testified he has been making 
phone calls to contact the correct person to file the complaint. So far, he has been 
unsuccessful. He has filed no written dispute. The tax lien is depicted in the 2014 credit 
report. (GE 2) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d allege Applicant’s two judgments for delinquent student loans, 
totaling $41,016, made between 2005 and 2006. Applicant admitted the two debts were 
his student loans and submitted documentary evidence showing he made six payments 
of $468 each in 2008, and seven payments of $500 each in 2009. He presented no other 
documentary evidence of payments made after 2009. Applicant testified he hired two debt 
resolution companies to help him pay his student loans, but their help was limited.  
 
Applicant is currently disputing the student loans. He submitted two affidavits 
showing the lender lost his initial student loan applications. He claimed that after he made 
the payments in 2008 and 2009, he realized his payments were not applied to his student 
loan debt and decided to dispute the debts. Applicant now believes that the statute of 
limitations to collect the student loans has passed and he has an affirmative defense for 
any collection action against him. (AE S, Tab G) The two judgments are shown in his 
2014 credit report. (GE 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $15,000 delinquent debt. Applicant claimed the debt was for 
dental services to his then girlfriend, which he cosigned. A 2012 credit report (GE 3) 
shows this as Applicant’s individual credit card debt that was charged off.  
 
Applicant claimed he paid the debt in 2009, and submitted two documents 
reflecting purported payments to company “N” in December 2008 ($2,267), and in 
January 2009 ($3,778). Applicant’s documentary evidence fails to show that he paid the 
 
4 
                                         
 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. The documents submitted show that company N asked 
Applicant to ensure he had money in his checking account before they initiated a 
withdrawal. There is evidence the first withdrawal was completed; however, the evidence 
does not show the second withdrawal was accomplished. Nor is there evidence that he 
settled the account for less and paid it. Furthermore, Applicant’s documents failed to 
make the connection between company N and the creditor alleged in the SOR ¶ 1.e. He 
may have paid another creditor, but it is not clear whether he paid the creditor alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. (See AE S, Tab H) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $6,500 delinquent debt for a credit card. Applicant claimed he 
paid the debt. His documentary evidence established that a debt resolution company 
negotiated a settlement of the debt for $2,904 in 2012. However, Applicant failed to submit 
documentary evidence to show that he paid the agreed settlement. (AE S, Tab I)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a $1,214 delinquent debt to a phone services provider. Applicant 
claimed he paid the debt. As documentary evidence he submitted two documents from 
the collection agency from July and August 2012, asking Applicant to ensure he had 
money in his checking account prior to “a pre-approved draft in the amount previously 
agreed upon” being sent to his account. The first payment was made since the debt was 
reduced by $606. However, he presented no evidence to show the second payment was 
made and the debt was paid. (AE S, Tab J) 
 
 Applicant believes he has been making improvements resolving his financial 
problems. He considers himself more mature and responsible. He has taken budgeting 
and financial management courses to help him resolve his financial problems. He and his 
wife’s combined incomes are sufficient to resolve his delinquent debts and pay for their 
living expenses. Applicant had other debts not alleged in the SOR that he has resolved 
and he is in the process of becoming financially stable. He testified that he is motivated 
to resolve his financial problems. He claimed that many of his delinquent debts were paid 
or have been resolved. He needs his clearance and current job to continue paying his 
debts.  
 
Applicant noted he obtained financial counseling thrice from different companies. 
Currently, he is keeping his own budget and managing his expenses. Applicant does not 
consider himself a security risk. He served in the Air Force Reserve and continues to 
serve U.S. interests while working for a Government contractor sometimes overseas 
under dangerous conditions. He noted the certificates of appreciation and recognition 
awards he has received from his employer. The documents show Applicant is considered 
to be a good employee who makes valuable contributions to his employer. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
 
5 
                                         
 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in his credit reports, his 
SOR response, his testimony, and the record evidence. AG ¶ 19 provides two 
disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in 
this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
 
6 
                                         
 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
                                         
 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant acknowledged some of his delinquent debts. He paid one SOR creditor 
in 2010 (1.a), and two creditors in 2012 (1.f and 1.g). I have credited Applicant with 
mitigating those three accounts. Additionally, there is evidence in the credit reports 
showing he has paid other debts not alleged in the SOR, and that he has acquired no 
additional delinquent debts. He sought assistance to resolve his financial problems three 
times, and seems to be in control of his current finances.  
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant received unemployment benefits while being fully 
employed and has refused to pay back the money. He received two student loans, paid 
some money back in 2008-2009, but then waited to the passing of the statute of limitations 
to dispute them. He did not establish the applicability of the stature of limitations to his 
two student loan judgments. Additionally, he claimed he cosigned the debt alleged in SOR 
1.e, when in fact it was his credit card debt. He claimed he paid the debt, but his 
documentary evidence failed to substantiate his claim. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s demeanor while 
testifying, his past financial problems continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant should have been more diligent 
addressing his delinquent debts. His half-hearted efforts to pay his financial obligations 
are insufficient to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant failed 
to establish that he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 36 years old. He served in the Air Force Reserve for four years, and 
has worked for a federal contractor since 2007. He should have been more diligent in 
taking action to resolve his financial problems. Under the totality of the circumstances of 
 
8 
                                         
 
this case, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish his financial responsibility. 
Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.f, and 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
