 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 12-11364  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a lengthy history of financial irresponsibility, including failure to 
properly file or fully pay his Federal income taxes. Resulting security concerns were not 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On February 9, 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On October 6, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 7, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
March 17, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on March 21, 2016, and received by him on April 11, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. He did not file any objection to the Government’s FORM, submit additional 
evidence or comments in response thereto, or request additional time to respond. 
DOHA assigned the case to me on January 27, 2017. Items 1 through 7 are admitted 
into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR (Item 2), Applicant admitted the allegations set forth in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.k, and 1.l. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 
1.h, 1.i, and 1.j. His admissions, including his responses in Item 4 (a DOHA financial 
interrogatory dated August 26, 2015), are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old, and divorced with no children. He earned an 
associate’s degree from an online university in 2004. He has been employed by a 
defense contractor since April 2000, and is seeking to renew the security clearance that 
he has held since June 2000 in connection with that employment. (Item 3; Item 4.)  
 
 Applicant admitted that he owed a total of $15,953 in Federal income taxes that 
he failed to pay for tax years 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, and 2010, as alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g. He denied owing the IRS for two tax liens totaling 
$19,905 that were entered against him in 2009 and 2006, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 
1.j, claiming that those liens had been paid and satisfied. He formally denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h, but apparently misread those statements. These 
paragraphs accurately stated that he filed Federal income tax returns for 2008 and 
2011, but further alleged that he deliberately and falsely reported that he earned $0.00 
in taxable income during each of those years despite having earned taxable income. 
Documents provided by Applicant confirmed that these allegations were correct. (Item 
2; Item 4; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in 1997, which resulted in his then-
existing debts being discharged in October 1999. (Item 2; Item 5.) During August 2012 
he followed his attorney’s advice and filed for bankruptcy relief again, this time under 
Chapter 13. Applicant did this as a means of dealing with his income tax delinquencies 
without continuing to make payments under his previous IRS installment agreement or 
through automatic levies pursuant to the 2006 and 2009 tax liens. Applicant’s Chapter 
13 plan was confirmed in February 2012. He made plan payments to the bankruptcy 
trustee until December 2015, when the bankruptcy court granted his motion to dismiss 
the case. According to the trustee’s final report and account, Applicant made $25,458 in 
 
 
3 
 
 
payments during the 39 months that the plan was in effect. From those funds, the 
trustee paid $21,432 to Applicant’s creditors; including $20,357 that was paid to the IRS 
toward the $41,354 in plan-allowed IRS principal and interest claims. (Item 2; Item 4; 
Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant explained in January 2016 that, after his bankruptcy case was 
dismissed, he hired “a tax attorney who is going to get all these tax problems with the 
IRS resolved.” He said, “I am doing my best to take care of these tax issues. It will take 
a little time, but I am working on it.” (Item 2.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
 
4 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial irresponsibility dating back at least to his 1997 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and continuing to date with respect to his substantial delinquent 
Federal tax debt. From 2004 to 2011, he accumulated Federal income tax 
delinquencies totaling more than $15,000. His 2012 Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan 
included more than $40,000 in allowed IRS claims for unpaid income taxes. Despite 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
working full-time for his current employer in 2008 and 2011, he fraudulently filed Federal 
income tax returns for those years certifying that he earned no taxable income. His 
financial history and ongoing pattern of inability or unwillingness to pay his debts raise 
security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s ongoing financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are extensive, ongoing, and arose from voluntary 
choices on his part. They continue to reflect irresponsibility, unreliability, and poor 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) do not provide mitigation of the security concerns. There 
is insufficient evidence that he participated in effective financial counseling or that his 
financial problems are under control. Thus, he failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(c). He made partial payment toward his IRS tax debt during the 39 months of his 
court-supervised Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, but he voluntarily ended that process 
shortly before providing his notarized response to the SOR and provided no evidence of 
a plan to resolve the rest of it. Little significant mitigation was established under AG ¶ 
20(d) given these circumstances. Applicant recently acknowledged the legitimacy of 
these debts, and abandoned his prior claim that the Federal government has no legal 
authority to impose or collect income taxes. Accordingly, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
expressed in the SOR, including willful income tax fraud. The alleged incidents of 
financial concern took place between 1997 and 2015. He did not present an effective 
current plan for addressing the remaining debt, or establish a record of recent 
compliance with tax laws and regulations, either of which could demonstrate 
rehabilitation or behavioral change. The likelihood that similar problems will recur 
remains a security issue, such that the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress is 
undiminished.  
 
Some of the specific debts and liens alleged in the SOR probably reflect 
overlapping reported claims related to Applicant’s income tax delinquencies during the 
years in question, and some of his total delinquent debt to the IRS was repaid during his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy proceeding. These circumstances do not support findings for 
Applicant concerning any specific SOR allegation, or Paragraph 1 in general, based on 
the record evidence. The totality of those allegations, while recognizing such potential 
duplication, accurately describes his financial history, fraudulent tax filings, and inability 
or unwillingness to resolve his remaining tax obligations. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
