1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )    ISCR Case No. 14-06318 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to establish that he had mitigated the 
financial considerations security concern. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 28, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was unable to 
find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility for 
him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On September 24, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
decision based on the administrative record instead of a hearing. On November 4, 2015, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the 
 
2 
 
FORM on April 12, 2016. He did not file a response, whereupon, the case was assigned to 
me on February 13, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 47-year-old married man with two children, ages 13 and 12. He 
graduated from college in 1992 and he earned a master’s degree in 1999. (Item 2 at 8-9) 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1992 to 2001. He was 
honorably discharged. He served in the Marine Corps active reserves from 2001 to 2008, 
returning to active duty from 2008 to 2011. He has been in the active reserves since then, 
and currently serves as a lieutenant colonel. (Item 3 at 2) Applicant has been working in his 
civilian capacity as a federal contractor since 2012. (Item 2 at 11) He has held security 
clearances intermittently since 1993. 
 
 Applicant incurred approximately $35,000 of delinquent debt, as alleged in the SOR. 
His financial problems began in early 2012 when rental receipts from his multiple rental 
properties decreased, as tenant payments became more erratic, causing him to fall behind 
on the properties’ respective mortgage payments. (Answer at 1) His financial problems 
were compounded by a six-month period of unemployment between June 2012 and 
January 2013. 
 
 In January 2013, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, as alleged in 
subparagraph 1.a. He sought the assistance of the bankruptcy court in restructuring the 
mortgage payments that he owed to the holders or his rental property mortgages. (Answer 
at 1) Shortly after the filing, the individual mortgagors agreed to their own respective 
repayment arrangements, prompting Applicant to withdraw the bankruptcy filing.  None of 
the SOR delinquencies stems from his rental properties, as he has paid them consistent 
with his payment agreements. 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b is a medical bill for $396. Applicant contends that he incurred this 
bill, but that his insurance company should have satisfied it. (Answer at 1-2) He provided 
no evidence memorializing any contact with the insurance company. 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c is a credit card debt totaling $1,228. It was charged off when 
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. (Answer at 2) Applicant contends that 
after he withdrew the bankruptcy petition, he contacted the creditor and began making 
payments, gradually satisfying it in its entirety. He provided no evidence of payment 
confirmations, either from the creditor, or from his checking account statements. 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d is a primary residence mortgage delinquency totaling $19,865. 
Applicant admits incurring the debt, but denies any current delinquency, as he sold the 
property in March 2015 for an amount that covered the delinquency and the remaining 
balance of $515,732 (Answer at 2, 16-17) 
 
 Applicant disputes subparagraph 1.e, totaling $290. He provided no evidence of 
efforts to resolve the dispute, or substantiate the basis of the dispute. SOR subparagraph 
3 
 
1.f, totaling $54, is a holdover utility balance from one of the rental properties that Applicant 
sold. He contends that he paid it, but provided no evidence. Similarly, Applicant’s 
contention that he paid the debt alleged in subparagraph 1.g, totaling $14,703, is 
unsupported by any documentary evidence. 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 The proceeds from Applicant’s sale of his home in March 2015 covered both 
the delinquency and the remaining mortgage balance. I resolve subparagraph 1.d in 
his favor. The remaining SOR delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), 
“a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” is only partially 
applicable.   
 
AG ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;   
 
AG ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;” and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt that is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused by a combination of a downturn in his 
real estate investment business and a six-month unemployment. I conclude that these 
facts constitute circumstances beyond his control. Applicant has begun to resolve his 
delinquencies, eliminating the most significant debt, his primary residence mortgage, by 
selling the home. Conversely, Applicant’s contention that he has either paid or disputed the 
remaining debts in unsupported by record evidence, and he provided no evidence of a 
spending plan or a budget. Under these circumstances, I conclude there is enough 
5 
 
evidence to trigger the application of AG ¶ 20(d), but that AG ¶ 20(b) is only partially 
applicable, and that AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(e) are inapplicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).1 The nature and seriousness of Applicant’s financial problems 
are mitigated somewhat by the surrounding circumstances of Applicant’s business 
downturn and his lengthy period of unemployment in 2012. Ultimately, however, Applicant 
did not provide enough evidence to meet the burden of persuasion to mitigate the security 
concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
