 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 14-02222 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges, and the record establishes, ten 
delinquent debts totaling $181,159, including state and federal tax debts of $173,462. He 
did not provide documentation showing resolution of any SOR debts. Financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On November 6, 2013, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 3) On 
December 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
2 
                                         
 
On March 11, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he requested 
a decision without a hearing. (Item 2) On May 25, 2016, Department Counsel completed 
the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On June 8, 2016, Applicant received the FORM. 
Applicant provided an undated response to the FORM. On March 1, 2017, the case was 
assigned to me. The case file consisted of five exhibits. (Items 1-5) Applicant did not 
object to any of the Government exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, 
1.g, and 1.j. (Item 3) He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 54 years old, and he has been employed as a dispatcher for a trucking 
company for 36 years, since he was 18 years old.2 (FORM response) In 1980, he received 
a General Educational Development (GED) certificate. (Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) personal subject interview (PSI)) He has not served in the U.S. Armed Forces. In 
1983, he married, and in 2006, he divorced. His children were born in 1988, 1991, and 
1997. There is no evidence that he violated security rules, committed any crimes, abused 
alcohol, or used illegal drugs. There is no evidence of employer performance evaluations.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SCA, 
OPM PSI, and SOR response. The status of his ten delinquent SOR debts is as follows.3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a March 2008 federal tax lien for tax years 2004 and 2005 for 
$80,961. Applicant said, “I admit. Taxes owed—in part owed—by my ex-wife.” He 
continued, “And seeking consultation in regards to amount owed.”        
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges an April 2008 federal tax lien for tax year 2006 for $25,445.  
Applicant said, “I admit. In process of seeking relief on taxes owed.”  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a 2012 federal tax lien for tax year 2007 for $11,778. Applicant 
said, “I admit. In process of seeking relief on taxes owed.” 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a federal tax debt for $29,107 for tax year 2010. Applicant said, 
“I admit. In process of seeking relief on taxes owed.” 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s November 
6, 2013 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA). (Item 3) 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information about the status of his SOR debts is 
Applicant’s response to the statement of reasons.    
 
3 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a 2012 state tax lien for $26,161. Applicant said, “I admit. In 
process of seeking relief on taxes owed.” 
   
SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.i allege four 2012 judgments obtained by the same creditor 
for $725, $1,095, $1,542, and $2,190, and relate to Applicant’s residence in an apartment 
complex. (OPM PSI) Applicant said he was working with the creditor to remove the $725 
and $2,190 debts. He has a payment plan for the $1,095 debt, and it will be paid in June 
2016. He said he paid the $1,542 debt in September 2015. He did not provide a copy of 
the payment plan for the $1,095 debt or proof that he paid the $1,542 debt.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j alleges a charged-off debt for $2,145. Applicant said, “I admit. Balance 
owed—is result of ex-wife—and trying to negotiate pay-off.”  
 
Applicant said he failed to pay his federal income taxes when due for several years 
because he could not afford to pay his taxes. (OPM PSI) His annual pay is documented 
on an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1099, and he failed to withhold or make 
sufficient quarterly payments to the IRS. (FORM response) At the end of the year, he did 
not have the funds to pay his taxes. He used his salary to support his spouse and children. 
His spouse and one child had medical problems and required funds for rehabilitation. 
(FORM response) He did not describe any contacts or resolution of his tax debts after 
2012. (OPM PSI) 
 
Applicant does not have access to classified documents or materials as part of his 
employment.4 He dispatches trucks containing classified materials. He does not have 
access to the contents of the trucks. The only area under the AGs of security concerns is 
his finances. His record establishes that he is reliable, trustworthy, and responsible under 
all of the other AGs except finances. He said the four judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 
1.i were now satisfied.  
   
 Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no documentary 
evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise 
resolved any of the delinquent SOR accounts. He did not describe financial counseling 
or present a budget. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and 
detailed explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating 
information. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM 
“in which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
                                            
4The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s FORM response. He did not include 
any supporting documentation to support the assertions in his FORM response. 
 
4 
                                         
 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
 
5 
                                         
 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, OPM PSI, and SOR response. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,5 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
                                            
5A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
6 
                                         
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;6 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
                                            
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
Applicant described divorce and medical problems. These circumstances beyond 
his control adversely affected his finances.  
 
The record establishes Applicant has ten delinquent SOR debts totaling $181,159, 
including state and federal tax debts of $173,462. Applicant did not provide enough details 
about what he did to address his SOR debts over the last four years. He did not provide 
documentation relating to any of his SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking 
account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he 
paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or from the creditors 
to establish maintenance of contact;7 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not 
believe he was responsible for the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence 
of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show 
that he was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or 
resolution. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not 
provide documented proof to substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt 
disputes. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance that his financial 
problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all 
the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial considerations security concerns 
are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
                                            
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
8 
                                         
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 54 years old, and he has been employed as a dispatcher for a trucking 
company for 36 years. In 1983, he married, and in 2006, he divorced. His children were 
born in 1988, 1991, and 1997. There is no evidence that he violated security rules, 
committed any crimes, abused alcohol, or used illegal drugs.   
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by divorce and medical problems of 
his spouse and one of his children. Applicant did not provide details about how these 
circumstances beyond his control negatively affected his finances. 
 
Applicant did not provide documented resolution of ten delinquent SOR debts 
totaling $181,159, including state and federal tax debts of $173,462. Applicant provided 
insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary evidence of payments and 
established payment plans for his SOR debts. He did not provide a detailed plan about 
how he intended to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. His actions show lack of financial 
responsibility and judgment and raise unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More 
information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or documented financial 
progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial considerations 
concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to Applicant is not 
warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be able 
to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial consideration concerns are not mitigated, and it is not clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
9 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
