 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-02845 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire 
                                             For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On December 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a notarized document on 
January 29, 2016, Applicant responded to the allegations and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). I was assigned the case on June 30, 2016. DOHA issued a hearing notice on 
June 30, 2016, setting the hearing for August 17, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled.  
 
The Government offered 12 documents, accepted without objection as exhibits 
(Exs.) 1-12. Applicant offered testimony and three documents, accepted as Exs. A-C. 
The record was kept open until September 9, 2016, in the event the parties wished to 
submit additional materials. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 25, 2016. 
Additional materials from Applicant were forwarded to me and received on September 
9, 2016, without objection, I marked them as Exs. D-G and the record was closed.   
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old cyber security specialist who has been with the same 
employer for over a year. A high school graduate, he finished a trade school program in 
computers. He is married with four adult step-children, one of whom lives at home. 
  
 In or about 1981, at age 21, Applicant pled guilty to driving under the influence 
after being charged with that offense and speeding. He had been drinking for a few 
years, but not generally to excess. His drinking increased while in the military from 
about 1983 to 1987. (Tr. 15) He reduced his drinking after his discharge. (Tr. 16) In 
1989, however, he was found guilty of driving under the influence, speeding, and 
reckless driving. In addition, in 2005, he was charged with public intoxication.   
 
 In February 2012, Applicant was arrested and found guilty of driving while 
intoxicated. This occurred while running errands the morning after hosting a football 
party. The court ordered him to attend treatment for six months at a local counseling 
center, which he attended from June 2012 to January 2014. His treatment was 
extended as a consequence of relapsing and having one drink during the 2012 holiday 
season. (Tr. 23) At the treatment facility, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. The 
evidence is unclear, however, whether he was treated by a medical practitioner or 
licensed clinical social worker (LCSW), as only a licensed professional counselor (LPC) 
and multiple case workers are referenced with regard to his alcohol treatment. (Ex. 3) 
 
Although he successfully completed that program, Applicant continues in 
individual counseling. He has been with his present LPC since December 15, 2013. (Ex. 
D) He no longer consumes alcohol, preferring total sobriety over measured drinking. It 
has been “a couple of years” since he was last intoxicated. The last evidence of 
intoxication was February 2012. In the interim, he once tasted wine. (Tr. 22) He 
understands that he is an alcoholic and that sobriety is a lifelong focus. (Tr. 24) 
 
 From January 2008 to August 2008, Applicant was unemployed and started to 
acquire delinquent debt. Short of financial resources, he made choices between which 
bills he could pay and which he could not. (Tr. 28-29) He has been working on a 
relatively steady basis since that time. The first thing he did once his finances stabilized 
was pay off a car loan and address some of his wife’s bills. (Tr. 25) He only recently 
found himself able to make any notable progress on his debts. (Tr. 25) In November 
2015, he refinanced his house after falling behind on his mortgage payments for about 
two months. He received the SOR in December 2015. 
 
At the August 2016 hearing, Applicant provided evidence of satisfaction of the 
debt at 2.a for $1,306 (Ex. E), and the Government concurred that the debt cited at 2.b 
for $984 was paid. (Ex. A; Tr. 26-27, 29) Applicant submitted Ex. F, which shows 
payments on the two medical accounts for $126 and $53, respectively, cited at 2.e and 
2.f. The parties agreed that the debt at 1.k for $866 was settled. (Tr. 44; Ex. 7 at 4) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
In September 2016, after the hearing, Applicant forwarded what was marked as 
Ex. G. He notes that a page of bank account activity is in reference to “Guideline F: 
Section C: Highlighted.” The highlighted line reflecting a payment of $1,000 to a law firm 
appears to have been a payment on, or settlement of, the adverse judgment for $1,687 
noted in the SOR at 2.c from 2010. (Ex. G)  
 
 Applicant does not recognize the medical accounts at 2.d-2.h and 2.l-2.m, 
amounting to about $1,300. There is no documentary evidence he has tried to verify or 
dispute these balances.  
 
The debts at 2.i and 2.j, for $2,038 and $6,681, respectively, are for student 
loans. Applicant provided a page-long payment history from a student loan consolidator, 
but the evidence does not link the loan payment schedule with the accounts 
represented in 2.i and 2.j. (Ex. B) It also fails to clarify whether it shows payment 
includes or pertains to the loan debt of $38,655 reflected at 1.n. Applicant did not later 
provide additional documentation linking his payments to these cited accounts.2 (Tr. 38)  
 
In sum, at issue are 14 delinquent debts, set forth in the SOR as 1.a-1.n. They 
amount to approximately $53,500, Applicant provided documentation reflecting he has 
satisfied the debts at 2.a, 2.b, 2.e, 2.f. and 2.k, and expended $1,000 toward the 
adverse judgment at 2.c. This represents $4,335 documented to have been applied 
toward the debt at issue in the SOR. No action has been documented with regard to 
progress involving 2.d-2.h, 2.i-2.j, or 2.l-2.m, which includes the largest debt ($38,655).  
 
Applicant did not provide documentary evidence indicating he has received 
financial counseling. There is no documentary evidence he has disputed any of the 
debts. While he did not describe his methodology for satisfying these debts, he appears 
to have focused his attention on like kinds of debts. He is still helping support one of his 
grown step-children, who has intermittent employment working with window treatments. 
(Tr. 49) Applicant’s wife stopped working January 2016 after a November 2015 cancer 
diagnosis. (Tr. 49-50) She has been completing treatment. At the end of each month, 
Applicant has a net monthly remainder of about $1,000. (Tr. 50).  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
                                                          
2 Applicant did, however, provide evidence of payment on an adverse judgment not at issue in the SOR 
for about $1,500. (Ex. C) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
In making a decision, all available, reliable information must be considered. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” A person who 
seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends normal 
duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in those 
granted access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard such 
information. Decisions shall be in terms of the national interest and do not question the 
loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21)    
 
Applicant drank alcohol to excess, and sometimes to the point of intoxication, 
from his late teens through about December 2012. Aside from a one drink relapse 
during the 2012 holiday season, his only consumption of alcohol was a taste in about 
2013. This is a turnaround from his earlier years, when he pled no contest to driving 
under the influence in about 1981, was found guilty of that same offense along with 
speeding and reckless driving in 1989, found guilty of driving while intoxicated in 
February 2012, and was deemed alcohol dependent during treatment between 2012 
and 2013. These facts raise Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 22:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, and 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
I considered Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 23 
 
(a) so much time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of action taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or licensed social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program.  
   
AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply here, nor did AG ¶ 22(e)-(f) apply as disqualifying 
conditions, because the documentary evidence offered at Ex. 3 fails to show whether 
Applicant was treated by either a medical practitioner or a LCSW.   Applicant has been 
sober, however, for over five years. He acknowledges his alcoholism, recognizes this 
disease is a lifelong challenge, and has continued to work with a LPC after successful 
completion of a court ordered program. He has not suffered any relapses since 
completing that program. He remains abstinent. He noted no current stressors or 
obstacles deleterious to his continued abstinence. Alcohol consumption mitigating 
conditions AG ¶ 23(a)-(b) apply.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts, amounting to about $53,500 in delinquent debt. This is 
sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
  
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
Applicant pinpoints the genesis of his financial distress to a period of 
unemployment that lasted from January 2008 to August 2008. Over time, he has 
acquired at least 14 delinquent debts amounting to about $53,500. He testified that it 
took him a long time to recover from this 2008 unemployment period, and that he only 
recently has had excess available funds to devote to repayment of the long-delinquent 
debts at issue. This excess is presently a monthly net remainder of about $1,000. 
 
Applicant failed to clarify why it took so many years to financially recover from a 
2008 eight-month period of unemployment. While he mentions efforts to address a few 
other debts, including a home refinance obtained after falling behind on his house 
payments, there is scant indication as to why these particular debts remained largely 
unaddressed. Therefore, while unemployment may have initially contributed to the 
acquisition of these debts, the lack of more information regarding contemporaneous 
action to address them limits the applicability of AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 
 
 
7 
To his credit, since receiving the SOR in December 2015, Applicant has applied 
about $4,350 toward his nearly $39,000 in delinquent debt and adverse judgments. He 
testified about more strides to address some of the other debts, but no corroborating 
documentation was forthcoming. While Applicant was credible, documentary 
corroboration is needed to support his statements. Moreover, there is no documentary 
evidence indicating that he has received financial counseling, or either disputed or 
sought verification of any of the accounts at issue. Therefore, while his documented 
actions raise AG ¶ 20(d), more documentation is needed to show that his finances are 
under control. None of the other mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s alcohol and financial issues, I 
considered his present life, candor at the hearing, and credible explanations. 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old cyber security specialist. A high school graduate, he 
completed a vocational trade program related to his field. He has served in the United 
States military. Applicant’s wife is presently unemployed, after recently undergoing 
cancer surgery. One of Applicant’s four grown step-children lives at home, but does not 
contribute to the household upkeep. 
  
After years of alcohol use, and multiple citations for driving under the influence, 
Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent and received about 18 months of 
treatment. He completed that treatment and continues to receive LPC support. He has 
stayed sober for over five years. He understands the nature of the disease, his illness, 
and the need to persevere with appropriate support. Applicant is to be commended for 
his success to date. He has mitigated alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
With regard to his finances, Applicant presently retains a net monthly remainder 
of about $1,000. It would seem his present finances are under control. Remaining at 
issue, however, are delinquent debts he connects with a period of unemployment in 
2008. After new employment is secured following a period of unemployment, a period of 
time may be needed to reconnoiter and reconsider one’s acquired debts and 
accumulated bills. Applicant has had a notably long period of recovery, and he has been 
on notice about the specific debts at issue since receiving the December 2015 SOR.  
 
Moreover, the status of many of Applicant’s debts, including one exceptionally 
large student loan, remains unclear. Applicant testified, for example, that his student 
 
 
 
 
8 
loans were consolidated and in repayment, but he failed to mesh his documentary 
evidence with the specific account information provided for the accounts at issue. He 
also failed to provide documentation showing actual payments on accounts he stated 
have been paid, or documentation reflecting any efforts to discern the origin or accuracy 
of other accounts, such as the alleged medical debts.  
 
This process does not require an Applicant to satisfy all delinquent debts at 
issue. It does, however, expect that an Applicant describe a reasonable plan for 
addressing his delinquent debts, and provide documentary evidence reflecting that such 
a plan is being successfully implemented. Here, despite credible testimony, he failed to 
document his efforts in a way showing he is getting his debt under control. This is 
especially true given the timeframe involved and his net monthly remainder. Given 
these facts, I find that financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
           Subparagraphs 2.e-2.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.g-2.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.k:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.l-2.n:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
