 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01297 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct security concerns. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines H, drug involvement, and E, personal conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 13, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 9, 2017. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 14, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 3, 2015. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through E. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 14, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR, except he denied SOR ¶¶ 2.f and 
2.g. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He has never married and has no children. He served 
in the Air Force from May 1988 to December 1991, and was honorably discharged. He 
graduated from college in 1995 and has worked for the same federal contractor since 
1996. He has held a security clearance continuously during his employment.1  
 
 Applicant admitted that from 1982 to December 2012, he illegally used marijuana 
on various occasions. However, he testified that he did not use it while he was serving 
in the Air Force from 1988 to 1991, but resumed his use while he was attending college. 
During these periods before his military service and while in college, he used it several 
times a week. After college, he limited his use to the holiday periods in late December 
when his employer’s offices were shutdown. He also used it with his brother one or two 
times during a July 4th weekend, but did not recall the year. He admitted that he was 
aware that his employer has a zero-tolerance drug policy. He was aware that he was 
violating that policy. He is required to participate in annual online training for drug 
awareness and handling classified information. He was aware that using illegal drugs 
after being granted a security clearance is prohibited. He testified that his marijuana use 
did not interfere with his job performance because he was on vacation when he used it. 
He believed the marijuana was out of his system by the time he returned to work.2 
 
 After he began working, Applicant testified that he obtained marijuana from his 
brother each year. He smoked the marijuana by himself through a pipe. He did not use 
it with friends, and he would consume the entire amount each year during the holiday 
break. He also stated that after he disclosed his marijuana use in 2012, he discarded 
marijuana that he had leftover at his house. He also discarded the pipe. He is estranged 
from his brother and believed his last contact was either in 2012 or 2013. If his brother 
contacts him for help, Applicant indicated he would respond.3  
 
 Applicant purchased marijuana for personal use before enlisting in the Air Force 
and during college. He sold marijuana to friends, but not for profit. He never purchased 
                                                          
1 Tr. 20-24. 
 
2 Tr. 25-27, 53, 59-60. 
 
3 Tr. 35-38, 47. 
 
3 
 
 
marijuana while holding a security clearance, but believed there was one occasion that 
he attempted to purchase marijuana, but he was unsuccessful. Applicant indicated on 
his March 2016 interrogatories, which asked about his intentions for future marijuana 
use and frequency, that “maybe when it’s legal and I’m retired.”4 At this hearing, he 
testified, “my intent is to abstain until retirement.”5 He further explained he would only 
use it where it was not prohibited by law. He confirmed he understood that his past use 
was illegal, and he had no explanation for his conduct.6  
 
 Applicant stated that he has been working with classified information for the past 
two to three years, and that his current project involves classified information. In the 
past, he has been exposed to classified information, but was not always directly 
involved in handling it.7  
 
 In April 2003, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). In 
response to the inquiry about whether in the last seven years or since he was 16 
whichever is shorter, if he had used illegal drugs, he answered “no.” He failed to 
disclose his marijuana use from 1996 through 2003. On the same questionnaire, he 
failed to disclose that he had used marijuana on various occasions while holding a 
security clearance from between at least 1988 to 2003. Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose his past illegal drug use. He stated: “[s]o, misguided as it was, I decided if it 
doesn’t affect anyone, especially my work, then I should just go ahead and falsify the 
report. So, I did that.”8 He explained that he was concerned he would not be granted a 
security clearance, and he would lose his job if he disclosed his past illegal drug use.9  
 
 In March 2010, Applicant completed another SCA, which inquired whether 
Applicant had used any illegal drugs in the past seven years, to which he responded 
“no.” On the same SCA, he failed to disclose that he had used marijuana on various 
occasions while holding a security clearance between at least 2003 to 2010. Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose his past illegal drug use. Applicant admitted the 
falsifications on his March 2010 SCA were because “it was at the time easier to 
propagate the same mistake.”10  
 
 In approximately October 2013, Applicant was transferred by his employer to a 
new program with a special access area. He was required to complete a different 
                                                          
4 GE 3. 
 
5 Tr. 46.  
 
6 Tr. 40-47. 
 
7 Tr. 48-51. 
 
8 Tr. 29. 
 
9 Tr. 28, 56. 
 
10 Tr. 28. 
 
 
4 
 
 
security form as part of the requirement for the job.11 He testified that in this form he 
disclosed his past illegal drug use. He stated: “it finally hit that I was falsifying 
Government documents . . ..” He testified that he needed to solve the problem. He 
further stated that he came to the realization that falsifying the form was worse than 
disclosing his past drug use, and he could no longer propagate the lie. Although he had 
been involved in other special access programs in the past, he believed this was the 
first that required him to complete new forms. He testified that he believed when he was 
disclosing his last use of marijuana that he incorrectly stated it was December 2013, 
when it should have been December 2012.12 
 
 In January 2014, a government investigator interviewed Applicant. During the 
interview, Applicant indicated that he had never purchased or sold illegal drugs. In 
response to interrogatories in November 2014, Applicant disclosed the following: “1982 
– 1985 made several purchases of marijuana, less than ¼ oz. each, for personal use. 
Sold on several occasions less than 1g[ram] marijuana from personal stash to other 
students.”13 At his hearing, Applicant explained that he was confused and that his 
interview statement was referring to the fact that he had never purchased or sold 
marijuana while holding a security clearance. He also stated that he was confused in 
that he thought the question was asking if he sold illegal drugs with the intent to 
distribute or to make a profit. The summary of government investigator’s interview with 
Applicant does not state the specific questions that were asked. Therefore, I am unable 
to determine if Applicant deliberately provided false statements or answered the 
questions accurately. I find there is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant 
deliberately falsified material facts during his January 2014 interview.14  
 
Applicant disclosed in his November 2014 interrogatories that he last used 
marijuana in December 2012. I found his timeline consistent, and he was confused 
when he stated his last use was December 2013. The documents support his disclosure 
to the government, in approximately October 2013, as part of the application process for 
the special access program, that he had used marijuana in the past while holding a 
security clearance. It is improbable that he would then use marijuana in December 2013 
after said disclosure. I conclude Applicant did not intentionally provide a false statement 
when he indicated his last marijuana use was December 2012.15  
 
 Applicant testified that his leadership is aware of his past drug use and they 
support him and his continued employment. He did not know to what extent that his 
security manager is aware of his past drug use. He believes that his use of marijuana 
                                                          
11 Tr. 29; GE 4. 
 
12 Tr. 29-35, 57-58. 
 
13 GE 2. 
 
14 Tr. 39-42. 
 
15 Tr. 35.  
 
 
5 
 
 
did not affect his work, and no one other than his brother and employer is aware of his 
past use.16 
 
 Applicant provided copies of his performance evaluations from 2002 to 2016, 
which reflect he has been a “successful” or a “high” contributor or his “performance 
rating exceeded commitments” throughout his tenure, and that he is considered a 
valuable member of his team. He has received numerous cash awards for his 
performance. Character questionnaires completed by Applicant’s supervisor, manager, 
and team leader describe him as a subject matter expert who is honest and a person of 
integrity. He has not had any security-related issues or been suspected of using drugs 
while working. His peers and superiors view him positively. He is considered dedicated, 
dependable, reliable, and highly competent.17 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
                                                          
16 Tr. 27, 54. 
 
17 AE D. 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana on various occasions from 1982 to 2012. He 
repeatedly used marijuana while holding a security clearance. I find the above 
disqualifying condition applies.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant has a long history of illegal marijuana use. He repeatedly used it while 
holding a security clearance. However, it has been more than four years since his last 
use. He has demonstrated that he will likely not abuse illegal drugs while working for a 
federal employer. I find that AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies.  
 
The fact that Applicant knowingly used marijuana for many years while holding a 
security clearance raises questions about his ability and willingness to follow rules and 
regulations. His comment that he may use marijuana in the future after he retires also 
raises the same questions. Although, Applicant may be committed to not using illegal 
drugs while employed, his past repeated conduct casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsifications of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authorities, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal , professional, or community standing.  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant used marijuana for many years while holding a security clearance. He 
deliberately falsified his 2003 SCA by failing to disclose his past illegal marijuana use 
from 1996 to 2003, and failing to disclose he had used marijuana on various occasions 
while holding a security clearance. He repeated these falsifications on his 2010 SCA, 
failing to disclose his marijuana use between 2003 and 2010, and that he used it from 
1991 to 2010 while holding a security clearance. AG ¶ 16(a) and 16(e) apply. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant deliberately falsified 
material facts during a January 2014 interview with a government investigator and in 
response to interrogatories issued in November 2014. I find AG ¶ 16(b) does not apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant did not make a prompt good-faith effort to correct his falsifications on 
his 2003 SCA or his 2010 SCA about his past drug use and use while holding a security 
clearance. Applicant’s falsifications and drug use are serious and occurred over many 
years, and on two separate documents. It was not until he was required to complete 
another official document in 2013, for a special access program that he finally disclosed 
his misconduct. His behavior was frequent and did not happen under unique 
circumstances. Rather, Applicant was on notice after his 2003 and 2010 applications 
that the government had a special interest in illegal drug use, and specifically while 
holding a security clearance. Applicant disregarded his misconduct and intentionally lied 
about it. Based on his long history of drug use, his disregard for complying with the law, 
and his repeated falsifications, I cannot find that his behavior is unlikely to recur. I find 
that his conduct casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
9 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old mature college-educated man and a veteran. He 
repeatedly used marijuana for many years while holding a security clearance and lied 
about his conduct. Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion regarding his drug 
involvement and personal conduct. This conduct raises serious questions about his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement and 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 2.a-2.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 2.f-2.g:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
