 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05360 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his divorce and periods of 
unemployment. He paid or resolved most of his delinquent debts and his credit report 
shows no new delinquent debt. He established he is in control of his financial situation. 
Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information 
is granted.   
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 23, 2011. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on November 27, 2015, issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 18, 2015 (Answer), and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on May 4, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 6, 2016. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. Government exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, and Applicant’s exhibit (AE) 1 
(comprised of Tabs A through L) were admitted into evidence without objection. On June 
14, 2016, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he admitted all the SOR allegations. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information, and disputed the total debt owed on some of his 
delinquent accounts. Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing 
are incorporated into my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 50 years old. He has a high school diploma and completed some 
college courses, but did not earn a degree. He enlisted in the Navy in 1987, where he 
served on active duty six years and then completed two additional years in the Reserve. 
He achieved the rank of E-4 and received an honorable discharge.  
 
Applicant’s employment history shows he was employed from June 2001 to 
November 2002; unemployed from November 2002 to January 2003; employed from 
January 2003 to June 2007; unemployed from May 2007 to February 2008; employed 
during most of 2008; unemployed from December 2008 to March 2009; employed from 
March 2009 to July 2009; unemployed from July 2009 to December 2009; and he has 
been employed from December 2009 to present.  
 
Applicant started working for federal contractors in 2004. He was hired by his 
current employer, a federal contractor, in 2011. He has possessed a secret clearance on-
and-off since 2007, and requires a clearance to retain his job. Applicant has been 
deployed to the Middle East in support of U.S. personnel since 2011. He was injured 
during a rocket attack in 2012, and carries a piece of shrapnel in his chest. His hourly-
rate is $23 plus uplift, hazardous duty pay, and overtime. 
 
Applicant married in 2010 and divorced in 2012. He married his wife in July 2012. 
He has two grown stepchildren who are attending college.  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2011. In response to Section 26 
(Financial Record) of the SCA, Applicant disclosed that during the last seven years he 
had financial problems, including a foreclosed mortgage and other delinquent accounts.  
 
Applicant’s security investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed 
the six SOR debts. Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit 
reports, his SOR response, his testimony, and the record evidence. The status of his SOR 
debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant’s foreclosed mortgage. Applicant explained that in 
2009, he was fired from his job because of excessive absences. His car engine blew up 
and he could not repair the car in a timely fashion. He claimed he had no other means of 
 
3 
                                         
 
transportation to get to work. After he was fired, he exhausted his retirement funds to pay 
his mortgage and living expenses. The mortgage went into foreclosure, but Applicant 
continued communications with the lender.  
 
After he was hired in December 2009, Applicant attempted to establish a payment 
plan. His job required him to deploy overseas and the lender told him to make no 
payments on the mortgage until he was notified to do so. Applicant averred the lender 
foreclosed the mortgage illegally; that he received no notice of the foreclosure. Ultimately, 
the lender paid him $6,000 to settle any possible claims related to the foreclosure. 
Applicant averred he does not owe any money resulting from this foreclosure. Applicant’s 
credit report (AE I) shows the mortgage in an “OK” status, with a “0” balance.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant’s delinquent phone service account. He paid the debt 
in July 2015. (AE D) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a delinquent account in collection. Applicant’s documentary 
evidence shows he paid the debt on an unspecified date. (AE E) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges Applicant owes a credit card debt of $9,741. Applicant explained 
that he worked for a federal contractor that issued him a travel credit card. The travel card 
contained inaccurate charges. A supervisor told him and other employees not to make 
any payments until the questionable charges were resolved with the credit card company. 
Applicant was let go from his job when the contract ended, and he was never asked to 
make any payments. Applicant further claimed he attempted to contact his prior employer 
concerning the debt without success. Applicant believes his prior employer paid the debt 
because it is no longer reflected in his credit report. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a delinquent natural gas debt. Applicant claimed he paid this 
debt. He submitted a letter from the gas company indicating the debt “was removed from 
credit agency reporting” in March 2016. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a delinquent debt for telephone services. Applicant’s former 
girlfriend made 50% of the charges. She agreed to pay the debt and failed to do so. 
Applicant also claimed that when he had the opportunity to pay the debt, his credit report 
no longer listed the debt. He never made any payments on this debt. 
 
 Applicant explained that his periods of unemployment adversely affected his 
financial situation. Although he received unemployment benefits during some of his 
unemployment periods, his income was insufficient to cover his living expenses and 
outstanding debts. At his hearing, Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems. 
He testified that his financial situation is now stable and that he is motivated to resolve 
his financial problems. He obtained financial counseling twice. (AE G, H) 
 
 Applicant believes he has been making improvements resolving his financial 
problems. He testified he had other debts not alleged in the SOR that he has resolved in 
the process of becoming financially stable. He noted that many of his delinquent debts 
 
4 
                                         
 
were paid or have been resolved and are no longer in his credit report. He needs his 
clearance and current job to continue paying his debts.  
 
 Applicant does not consider himself a security risk. He served on active duty and 
continues to serve U.S. interests overseas while risking his life. He believes his financial 
situation is stable. He testified he has approximately $80,000 in savings that he intends 
to use to buy a home. He does not want to go through a home foreclosure ever again and 
intends to pay cash for his home. Applicant understands that he is required to maintain 
his financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
  
 
5 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in his credit reports, his 
SOR response, his testimony, and the record evidence. AG ¶ 19 provides two 
disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in 
this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
 
6 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant presented some important positive financial information. His 
employment history indicates repeated periods of unemployment for extended periods. 
Between 2002 and 2009, he was unemployed four times. Because of his unemployment, 
he lacked sufficient income to make payments and keep some debts current. Additionally, 
he divorced his first wife in 2012. His financial problems were caused or exacerbated by 
his divorce and the periods of unemployment – circumstances beyond his control.  
 
Applicant acknowledged his delinquent debts, and he has been making payments 
to some creditors. I have credited Applicant with mitigating all the accounts alleged in the 
SOR except for SOR ¶ 1.d ($9,741 credit card debt). He participated in financial 
counseling twice. Additionally, the credit reports show that he has not acquired any new 
delinquent debt.  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s past financial problems do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find there are 
clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved and is under control. 
Applicant understands that he has to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a 
clearance and retain his job.  
  
                                            
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 50 years old. He served in the Navy for eight years, has worked for 
federal contractors since 2003 (on-and-off), and he has held a security clearance since 
2007. He has been deployed overseas and works in dangerous conditions for his current 
employer since 2009. There is no evidence of security violations. 
 
Several circumstances beyond his control adversely affected his finances, 
including his periods of unemployment and his 2012 divorce. He should have been more 
diligent in taking action to resolve his financial problems. Notwithstanding, he has 
resolved most of the SOR financial concerns, and he is in control of his financial situation. 
Under the totality of the circumstance of this case, Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to 
establish his financial responsibility. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
