1 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05608 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) lists delinquent obligations totaling approximately $54,000. A 
delinquent mortgage and student loans have been satisfactorily addressed. However, 
the majority of the remaining delinquent debts have yet to be addressed. Applicant has 
not sufficiently rebutted or mitigated the Government’s security concerns under the 
financial considerations guideline. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DoD) 
Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR on 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
2 
March 23, 2015, detailing financial considerations security concerns. On May 12, 2015, 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On February 17, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the 
hearing to be convened on March 1, 2016.  
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 6 and Applicant’s Exhibits 
A through J were admitted without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The 
record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. Additional 
documents were admitted, without objection, as Ex. K. On March 10, 2016, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations of delinquent debts. 
She stated some of the debts had been paid and had attempted to communicate with 
other creditors. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 54-years-old engineering laboratory technician seeking to obtain a 
security clearance. (Tr.58) In February 2013, she obtained employment with the 
company sponsoring her application for a security clearance. (Ex. 1) She has had full-
time employment since 1999. (Tr. 15) Applicant’s current annual salary is approximately 
$ 55,000. (Tr. 35) She has $14,000 in her 401(k) retirement plan. (Tr. 59) 
 Co-workers, supervisors, and friends state Applicant is highly qualified for her 
job, she is honest, trustworthy, loyal, dedicated and committed to her work, has the 
highest integrity, and is a very valuable asset to the company. (Ex. J) They indicate she 
is a self-starter and is always looking for ways to improve herself. She received an 
award recognizing her dedication and outstanding performance. (Tr. 32) She received 
an accomplishment award, a team award for an outstanding job, and other awards for 
her outstanding job in representing the company. (Tr. 33) Her duty evaluations indicate 
she meets or exceeds expectations. (Ex. I) 
 
Applicant’s delinquent obligations are set forth in the four credit reports: April 
2013, May 2014, March 2015, and November 2015. (Ex. 2, 3, 4, 5) In her March 2013 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), she listed a judgment 
and various financial delinquencies for auto loans, medical bills, student loans, and a 
mortgage. The SOR lists approximately $51,000 in delinquent debt. (Tr. 18) 
 
 Applicant has a daughter age 35. (Ex. 1) In 2001, she separated from her 
husband pending divorce. (Ex. 6) In 2001, she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection 
as a result of the divorce. (Ex. 6) A tax liability was incurred when her husband had 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
insufficient tax withheld from his salary. The bankruptcy discharged a portion2 of the 
taxes owed and in 2002, her $3,500 tax refund was intercepted and applied to her tax 
debt. (Tr. 25) There is no allegation of taxes currently owed.  
 
 Following the bankruptcy, Applicant’s finances were sufficiently good to qualify 
her to obtain a loan for the home she purchased in October 2005. (Ex. 6) She 
purchased the home for approximately $70,000 with $600 monthly payments. (Ex. 3) In 
March 2011, she stopped making her mortgage payments, but continued to live in the 
home, without making payments, for an additional 19 months, until October 2012. (Ex. 
5, 6, Tr. 63) She attempted a short sale on the property. (Tr. 24) In March 2012, an offer 
was received to buy the home for $65,000, which is what she owed on the home. (Ex. 
6) Mortgage company delays cause the potential buyer to withdraw the offer.  
 
 Applicant then attempted a deed in lieu of foreclosure. (Tr. 24) The mortgage 
company reported $15,171 past due (SOR 1.k) on the mortgage. The house went to 
foreclosure in early 2015. (Tr. 62) For tax year 2014, Applicant received an Internal 
Revenue Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt in the amount of $28,019. (Ex. K) Her 
March 2015 and November 2015 credit reports reflect a zero balance and zero past due 
on the mortgage. (Ex. 4, 5) 
 
In 2006, 2008, and 2009, Applicant experienced medical problems. (Tr. 15) She 
got behind on her finances following the medical issues and her daughter and 
granddaughter moved in with her. (Tr. 23) In June 2006, Applicant was injured in a lawn 
mowing accident that required knee surgery. (Ex. 6) In August 2006, she purchased a 
new vehicle when her vehicle experienced transmission problem. (Ex. 6) The car cost 
$18,505 with monthly payments of approximately $400. She made timely monthly 
payments until August 2012, when the vehicle experienced engine problems. (Ex. 6, Tr. 
24, 44) Six payments remained on the loan. The vehicle was repossessed and the 
lender has charged-off approximately $3,000 (SOR 1.j). (Ex. 2) 
 
 Applicant stated that in 2006 her finances were tight but she was meeting her 
obligations until October 2006 when emergency gall bladder surgery and shortly 
thereafter, a MRSA3 infection caused her to be out of work until mid-January 2007. (Ex. 
                                                          
2 Bankruptcy proceedings allow a tax debt of greater than three years to be discharged under limited 
circumstances. Applicant’s federal tax debts meet the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) criteria for 
discharge under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. See Nolo website, (In general, three criteria must be 
met before tax debts are discharged: (1) The return was due at least three years before the bankruptcy is 
filed; (2) The return was filed at least two years before the bankruptcy is filed; however, the return must 
be accurate; (3) A tax lien must not be attached to any property; and (4) The taxing authority must have 
assessed the tax (entered the liability on the taxing authority’s records) at least 240 days before the 
bankruptcy is filed.), http://www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/tax-debt-chapter-7-bankruptcy.html. 
(Hearing Exhibit 1) 
 
3 MRSA stands for methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus and is an infection caused by a strain of 
bacteria that is resistant to the antibiotics commonly used to treat ordinary staph infections. MRSA 
infections typically occur in patients who have been in a hospital or other health care settings. 
 
4 
6, Tr. 22, 25) Her health insurance did not cover all of her medical expenses. The SOR4 
lists nine medical debts totaling approximately $3,200. 
 
 Applicant had a credit card on which she made timely payments until 2010, when 
she last made a payment on the account (SOR.1.l, $1,024; SOR 1.i, $1,331). (Ex. 6) 
Until 2010, she made timely payments on another credit card account (SOR 1.m, $945; 
SOR 1.r, $1,663), when she made her last payment. There are two different amounts 
listed in the SOR, but Applicant asserts she had a single credit card with the lender. (Tr. 
45)  
 
 In July 2007, an attorney obtained a $196 judgment (SOR 1.q) against Applicant 
for services provided when Applicant sought advice concerning custody of her 
granddaughter. (Ex. 6) The debt remains unpaid. (Tr. 48) Applicant has not had recent 
contact with the attorney. (Tr. 48) In August 2015, she received temporary guardianship 
of her granddaughter. (Tr. 35)  
 
 In October 2007, Applicant’s daughter and two grandchildren moved in with her. 
In February 2008, she was out of work 12 weeks when she had knee replacement 
treatment. (Ex. 6) The three medical debts referenced in SOR 1.a ($198), 1.b ($895), 
and 1.c ($265) were combined into a single debt, which Applicant paid in April 2015. 
(Ex. A, Tr. 28) In June 2012, the medical provider obtained a judgement (SOR 1.p, 
$196) for the amount not covered by Applicant’s health insurance. Applicant asserts this 
is the same medical debt as 1.a, which she paid. (Tr. 47) She has medical insurance 
through her job, but still has a yearly deductible and co-payments to make. (Tr. 72)  
 
 The largest of Applicant’s delinquent obligations (SOR 1.n, $22,474) is collection 
account on her student loans. (Ex. 6) In 1985, Applicant obtained $6,000 in student 
loans to attend a technical institute. In 1990, the payment was to commence on the 
loans. (Ex. 6) From 1990 through 2002, Applicant’s income tax refund was intercepted 
and applied to her student loan debt. (Tr. 24) In 2013, she paid $2,548 in interest on the 
loans. (Tr. 52) Her student loan was brought out of default after she made 12 to 14 
timely payments on the note, and the note was transferred to a different entity for 
collection. (Tr. 46)  
 
 When Applicant had foot surgery, she went on short term disability which paid 
her eighty percent of her salary, she asked for six months forbearance on her student 
loan. (Tr. 60) Applicant did not indicate when the forbearance occurred. As of April 
2016, she was current on her $145 monthly payments on her student loan, (Ex. K, Tr. 
47) As of February 2016, $23,633 was owed on the loan and there was no past-due 
amount then owing. (Ex. K) The amount owed on the debt had increased $1,055 from 
March 2015 until April 2016. (Ex. 4, K) Applicant failed to provide any documentation as 
to how much she has actually paid on the loan since the loan was transferred to the 
current holder of the note. 
 
                                                          
4 DC acknowledges that SOR 1.l and 1.i, SOR 1.d and 1.o, and SOR 1.g and 1.h are duplications of the 
same obligations. (Tr. 16, 29) 
5 
 Applicant owes a telephone company $681 (SOR 1.d and SOR 1.p, which are 
the same debt) for equipment she failed to return when she moved. (Tr. 38) The debt 
has not been paid. The $1,331 debt listed in SOR 1.i, and duplicated in SOR 1.l, has not 
been paid. (Tr. 42) The $1,270 collection account (SOR 1.s) remains unpaid. (Tr. 49)  
 
 Applicant owes approximately $2,800 on ten collection accounts owed to the 
same collection company: SOR 1.t, $1,011; SOR 1.u, $314; SOR 1.v, $297; SOR 1.w, 
$282; SOR 1.x, $232; SOR 1.y, $229; SOR 1.z, $161; SOR 1.aa, $131; SOR 1.cc, 
$122; and SOR 1.dd, $28. Applicant sent a letter disputing the debts and asking the 
amounts to be verified. (Tr. 51) The response stated the debts were returned to the 
hospital. (Tr. 53) Applicant has made no payments on the debts.  
 In Applicant’s May 2013 personal subject interview (PSI), the SOR debts were 
discussed including her numerous small medical debts. When she completed her PSI, 
she was living pay check to paycheck and not making any payment on her delinquent 
accounts. (Ex. 6) She was considering participating in a consumer credit counseling 
service and setting up a plan to start repaying her debts. She has contacted her 
creditors, but found it difficult to make payment arrangements on the larger debts. (Tr. 
34) Her current monthly disposable income (gross income less expenses) is $127. (Ex. 
H, Tr. 61) She does not have any credit cards. (Tr. 84) 
  
 Applicant had some on-line credit counseling, which involved reading material, 
watching videos, and taking a quiz. (Tr. 29) The information related to budgeting, 
understanding credit and credit reports, identity theft predatory lending, banking 
relationship, and setting financial goals. (Ex. G, Tr. 30) Applicant is current on her five-
year-old vehicle. (Tr. 35) She has recently moved to a more affordable home that will 
have lower utility bills due to better insulation. (Tr. 35) 
 
Applicant was informed of the necessity to provide documentation supporting her 
assertions that delinquent obligations has been paid and to provide documentation as to 
the current status of the debts.  
      Policies  
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
6 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
7 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, her 
interview by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, and her testimony. 
Applicant owed approximately $54,000 on two judgements and 24 collection, charged-
off, delinquent, or unpaid accounts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
                                                          
5 This number does not include the four duplicate accounts, which were counted as one delinquent 
obligation. 
8 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
In 2014, the lender discharged $28,019, which was the amount Applicant owed 
following her foreclosure (SOR 1.k). She lived in her home 19 months, from March 2011 
until October 2012, without making her monthly mortgage payments. The home went to 
foreclosure and the lender cancelled the debt in 2014. This fails to show good faith or 
that she acted reasonably. She is current on her student loan, an obligation that was at 
one time serviced by the lender in SOR 1.n ($22,472). However, she incurred a $6,000 
debt more than thirty years ago and still owes $23,633 on the loan, which is an increase 
of $1,000 over what she owed a year earlier. She has documented payment of one 
judgement, but not the other. Even after deciding favorably for her on these two 
obligations and the four accounts which were listed more than once, she still has 
$13,352 in delinquent obligations.  
 
Applicant provided documentation showing she has paid less than $2,000 on her 
debts since her May 2013 interview. She never documented how much she has paid on 
her student loan since the interview. Even seven of the relatively small delinquent 
obligations under $200 each have not been addressed. 
 
The mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20(a) do not apply. Applicant has been full-time 
employed since 1999, and employed with her current employer since July 2013. There 
are numerous delinquent obligations yet to be addressed.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced medical problems, which is a factor 
beyond her control and a number of the delinquent obligations relate to medical 
treatment. However, the majority of her delinquent accounts have not been addressed, 
and, under the circumstances, she has not acted reasonably. AG & 20(b) does not 
mitigate the financial considerations concerns.  
 
Under AG & 20(c), Applicant has received some on-line financial education, but 
the majority of the debts remain unpaid. Under & 20(d), she paid one judgement 
($1,196), which included SOR debts 1.a ($198), 1.b ($895), and 1.c ($265). The student 
9 
loan (SOR 1.n, $22,472) was transferred to a new lender for collection. AG & 20(c) 
applies to these four debts.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s coworkers speak highly 
of her duty performance and her character. After thirty years Applicant’s student loan is 
three times the amount borrowed, but she is current on the payments and there is no 
past-due amount. She lived in her home 19 months without making her monthly 
mortgage payments.  
 
Applicant’s annual household income is approximately $55,000, and she has 
documented little payment on her delinquent obligations. She has been aware of the 
Government’s concern about her delinquent debts since her May 2013 interview when 
she was specifically confronted about each of her delinquent accounts now listed in the 
SOR. Additionally, the March 2015 SOR put her on notice of the Government’s concern 
about her delinquent accounts. She has failed to established repayment agreements to 
address the delinquent debts, except for her student loan obligation on which her 
monthly payments are current.  
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to 
be eligible for a security clearance. The determination of an individual’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on 
applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. Under 
Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not warranted. In the future, if 
10 
Applicant has paid her delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment 
plan, or otherwise substantially addressed her past-due obligations, she may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all her debts are paid—it is whether her financial 
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.c:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d –1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i –1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k –1.p:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q –1.dd:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
