 
  1
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ADP Case No. 15-05554 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations.)  Applicant incurred delinquent debt as a result of her 2009 divorce, 
however, she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on September 22, 2014. On February 23, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR, submitted her Answer on March 11, 2016, and 
requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on April 27, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
  2
material (FORM), which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7, was sent to 
Applicant on May 2, 2016. She was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the 
FORM on May 10, 2016. DOHA received her Response on June 6, 2016, which was 
admitted to the record without objection. The case was assigned to me on February 10, 
2017.  
 
On February 22, 2017, I reopened the record until March 10, 2017, to permit 
Applicant to submit additional information. On March 9, 2017, she submitted a statement 
and an additional document via electronic mail which I admitted to the record, without 
objection, as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A and B.  
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges 30 delinquent debts totaling approximately $12,700. These debts 
include:  ten medical debts totaling $2,240; three judgments totaling $2,574; and several 
credit-card and cell phone debts. In her Answer, Applicant wrote “I admit” next to each 
allegation on a copy of the SOR. However, she also attached an explanatory statement 
and a list describing the repayment status of each SOR debt. The list also included denials 
of several of the SOR debts. Her admissions, as modified, are incorporated in my findings 
of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of defense contractor for which she has 
worked since November 2001. She graduated High School in May 1989. She married in 
1994 and divorced in 2009. She has two children, ages 19 and 15. She has held a DOD 
position of trust since 2005. (GX 3.)   
 
Applicant’s financial problems arose after her divorce. As part of the divorce 
settlement, the marital debts were divided between Applicant and her husband. Since the 
divorce, Applicant has “tried [her] best to stay on top of [her] finances . . .” but has not 
always been able to do so. (Answer.) Additionally, Applicant was unaware of several 
delinquent accounts until her personal subject interview (PSI) in December 2014. (GX 4.) 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in early March 2017, with monthly payments 
to begin on April 30, 2017. She included all her remaining debts in the bankruptcy. She 
also completed the required credit counseling. (AX A; AX B.) Prior to filing bankruptcy, 
she had paid or was in repayment plans with the following SOR creditors:   
 
¶ 1.a - $1,502 judgment - $80 a month – balance as of March 2016 - $353; 
 
¶ 1.b - $674 judgment - satisfied in August 2013 (GX 5; GX 6); 
 
¶ 1.c - $398 judgment – paid in full November 2011; 
 
¶ 1.k - $501 cash advance – paid $200 in February 2016, making payments; 
 
¶¶ 1.n and 1.cc - $431 and $318 credit union accounts – paid in 2001; 
 
  3
 
¶ 1.r - $179 debt owed to high school – paid by ex-husband; 
 
¶ 1.dd - $798 past due vehicle loan – account is current. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant is also disputing the following accounts with the credit reporting 
agencies:  
 
¶¶ 1.n and 1.cc – disputing as paid; 
 
¶ 1.r – disputing as paid; 
 
¶¶ 1.s, 1.v, 1.aa, and 1.bb – disputing as current with $0 past due balances. 
(Answer.) 
 
The debts totaling $2,240 alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.o-q, 1.t, 1.u, and 1.w-z, are 
medical debts for her children’s care. Applicant and her husband have been making 
payments on these debts. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant contacted several of her creditors to arrange repayment plans prior to 
her PSI in December 2014. Applicant has not incurred any delinquent debt since 2013, 
and the majority of her debt was incurred in 2010. She currently lives within her means. 
(GX 5; GX 6.) Her statements concerning the circumstances that led to her indebtedness 
and the steps she has taken to resolve her delinquent accounts, including her recent 
bankruptcy filing, are straightforward and credible. (Answer; AX A.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
 
  4
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for a public trust position.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise [sensitive] information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding [sensitive] 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
   
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 However, a person can mitigate concerns raised by his or her financial 
circumstances by establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions listed under the 
guideline. The relevant mitigating conditions in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
  5
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 Applicant’s financial difficulties arose due to circumstances largely beyond her 
control, specifically her divorce in 2009. She also incurred $2,240, nearly 20% of her total 
debt, in medical debt for her children’s care. She initially acted responsibly under the 
circumstances by not incurring any significant delinquent debt since 2010, by contacting 
many of her creditors prior to her background investigation to arrange repayment plans, 
by paying a number of her debts, and by entering repayment plans for several accounts. 
She has recently chosen to resolve her remaining debts by filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy, 
which is reasonable given her circumstances. She has completed the requisite credit 
counseling.  
 
 Overall, Applicant has acted in good faith to resolve her delinquent accounts. 
“Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A [trustworthiness] adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case 
No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish resolution 
of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial 
problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines 
do not require that an individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, 
nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 
07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 Applicant has established a plan to resolve her remaining debts and has 
established a sufficient track record of debt resolution. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
position of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
 
  6
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has worked as a federal contractor since 2001, and has held a position 
of trust since 2005. She lives within his means, has not incurred any recent delinquent 
debt, and has been actively working to resolve her delinquent debts for several years. I 
am confident that Applicant will continue her good-faith efforts to resolve her remaining 
delinquent debts.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by her delinquent debts.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.dd:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the interest of national security to 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
