 
 1 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  Redacted )     ISCR Case No. 15-06339 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gary Myers, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who was born in Lebanon. His spouse is a 
U.S. permanent resident, who intends to apply for U.S. citizenship as soon as she is 
eligible. His mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen residing in the United States. Applicant 
has three sisters and one brother who are resident citizens of Lebanon. Applicant has 
established significant ties to the United States over the past 20 years, and he can be 
counted on to act in U.S. interests. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence, and explaining why it was unable to grant him a security clearance. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended (EO); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 30, 2016, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On July 6, 2016, Applicant’s counsel entered his appearance and requested a 
hearing date after September 11, 2016. On July 14, 2016, the case was assigned to me 
to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security 
clearance for Applicant. On September 26, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for October 18, 
2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) and 
nine Applicant exhibits (AEs A-I) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on October 27, 2016. 
 
At the Government’s request and without any objection from Applicant, I agreed 
to take administrative notice of pertinent facts related to Lebanon.1 The Government’s 
request for administrative notice, dated June 23, 2016, was based on excerpts of 
publications from the U.S. State Department, the U.S. Department of Justice, and the 
Congressional Research Service. Excerpts from some of the documents were provided 
to me at the hearing.2 The facts administratively noticed are set forth in the Findings of 
Fact, below. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline B that Applicant’s three sisters and one 
brother are resident citizens of Lebanon (SOR ¶ 1.a); that Applicant’s fiancée is a 
citizen of Lebanon residing with him in the United States (SOR ¶ 1.b); and that 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Lebanon who resides with Applicant or his brother in 
the United States (SOR ¶ 1.c). When he responded to the SOR allegations (Answer), 
Applicant admitted that four of his siblings are resident citizens of Lebanon, but that one 
sister has been approved for immigration to the United States and is awaiting her 
interview. Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.b in that he and his fiancée married in the United 
                                                 
1The Government’s formal request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record. I agreed to take administrative notice, subject to my obligation to make accurate 
and timely assessments of the political landscape in foreign countries when adjudicating Guideline B 
cases. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007). 
 
2 The Government relied in part on the State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 
for 2014: Lebanon. I was not provided the publication but was given the URL where the information could 
be accessed. In addition to the Travel Warning dated December 11, 2015, relied on by the Government, I 
was provided an earlier Travel Warning from October 19, 2015, not referenced in the Administrative 
Notice request. Consistent with Appeal Board precedent requiring consideration of updated information, I 
reviewed the December 2015 Travel Warning. Additionally, I note that some of the source information 
cited by the Government had been updated before its June 23, 2016 Administrative Notice request. For 
example, the State Department’s Country Report on Human Rights Practices for 2015-Lebanon and the 
State Department’s Country Report on Terrorism for 2015 were released respectively on April 13, 2016, 
and June 3, 2016. Additionally, previous travel warnings for Lebanon have been superseded by travel 
warnings issued on July 29, 2016, and recently on February 15, 2017. The State Department has also 
released its Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016: Lebanon. The updated reports of the 
U.S. State Department are available at www.state.gov. 
 
 
 3 
States in March 2015, and she obtained her U.S. permanent residency in September 
2015. Applicant admitted that his mother is a Lebanese citizen legally residing in the 
United States, but she has applied for U.S. citizenship. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old business program manager, who has held his current 
position with a defense contractor since October 2014. He was born in a predominantly 
Christian area in Lebanon and graduated from high school in Lebanon in June 1992. 
(Tr. 33-34.) He came to the United States on a student visa in August 1995. In January 
1996, he began studies in a dual program toward his bachelor’s and master’s degrees 
in electrical engineering, which he completed in October 2002. He earned two more 
master’s degrees: in computer engineering in June 2006 and in finance in September 
2010. (GE 1; Tr. 21-24.) 
 
Applicant’s father died in December 1999 in Lebanon. Applicant traveled to 
Lebanon in early 2000 to see his mother and five siblings (three sisters and two 
brothers). It was Applicant’s first trip to Lebanon since coming to the United States. He 
traveled on his Lebanese passport issued in July 1991. (GE 1; Tr. 24-25.) 
  
 Applicant initially pumped gas and worked as a cashier during the day to pay for 
his education. He obtained a job with a commercial company that sponsored him for a 
three-year work visa and U.S. permanent residency. After six years in that job, he 
moved on to another company in the same line of work for a couple of years. From 
September 2004 through October 2008 he worked as a product engineer for a U.S. 
company where he started dealing with International Traffic in Arms (ITAR) regulations. 
(GE 1; Tr. 27.) Applicant traveled to Lebanon on his Lebanese passport for his cousin’s 
engagement in December 2004 and marriage in July 2005,3 and with a friend for a 
beach vacation in December 2007. (GE 1; Answer; Tr. 34-35.) 
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen and obtained his U.S. passport in 
May 2008. (GE 1.) At his brother’s request, in June 2008, Applicant applied for the elder 
of his two brothers in Lebanon to emigrate from Lebanon to the United States. (Tr. 48.) 
The application was approved and pending further immigrant visa processing steps. (AE 
I.) Applicant also sponsored his mother for immigration to the United States. His mother 
came to the United States for the first time in approximately April 2009. (GEs 1, 2.) 
 
Applicant began working as a program manager for a new employer in 
November 2008. He worked on aerospace programs subject to ITAR regulations, but he 
did not require a security clearance. (AEs E, F; Tr. 29-31.) In 2010 or 2011, Applicant 
began corresponding online with an old childhood friend (now spouse). (Tr. 51.) In 
                                                 
3 Applicant testified that his cousin immigrated to the United States as a child and was a U.S. citizen. He 
had a close relationship with his cousin, who became engaged to a woman in Lebanon. (Tr. 35.) 
 
 4 
August 2011, he went to Lebanon for 30 days on his U.S. passport to vacation at the 
beach. (Tr. 35.) Applicant went to Lebanon for 45 days in March 2014 to meet his future 
spouse in person (Tr. 51), and they became engaged while she visited him in the United 
States in May 2014. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 36.) He went to Lebanon for another 45 days in 
September 2014 to visit his future spouse and to discuss marriage plans. Applicant 
visited with his family members when in Lebanon but usually for less than a day. (GE 1; 
Tr. 35-36.) 
 
Shortly after Applicant returned from Lebanon in October 2014, he began his 
current employment with a university-affiliated laboratory that has contracts with the 
DOD. On October 14, 2014, he completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). He disclosed that he had daily 
contact by telephone or electronic media with his then fiancée, who was a resident 
citizen of Lebanon at the time, but he indicated that he had applied for a fiancée visa for 
her to immigrate to the United States. He anticipated her to immigrate in January 2015. 
Applicant indicated that under his sponsorship, his youngest brother had immigrated to 
the United States in March 2012 and had acquired U.S. permanent residency.4 His 
brother was working as an automotive technician as of October 2014, but he was laid 
off in December 2014. (GE 3.) Applicant provided his U.S. address for his mother, a 
Lebanese citizen, whom he had also sponsored for U.S. permanent residency. He 
indicated that his mother was overseas, and he expected her to return to the United 
States in February 2015. While his mother had lived with him, he expected her to live 
with his brother when she returned to the United States. Applicant disclosed the 
Lebanese citizenship and residency of his other siblings. Sister #1, now age 44, is an 
elementary school teacher. Sister #2, now age 41, is a married homemaker. Sister #3, 
now age 35, had never worked outside the home. His brother in Lebanon, now age 37, 
reportedly works for a municipality (“city hall”). Applicant did not elaborate about his 
brother’s position or duties. Applicant indicated that he calls or texts Sister #3 once 
every few months. He reported times of frequent contact with his brother in Lebanon but 
also years without any contact. Applicant indicated that he “seldom” has contact with his 
sisters #1 and #2, although he disclosed that he saw his siblings in Lebanon in October 
2014. (GE 1.) Applicant was granted an interim secret clearance that was subsequently 
withdrawn. (Tr. 28.) 
 
On February 6, 2015, Applicant was interviewed about his foreign ties by an 
authorized investigator for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He stated that 
he had surrendered his Lebanese passport when he became a U.S. citizen. Concerning 
his foreign contacts, Applicant explained that he had telephone contact with his mother 
several times per month when she was overseas. Information about his contacts with 
his siblings in Lebanon and their occupations was largely consistent with his SF 86. 
Applicant advised that he was unaware of his brother’s specific occupation. He 
indicated that he was in contact with this brother once every few months. He denied any 
contact with sister #2. As for his fiancée, Applicant explained that she worked as a 
nurse at a hospital in Lebanon. They had met as children, and their relationship began 
                                                 
4 Applicant clarified at his hearing that his mother petitioned his brother and sister #3 for immigration but 
he sponsored the financial aspect of their petitions. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 5 
in August 2011. He reported that on February 3, 2015, his fiancée was granted a visa to 
immigrate to the United States. Applicant stated that to the best of his knowledge, 
neither his foreign family members nor his fiancée had any ties or loyalties to any 
foreign government, including Lebanon, and they were unaware that he was undergoing 
a background investigation for security clearance eligibility. Applicant related no 
difficulties with any foreign government officials, law enforcement, or customs officials 
during his trips to Lebanon. (GE 2.) 
 
Applicant’s then fiancée (now spouse) joined Applicant in the United States on 
February 24, 2015, and they married on March 19, 2015. Before they were engaged, 
Applicant made it clear to his spouse that his life is in the United States and that she 
should not commit to them being a couple unless she was sure she wanted to live in the 
United States. (AE G.) She was granted U.S. permanent residency on September 30, 
2015. (AEs A, G; Tr. 31-32.) Applicant’s spouse intends to apply for U.S. citizenship as 
soon as she is eligible. She intends to live in the United States permanently. (Answer; 
AE G.) She and Applicant are expecting their first child, a son, in March 2017. (Tr. 36, 
41.) As of late March 2016, Applicant and his spouse were looking to buy a home. 
(Answer.)  
 
Applicant’s mother applied for naturalization in the United States because of her 
desire to live permanently in the United States. (AE H.) On September 27, 2016, she 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She obtained her U.S. passport on October 5, 2016. 
(AE B.) While a U.S. permanent resident, Applicant’s mother sponsored Applicant’s 
sister #3 for U.S. immigration in May 2010. As of February 3, 2016, sister #3 was in the 
queue to be interviewed by a U.S. consular or embassy official. As of June 28, 2016, 
she had been approved for immigration, but she was pending the availability of a visa 
number. (AE C; Tr. 32.) Applicant’s sister #3 did not graduate from high school. She 
intends to obtain her Graduate Equivalency Diploma in the United States. (Tr. 39.) 
Applicant is in contact with this sister every few months. (Tr. 39.) 
 
Applicant has not had any in-person contact with sister #1 or sister #2 since his 
engagement party in Lebanon in October 2014. He had one or two telephone 
conversations with sister #2 during that trip. Applicant does not telephone either of 
these sisters. Whether because of their geographical distance, his independence, or the 
education gap, “It’s just the way it is.” (Tr. 39-40.) Applicant has been in contact with his 
brother in Lebanon by electronic media (texting primarily) about the status of his U.S. 
immigrant application or their mother’s well-being. (Tr. 40.) His brother works for a 
municipality in Lebanon on public work projects, such as paving roads. (Tr. 48.) Should 
there be any attempt to gain influence on him through his siblings in Lebanon, Applicant 
would first advise his security office at work about the situation and ask for guidance. He 
testified that he would not do anything to compromise the United States. His life and 
future are here. (Tr. 41-43.) Applicant understands that he is not to discuss classified 
information with persons who lack the appropriate clearance and need-to-know. (Tr. 
46.) Applicant’s siblings and spouse do not know any specifics about his job. To his 
knowledge, none of his family members has been approached by Lebanese security 
forces or government officials or by Hizballah.  (Tr. 44.)  
 
 6 
Applicant’s spouse’s parents and her siblings live in Lebanon. Her father is a 
retired teacher. Her mother does not work outside the home. (Tr. 49.) Applicant’s 
spouse is close to her mother and calls her weekly to inquire about her well-being and 
that of her father. Applicant talks to his mother-in-law once or twice a year at most to 
wish her holiday greetings. His father-in-law has problems hearing phone conversation 
so they do not converse. (Answer.) Applicant’s spouse has asked him whether he would 
have any objection to her mother coming to the United States for a couple of weeks 
after their son’s birth. As of October 2016, there were no firm plans in that regard. (Tr. 
50.) Little is known about his spouse’s siblings in Lebanon apart from Applicant’s 
testimony that he has not talked to any of her siblings. (Tr. 49.) 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant has favorable character references from his direct supervisor (AE E) 
and from a co-worker (AE F) at his previous employment from November 2008 through 
September 2014, and from a present co-worker (AE D). Applicant’s former supervisor 
attests that Applicant as a program manager was responsible for the company’s most 
critical contracts, and that while Applicant did not handle any classified data, he 
appropriately handled data subject to ITAR regulations. Applicant had very good 
analytical and management skills. Applicant’s former supervisor is aware that Applicant 
has applied for a security clearance and that the government has foreign influence 
concerns because some of Applicant’s relatives reside in Lebanon. He endorses 
Applicant for security clearance eligibility. Applicant was reliable and conscientious, 
performed excellent work, protected sensitive data subject to ITAR regulations, and 
expressed a perspective always based on what he thought was in the best interest of 
the United States. (AE E). An engineering manager at the company, who frequently 
worked with Applicant on a variety of aerospace programs, “consistently found him to be 
hardworking, honest, and very trustworthy.” Also aware that Applicant has family in “a 
peaceful part” of Lebanon, he noted “a deep sense of pride that [Applicant] has for living 
and working in the United States.”  Applicant showed himself to be “a harsh critic of 
fundamental extremism of any kind.” (AE F.) 
 
 A business program manager, who currently shares an office with Applicant and 
holds a top secret clearance, has daily professional contact with him. She understands 
that Applicant has relatives in Lebanon but also that his relationship to these relatives is 
not close. She indicates that she would “periodically prod him to call and visit his mother 
and family in Lebanon to which [Applicant] typically expresses resistance.” He has 
insisted that he has nothing in common with his family in Lebanon and reminded her 
that everyone should be free to live independent lives and make their own choices. His 
co-worker indicates that she has every reason to believe that Applicant is a patriotic and 
loyal citizen of the United States. (AE D.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 After reviewing U.S. government publications concerning Lebanon and foreign 
relations and mindful of my obligation to consider updated information, I take 
 
 7 
administrative notice of the facts requested by the Government as supplemented by the 
following facts: 
 
 Lebanon is a parliamentary republic with a religiously diverse population. To 
mitigate a tendency for the religious diversity to fuel political rivalry and conflict, 
governmental authority is apportioned under an unwritten “National Covenant” among a 
Maronite Christian president, a Shia speaker of the Chamber of Deputies (parliament), 
and a Sunni prime minister. Lebanon’s power-sharing-based democratic system has led 
to Hizballah (Hezbollah), a U.S. government-designated terrorist organization, holding 
positions in parliament and in 2011 in Lebanon’s cabinet. Since its independence in 
1943, the country has experienced periods of political turmoil interspersed with 
prosperity built on its position as a regional center for finance and trade. Political 
tensions have heightened along with some destabilization of the security situation in 
Lebanon since 2014 because of the civil war in neighboring Syria; the influx of Syrian 
refugees into Lebanon; the intervention by Hizballah on behalf of the Assad regime in 
Syria; Lebanese Sunni support for Syrian opposition forces; and a wave of sectarian 
violence and terrorist attacks in Lebanon. While Lebanon’s security services have had 
some success at disrupting terrorist networks, suicide bombings and other terrorist acts 
in Lebanon have killed at least 49 and injured more than 250 people since November 
2015. Hizballah, with considerable support from Iran, remains the most capable and 
prominent terrorist group in Lebanon. Other designated terrorist groups, including 
Hamas, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL aka ISIS), the Al-Nusrah Front, 
and the Abdullah Azzam Brigade pose a constant challenge to state security. 
 
 Because of the threats of terrorism, armed clashes, kidnapping, and outbreaks of 
violence, especially near Lebanon’s borders with Syria and Israel, the State Department 
continues to warn U.S. citizens to avoid traveling to Lebanon. U.S. citizens have been 
the targets of terrorist attacks in Lebanon in the past, and the threat of anti-Western 
terrorist activity persists. The Lebanese government cannot guarantee the protection of 
U.S. citizens against sudden outbreaks of violence, which can happen at any time in 
Lebanon. The U.S. State Department considers the threat to U.S. government 
personnel in Beirut sufficiently serious to require them to live and work under strict 
security restrictions. 
 
 Civilian authorities in Lebanon maintained control over the armed forces and 
other security forces in 2016, although Palestinian security and militia forces, Hizballah, 
and other extremist groups continued to operate outside the direction or control of 
government officials. The most significant human rights abuses committed in 2016 were 
torture and abuse by security forces, harsh prison and detention center conditions, and 
limitations on freedom of movement for Palestinian and Syrian refugees in Lebanon.  
Although laws provide for prosecution and punishment, government officials in Lebanon 
continue to enjoy a measure of impunity for human rights abuses. 
 
 The United States seeks to maintain its traditionally close ties to Lebanon, and to 
help preserve its independence, sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity. 
Recent U.S. Administrations have focused on weakening Syrian and Iranian influences 
 
 8 
in Lebanon. The United States supports full implementation of United Nations Security 
Council resolutions concerning the disarming of all militias, delineation of the Lebanese-
Syrian border, and the deployment of Lebanese Armed Forces in Lebanon. As of 
November 2013, the United States had pledged well over $1.3 billion in assistance to 
Lebanon to support U.S. policies designed to extend Lebanese security forces’ control 
over the country and promote economic growth. Lebanon and the United States belong 
to some of the same international organizations, including the United Nations, 
International Monetary Fund, and World Bank. The United States and Lebanon have 
executed a Trade and Investment Framework Agreement to expand trade relations and 
remove obstacles to trade and investment between the countries. Lebanon is a member 
of the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL. The United States is Lebanon’s closest 
counterterrorism partner. 
 
 Lebanese citizens and other nationals living outside of Lebanon have provided or 
attempted to provide material support for Hizballah or its activities. In February 2006, a 
dual citizen of Lebanon and Canada was sentenced to 60 months in prison for 
attempting to export military night-vision equipment to Hizballah. In November 2007, a 
Lebanese national living in the United States pleaded guilty to immigration fraud in that 
she obtained U.S. citizenship by providing forged documents of a fraudulent marriage to 
U.S. immigration officials and used her fraudulently procured U.S. citizenship to gain 
employment in the U.S. intelligence community, to having accessed a federal computer 
system to unlawfully gain information about her relatives and a national security 
investigation into Hizballah, and to conspiracy to defraud the United States. In 
December 2008, a U.S. resident pleaded guilty to proving material support in the form of 
satellite transmission services to a Hizballah television station. In August 2012, the 
United States seized $150 million in connection with an international money laundering 
scheme involving the now defunct Lebanese Canadian Bank and Hizballah using the 
U.S. financial system to launder narcotics trafficking and other criminal proceeds 
through West Africa into Lebanon.  In March 2015, a citizen of Suriname was sentenced 
to 195 months in prison for attempting to support Hizballah. In exchange for a multi-
million dollar payment, he agreed to allow large numbers of purported Hizballah 
operatives to use Suriname as a permanent base for attacks on American targets.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
 
 9 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is articulated in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
 10 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant has foreign connections that present a potential risk of divided loyalties 
or undue foreign influence. Four of Applicant’s five siblings are resident citizens of 
Lebanon. His mother was a citizen of Lebanon with U.S. permanent residency as of the 
issuance of the SOR in March 2016. However, consistent with her intent to reside here 
permanently, she became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2016. Applicant 
married his spouse, a Lebanese citizen, in March 2015. She acquired her U.S. 
permanent residency in September 2015. Applicant’s in-laws reside in Lebanon, but the 
record is silent about their citizenship, which may well be with Lebanon. Applicant’s ties 
through his spouse to her parents and siblings cannot be considered in disqualification.5 
Nonetheless, the Lebanese citizenship and residency of four of his siblings and his 
spouse’s Lebanese citizenship could establish three disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The salient issue under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d), is whether there is substantial 
evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign influence or exploitation because of the 
respective foreign tie, contact, or interest. The “heightened risk” denotes a risk greater 
than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or owning property in a foreign country, but it is nonetheless a relatively low 
standard. The nature and strength of the family ties or other foreign interests and the 
country involved (i.e., the nature of its government, its relationship with the United 
States, and its human rights record) are relevant in assessing whether there is a 
likelihood of vulnerability to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
                                                 
5 The DOHA Appeal Board has long held that the administrative judge may consider non-alleged conduct 
to assess an applicant’s credibility; to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or 
changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; to 
decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or to provide evidence 
for a whole-person analysis under Section 6.3 of the Directive. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 09-07219 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012). Accordingly, the potential for 
foreign influence because of his spouse’s family members in Lebanon can be considered for other 
circumstances, such as whether Applicant has met a condition in mitigation. 
 
 11 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government; a 
family member is associated with, or dependent on, the foreign government; or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In 
considering the nature of the foreign government, the administrative judge must take 
into account any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 
02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
The United States has had traditionally close ties to Lebanon. Recognizing the 
importance of Lebanon’s stability to the Middle East, the United States has pledged well 
over $1.3 billion in assistance to Lebanon to support U.S. policies designed to extend 
Lebanese security forces’ control over the country and promote economic growth. 
Lebanon is an ally in counterterrorism efforts. However, Hizballah, a U.S. designated 
terrorist organization, has held seats in Lebanon’s parliament and cabinet. With 
considerable support from Iran, Hizballah remains the most capable and prominent 
terrorist group in Lebanon. Lebanese citizens living in the United States and other 
foreign nationals have been implicated in attempting to provide material support for 
Hizballah. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s siblings in Lebanon have been targeted or 
pressured. Nothing about his family members’ previous or present occupations or 
activities creates a heightened risk. Two of his sisters do not work outside the home. His 
other sister is a schoolteacher. While Applicant’s brother is employed by his local 
municipality, he does manual work on infrastructure projects, like paving roads. 
Applicant is the most educated in his family. To Applicant’s knowledge, none of them 
had a direct affiliation with the Lebanese government, or any military, security, or 
intelligence responsibilities. It has not been demonstrated that the Lebanese 
government is actively engaging in the collection of U.S. intelligence. There does not 
appear to be a significant risk that the Lebanese government would resort to coercive 
means to obtain sensitive information from Applicant’s siblings, who do not know that he 
is under consideration for security clearance eligibility with the DOD. 
 
Lebanon faces threats by several terrorist and extremist groups that have 
demonstrated a willingness and ability to strike civilian targets. The United States 
continues to warn U.S. citizens against traveling to Lebanon because of the threats of 
terrorism, armed clashes, kidnapping, and outbreaks of violence, especially near 
Lebanon’s borders with Syria and Israel. Terrorist groups such as Hamas, Hizballah, 
and ISIL commit indiscriminate acts of violence and attack Western targets to gain 
attention and increase their membership and power. There is no indication that they use 
terrorism to gain access to U.S. sensitive or classified information. Even so, the 
significant risk of terrorism in Lebanon creates a heightened risk. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
are established primarily because of Applicant’s contacts and connections with sister #3 
and his brother in Lebanon.  Applicant contacts these siblings occasionally, usually by 
electronic media. He supported both of them for U.S. immigration by sponsoring his 
brother and by providing a financial affidavit of support for his sister. While his sister’s 
U.S. immigration is pending only a visa number, a heightened risk exists as long as she 
remains a Lebanese resident citizen. Applicant does not share close relations with sister 
 
 12 
#1 or sister #2. His contact with them over the years has been limited. He did not make 
an effort to see them during some of his trips to Lebanon, and while they attended his 
engagement party in 2014, his contact with them in person or otherwise has been very 
infrequent since August 1995. However, while not fully explored, there is the risk that 
exists through his mother and her presumably close relations with her four children who 
are resident citizens of Lebanon.6 The risk of foreign influence is not heightened by his 
spouse’s Lebanese citizenship, given her immigration to the United States, her 
acquisition of U.S. permanent residency, and her intent to establish a life in the United 
States. Similarly, his mother now enjoys the protection of U.S. citizenship, and she too 
intends not to reestablish residency in Lebanon. 
 
Concerning potential factors in mitigation, AG ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the 
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or 
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the 
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.,” is 
difficult to satisfy, given the ongoing risk of terrorist activity in Lebanon, although there is 
no evidence that Applicant’s family members (or his spouse’s family members) have 
been targeted or victimized. 
 
There is nothing unusual about the nature and extent of Applicant’s contacts with 
his siblings. Given the limited nature of his contacts with sister #1 and sister #2 since 
August 1995, AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence 
or exploitation,” has some applicability. However, the sibling bond, especially to sister 
#3 and his brother in Lebanon, cannot reasonably be characterized as casual. 
 
A heightened risk of undue foreign influence may also be mitigated under AG ¶ 
8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or 
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” Applicant expressed no loyalty to his native Lebanon. Present and former co-
workers found Applicant’s perspective to be in line with U.S. interests and supportive of 
the American way of life. More telling, Applicant’s actions lead me to find that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. He came to the 
United States at age 21 for college. He earned his undergraduate and three graduate 
degrees here, working to pay for his education. Under the sponsorship of a former 
employer, he became a U.S. permanent resident. He sponsored his mother for U.S. 
permanent residency and brought her to the United States to live with him. He became 
a naturalized U.S citizen in May 2008 and shortly thereafter applied for a brother to 
immigrate to the United States. 
                                                 
6 AG ¶ 7(d) could be implicated because of the risk that exists indirectly through his mother’s presumed 
bonds of affection to her children in Lebanon. Applicant gave his address for his mother on his SF 86. 
While he expected his mother to live with his brother on her return from a trip to Lebanon, her town 
address on her naturalization papers is the same town in which Applicant and his spouse currently reside. 
 
 13 
Before they married, Applicant made it clear to his spouse, then a Lebanese 
resident citizen, that she had to commit to immigrating to the United States if she 
wanted their relationship to continue. He sponsored her for a fiancée visa. He and his 
spouse are expecting their first child, and they see their future as a family being in the 
United States. The persons to whom Applicant is closest (spouse, mother, and a 
brother) are U.S. residents with legal permanent status or citizenship. There is no 
evidence that Applicant or his spouse has any financial interests in Lebanon. Limited 
evidence was presented about Applicant’s U.S. assets, although he obviously has 
employment income. He and his spouse were looking for a home to purchase in the 
United States as of late March 2016. Applicant’s professional career has been solely in 
the United States, and by all accounts, he has shown himself to be a dedicated, reliable 
employee who handled ITAR material appropriately. The foreign influence concerns 
have been mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the 
totality of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine 
adjudicative process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).7 The analysis under Guideline B is 
incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 As with many immigrants to the United States, Applicant has some family ties in 
his native country. His spouse, likewise a native of Lebanon, has ongoing weekly 
contact with her mother, to whom she understandably has close ties of affection. 
Applicant’s tie to his parents-in-law was not shown to be closer than one would ordinary 
expect of an in-law relationship. The Appeal Board acknowledged in ISCR Case No. 08-
10025 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009) that “people may act in unpredictable ways when faced 
with choices that could be important to a loved-one, such as a family member.” 
Applicant testified credibly that if faced with the untenable situation of undue pressure or 
influence being placed on a family member, he would report the situation to his 
employer’s security office and ask for guidance. For the reasons noted, I conclude that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility for 
Applicant. 
 
  
                                                 
7 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 14 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal finding for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, is: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
