 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04401 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 23, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 13, 2016, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on May 11, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on May 17, 2016. Applicant responded with documents that I have 
marked collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. The case was assigned to me on 
March 10, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE 1 are admitted 
in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He obtained his 
GED in 2002 and attended college from 2004 to 2006 but did not earn a degree. He has 
worked for his current employer since June 2007, with multiple periods in which he 
worked overseas or occasions when he worked stateside but away from home. He 
served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1997 until he retired with an honorable 
discharge in 2007. He was granted DOD security clearances in 1997 and 2011. He 
married in 1997, divorced in 2002, married again in 2003, and divorced in 2009. He has 
one adult and two minor children.1  
 
Applicant divorced his second wife because of her failure to pay their bills and 
frivolous spending when he worked overseas. He resolved most of the resulting 
financial problems.2 
 
The SOR alleges a $10,161 judgment and 10 delinquent debts totaling $28,151, 
comprised of six student loan debts totaling $20,019, two consumer accounts totaling 
$7,702, and two minor medical debts. Applicant admitted to SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b to 1.i, 
and denied SOR debts ¶¶ 1.a, 1.j, and 1.k. The debts are established by Applicant’s 
admissions and credit reports.3 
 
With the exception of the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, the most recent credit 
report from May 2016 does not report any delinquent debts. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.j is for the same debt underlying the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.4 Credit reports 
from June 2014 and February 2015 report SOR debt ¶ 1.j as $1,813 past due with a 
$10,161 balance. Credit reports from November 2015 and May 2016 no longer report 
SOR debt ¶ 1.j. All four credit reports reflect that the $10,161 balance of SOR debt ¶ 1.j 
was entered as a judgment against Applicant as alleged in SOR debt ¶ 1.a. The 
settlement letter Applicant received in May 2016 references the same creditor as SOR 
debt ¶ 1.j, and the same date of judgment as SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant provided a copy of 
his Experian credit report from June 2014 to show that the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a was deleted as a result of his dispute. To continue to resolve this judgment, 
Applicant provided pay stubs to show that his wages were garnished from December 
2015 to April 2016 for around $4,368. After he received the settlement letter of $3,500 
                                                          
1 Items 2-4.  
 
2 Items 2-7; AE 1.  
 
3 Items 1-7; AE 1.  
 
4 While the creditors alleged are different, I am satisfied after reviewing all the evidence that they pertain 
to the same debt. Items 1-7; AE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
for the remaining $5,887 balance, Applicant paid $2,000 in May 2016 and planned to 
pay $130 monthly in accordance with the settlement.5 
 
Applicant also provided pay stubs to show that his wages were garnished from 
February 2010 to July 2013 for around $26,000 to resolve his student loan debts. The 
May 2016 credit report reflects that Applicant paid the two medical debts, as they carry 
a zero balance. Applicant maintained that he has no knowledge of SOR debt ¶ 1.k.6   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 Items 5-7; AE 1. 
 
6 Items 2-4; AE 1. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay his debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Most of Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his second wife’s financial 
irresponsibility when Applicant worked overseas. Applicant incurred a few minor debts 
after his divorce during the occasions when he worked stateside but away from home. 
He began resolving his delinquent debts before he received the SOR. He has paid most 
of his debts and not incurred additional delinquent debts. I am satisfied that Applicant’s 
finances are in order. AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(d) are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. I also considered the cause 
of Applicant’s financial problems and that he resolved his debts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
6 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia  
Administrative Judge 
