 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-08017 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $20,000 in delinquent debts, all which remain 
outstanding. He did not mitigate resulting trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility to occupy 
a public trust position is denied. 
 
On May 5, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2.) On February 5, 2016, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). (Item 1.) The 
action was taken under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DoD 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
On May 10, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On June 5, 2016, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
 
2 
 
 
Items.1 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) mailed Applicant a 
complete copy of the FORM on June 13, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on June 
20, 2016, and was provided 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. He did not submit any information within the time provided, made 
no objection to consideration of any contents of the FORM, and did not request 
additional time to respond. On March 2, 2017, DOHA assigned the case to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He has worked for a Government contractor as a 
healthcare business analyst since December 2014. He worked as a business systems 
analyst for a major information technology company from February 2012 to December 
2014. He has never married and has no children. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
August 2010, and has taken some additional college-level classes post-graduation. He 
has never served in the military, held a civilian position with the Federal Government, or 
held a security clearance or public trust position. (Item 2.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had three delinquent debts, totaling $20,079.  
Record credit reports indicate these debts became delinquent in 2010, 2012, and 2013.  
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all three debts, and explained the status 
of each as follows:  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $256 utility debt that arose in 2010. Applicant said he was 
disputing the amount with the collection agency because he thought the charge was too 
high and he had other college roommates living in the apartment who should have 
helped with the bill. He said that if he was convinced he owed the debt he would set up 
payment arrangements to handle it. He provided no documentation to demonstrate 
either communications with the creditor or a valid basis for a dispute. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges an unpaid $410 medical debt from 2013. Applicant said that 
he was unaware of this debt and thought his medical insurance would have handled it. 
He said that he had made arrangements with the collection agency to make monthly 
payments toward this debt, but provided no proof of such arrangements or payments 
thereunder. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a charged-off student loan debt in the amount of $19,413 that 
became delinquent in 2012. Applicant said that he could not afford the loan payments 
                                                          
1 Item 3 is the summary of two unsworn interviews of Applicant, conducted on July 23, 2015, and August 
12, 2015, which was included in the Report of Investigation (ROI) prepared by an investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). It was neither adopted nor authenticated by Applicant, but he 
did not object to its consideration in response to the FORM when offered the opportunity to do so. 
Pursuant to Directive E.3.1.20, ROI evidence is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. 
However, Applicants may reasonably assume that exculpatory information provided to an OPM 
investigator will be considered on their behalf. Accordingly, the explanations and justifications ascribed to 
Applicant by the OPM investigator in Item 3 have been considered on his behalf. No information in Item 3 
that is adverse to Applicant will be considered unless it is cumulative with evidence contained elsewhere 
in the record.  
 
3 
 
 
on his income at the time, but that he had since been in contact with the collection 
agency to negotiate a settlement. After he told them he could not repay the entire debt, 
they offered to settle the debt for a lump sum payment of $9,000. He could not pay them 
that amount either, and they declined his request for a monthly payment arrangement. 
Applicant offered no documentation supporting these explanations either. 
 
 From May 2010 to June 2011, Applicant worked as a call center reservation 
agent for a hotel and resort company, but was terminated from that job for not meeting 
call standards. He remained unemployed until January 2012, but attended additional 
college classes from September to November 2011. Other than living at college as an 
undergraduate, Applicant lived in his parent’s home until moving in December 2014 to 
accept his current job. (Item 2.) 
 
 All three of the SOR-alleged delinquent debts remain unresolved, and Applicant 
provided no evidence of payments toward any of them, despite his continuous 
professional employment since February 2012, and the absence of any independent 
living expenses until December 2014. Applicant’s most recent record credit report, 
dated June 5, 2016, lists several additional delinquencies that have arisen since 
issuance of the SOR. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze his current financial situation. No character references were 
submitted to describe Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was 
unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP-I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.” (See 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
 
4 
 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt since 2010, which he has 
been unable or unwilling to repay. This evidence raises trustworthiness concerns under 
these disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant accumulated more than $20,000 in delinquent debts that were alleged 
in the SOR. He did not show through evidence that these debts arose from conditions 
beyond his control, or that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He 
documented no counseling to assist with debt resolution, nor did he demonstrate an 
ability to avoid recurrence of financial problems. According to the record evidence, the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c remain unresolved, and no documented basis 
to dispute the legitimacy of any of them was provided. Applicant therefore failed to 
establish mitigation of trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e).  
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual who is 
accountable for the decisions and choices that led to his financial difficulties. He failed 
to demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, or permanent behavioral 
change, concerning his continuing pattern of financial irresponsibility. His ongoing 
delinquent debts establish continuing potential for pressure, coercion, or duress.  
    
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability to occupy a public trust position. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
