 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 15-04469 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He admits that he allowed his spouse to use his identity 
from August 2012 through April 2014 to work as an independent contractor for an 
online-media company. He omitted this aspect of his employment history in his 
September 2013 security clearance application, but he voluntarily self-reported it during 
his November 2013 background investigation. He did not present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from poor judgment and 
lack of integrity associated with the false or misleading information provided to an 
employer. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on September 18, 2013. This document is commonly known as 
a security clearance application. Thereafter, on February 24, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
 
2 
 
information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline E for personal conduct. He 
answered the SOR on April 11, 2016, in a detailed 15-page memorandum that included 
several enclosures.     
 
The case was assigned to an administrative judge on July 15, 2016, and then 
reassigned to me on August 16, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled on 
November 10, 2016. Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1 and 2, and they were 
admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and his 15-page answer to the SOR, 
along with the several enclosures, was admitted as Exhibit A. The transcript of hearing 
was received on November 17, 2016.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee who has a security clearance for his job as a 
software engineer for a company doing business in the defense industry. He has 
worked for this company since 2007. Before that, he worked as a software engineer for 
another company in the defense industry during 2004-2007. He has held a security 
clearance with the Defense Department since 2005. His educational background 
includes a bachelor’s degree in computer science engineering. He is married, and he 
and his wife have two young children.   
 
 The SOR alleged and Applicant admits that he allowed his spouse to use his 
identity from August 2012 through April 2014 to work as an independent contractor for 
an online-media company.2 Beginning in 2011, his spouse had a part-time as an 
independent contractor for the same online-media company. The part-time job suited 
her because the work was infrequent and there were no set or expected hours. It was in 
addition to her full-time employment. When her contract expired in 2011 or 2012, she 
applied several times to renew the contract, but she was declined. Their second child 
was born in May 2012. In addition, Applicant learned in February 2012 that the program 
he was working on was likely to be cancelled and he could be laid off as a result.  
 
At the time, Applicant and his spouse were concerned about the stability of his 
employment, they were concerned that she would not be able to maintain full-time 
employment and with two young children at home, they were relatively new parents with 
a three-year-child and a new infant, and they had a minimal support network in their 
state of residence. They decided to apply for a contract with the online-media company 
using his identity. The application process was online, it did not include submission of a 
resume, and it did not include an in-person interview. Applicant received a contract from 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were published in 
the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 Exhibit A.  
 
 
3 
 
the online-media company. By the end of 2012, the program he was working on was 
cancelled, but his employer moved him to work on other programs and he was never 
unemployed. His spouse performed the work for the online-media company using 
Applicant’s identity from about August 2012 through April 2014. He estimates they 
earned about $3,000 during this period, and they paid all required taxes on the 
earnings.3    
 
Applicant was required to complete a security clearance application in 
September 2013 as part of a periodic reinvestigation.4 In doing so, he was required to 
list all of his employment activities, including self-employment, going back ten years. He 
did not list employment with the online-media company that began in 2012 and was 
then ongoing. About two months later in November 2013, he was interviewed during the 
course of his background investigation.5 During the interview, he voluntarily disclosed 
and explained the circumstances of employment with the online-media company. He 
disclosed the employment information because he wanted to provide a full and honest 
account of his activities as part of his commitment to national security. He also indicated 
in the interview that they planned to continue to have his spouse work for the online-
media company under his name and would do so until they were told it cannot continue. 
Subsequently, he and his spouse decided to not renew the contract and the work ended 
in April 2014.6  
 
Applicant apologized for his lack of judgment and expressed remorse for his 
actions. He recognized that he did give much thought to the consequences of his 
actions. He also expressed that his spouse appreciates the fact that they made a poor 
decision, and that she is in turmoil over this case. She described Applicant as an 
incredible husband and father, a model employee, and an honorable, ethical, 
trustworthy, and reliable person.7    
 
In addition to full-time employment and parenting two young children, Applicant 
finds time for other activities. He and his family are members of a church, they have 
donated food and household goods to support church programs, and he has 
volunteered at the church. He and his spouse have volunteered to support their 
children’s preschool and kindergarten. His family has also volunteered and supported 
charitable programs through his employer as well as supporting other charitable causes. 
He has an excellent financial history as reflected by a credit score of 809, which is 
considered quite high or exceptional.8 He has a good if not excellent employment 
                                                          
3 Tr. 24-25.  
 
4 Exhibit 1.  
 
5 Exhibit 2.  
 
6 Tr. 40-41.  
 
7 Exhibit A.  
 
8 Exhibit A.  
 
 
4 
 
record, and his manager and coworkers hold him in high regard, describing him as a 
competent, professional, and trustworthy person.9   
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.10 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”11 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.12 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.13 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.14 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.15 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.16 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.17 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.18 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19 
                                                          
9 Exhibit A.  
 
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (no right to a security 
clearance).  
 
11 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
18 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
5 
 
Discussion 
  
 Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about [a person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.”20 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information  
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
AG ¶ 17(a) the [person] made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
[person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(d) the [person] has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that cause untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.    
 
 I have considered Applicant’s case, which is a bit unusual, the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include his knowledgeable and voluntary participation, his 
age and maturity at the time, to include the stressors he then felt, and that there was no 
unjust enrichment as the money was earned by his spouse’s labor. I also considered his 
good employment record, his constructive community involvement, and the passage of 
time since the conduct ended in August 2014. And I gave special consideration to his 
voluntary self-report of the information during the 2013 background investigation, and 
the fact that he has since been truthful and complete in responding to questions.  
 
 Nevertheless, the favorable matters do not outweigh and overcome the nature, 
extent, and seriousness of the conduct. Concerned about their financial situation, both 
Applicant and his spouse decided to provide false or misleading information to the 
online-media company to obtain employment. The misrepresentation was not a one-
time, isolated, or infrequent event, because the course of conduct played out over 
nearly a two-year period. Although the $3,000 was earned by the labor of his spouse, 
the money was obtained under false pretenses because the online-media company no 
                                                          
20 AG ¶ 15.  
 
 
6 
 
doubt thought they had hired Applicant, not his spouse, to perform the work. This type 
of conduct has a connection or nexus to an applicant’s security suitability. It does not 
take much to imagine a situation where a cleared employee in the defense industry is 
presented with a financial incentive or reason to bend, skirt, or break the rules 
concerning the proper handling and safeguard of classified information.     
 
 Applicant’s poor judgment and lack of integrity associated with the false or 
misleading information provided to an employer create doubt about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. The law 
requires that the doubt be resolved in favor of protecting national security. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also considered the 
whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden 
of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
