 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-07288 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 25, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudication Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline J, criminal conduct. 
The DOD CAF acted the DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 20, 2016. He requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. I was assigned to the case on September 28, 2016. A notice of 
hearing was issued on December 12, 2016, setting the hearing for January 10, 2017. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were admitted into evidence without any objection. Department 
Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
offered exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted into evidence without any 
objections. The record was left open for submission of additional evidence. Applicant 
timely submitted AE E through J, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling about $21,058. Applicant admitted 
all the debts except for ¶ 1.g, which he denied. He further explained that the admitted 
debts were either paid or he was making payments on them. The SOR also alleged four 
criminal offenses arising out of his driving on a suspended license, speeding, and two 
failure to appear charges. He admitted those allegations and explained they were all 
resolved. The admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He recently married for the second time. He was 
married to his first wife from 2006 to 2013. He has a child (age 7) from his first marriage 
for whom he pays child support. He also pays alimony to his ex-wife. Since 2013, he 
has been a senior data analyst for a defense contractor. He was unemployed between 
January and May 2013. He is several credits short of attaining his bachelor’s degree, 
which he expects to achieve in September 2017. He served in the Marine Corps for 
eight years, from 2005 to 2013. He deployed four times to combat locations. He earned 
several decorations during his deployments, including two Navy Achievement Medals 
with combat valor devices. Upon his discharge in 2013, he was diagnosed with Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). It was during this time that he also went through his 
divorce from his first wife.1 
   
 After Applicant was discharged from the Marine Corps in 2013, he experienced 
some difficulty returning to civilian life. As stated above, he was diagnosed with PTSD 
and eventually received a 50 per cent disability rating from the VA. He was prescribed 
medication for PTSD, which he continues to take. It was during this time that he 
received speeding tickets, and when he could not pay them, he failed to make required 
court appearances. His finances were stretched at the time because he was ordered to 
pay alimony to his ex-wife. He admitted this was a bad time in his life. In 2015 and early 
2016, he paid the traffic tickets and took care of the outstanding warrants for failure to 
appear. He received a valid driver’s license in September 2016. He has had no 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 18-19, 29, 47, 57; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
additional speeding, driving with a suspended license, or failure to appear offenses 
since then.2  
 
 Applicant’s emotional state after separating from the Marine Corps also affected 
his finances. Two judgments were entered against him for failure to pay rent, and both 
were satisfied in 2014. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) He provided documentation showing that 
he paid six of the nine remaining SOR debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.h through 1.k). He 
disputes the debt at SOR ¶ 1.g.  As for the unresolved two remaining debts, the first 
was a joint credit card with his ex-wife. He contacted the collection company holding the 
account and arranged a payment plan. He has yet to make a payment, choosing to pay 
his other debts first. (SOR 1.c) The second unpaid debt is for a personal loan to make 
vehicle repairs. He became delinquent on this account and it was charged off. He 
contacted the collection company holding the account post-hearing and arranged a 
payment plan. He provided documentation of his contact, but he has not documented a 
payment yet. Concerning the disputed debt, Applicant stated he paid the debt. It no 
longer appears on the two most recent credit reports. It is resolved. (SOR 1.d) He also 
documented payments on two non-SOR debts.3 
 
 Applicant presented a budget showing that he and his wife have approximately 
$1,350 of disposable income at the end of each month. He is current on his child 
support and alimony. He has about $5,200 in a retirement fund. He sold his car to help 
pay for some of his delinquent debts. All of his current obligations are in good standing.4  
 
 Applicant presented two character letters from his current supervisor and from a 
Marine Corps colleague. Both write in support of Applicant’s integrity, honesty, and 
ethical behavior.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a trustworthiness determination, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 21-23; AE B, C, K. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-28, 30-31, 33-35, 37-41; GE 3, 4; AE D, G, I, K. 
 
4 Tr. at 41, 44-45, 49-50, 56; AE F, H. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to sensitive 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated multiple debts, which he was unable to pay. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individuals current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 Several factors affected Applicant’s financial well-being during 2013. They 
included going through a divorce, leaving the Marine Corps, and his PTSD diagnosis. 
While the debts are recent, he has made significant strides to rehabilitate his financial 
affairs. His financial distress occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. 
Additionally, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to establish his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
Two of the circumstances referred to above (divorce and PTSD diagnosis), were 
circumstances beyond Applicant’s control. He acted responsibly when he satisfied the 
outstanding judgments, paid six of the delinquent debts, and contacted the collection 
companies for the remaining two debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has either paid or made payment arrangements for all his delinquent 
accounts, except for the debt he disputes. Most importantly, the two judgments have 
been addressed. The remaining two unresolved accounts are in settlement discussions 
and he has shown positive efforts towards resolving these as well. Both AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) apply. Applicant’s dispute of SOR ¶ 1.g as a valid debt is supported by the 
debts absence on two recent credit reports. AG ¶ 20(e) applies. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
In 2013 and 2014, Applicant was arrested for failure to appear, driving on a 
suspended license, and speeding charges. I find that both disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
  
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant went through a difficult period in his life after his Marine Corps 
discharge. He admitted not addressing his personal issues as he should have. Once he 
received assistance from the VA for PTSD, he began addressing his problems. He paid 
all the fines associated with the above charges and had his driver’s license reinstated. 
He has not had any further criminal or driving offenses since those listed in the SOR, 
 
7 
 
 
which is over two years. Now that Applicant has his PTSD under control, recurrence of 
similar behavior is unlikely. He successfully rehabilitated his behavior. His past actions 
did not affect his overall trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. Both AG ¶¶ 
32(a) and 32(d) apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a sensitive position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position 
of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service and the personal issues he faced upon his discharge. I also considered the 
circumstances by which he fell behind in his finances and incurred criminal charges, 
and the efforts he has made to recover since then. Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns in this case.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations and Guideline J, criminal conduct,  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:    For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
