1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 15-01772 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
March 16, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax 
years 2009 through 2012, and is alleged to be delinquent on seven debts, in a total 
exceeding $24,347. Applicant recently filed his delinquent tax returns and has resolved 
a few of his delinquent accounts. However, concerns about his judgment and 
trustworthiness remain unmitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 4, 2013, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On September 22, 2015, the Department of Defense 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
On November 24, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on March 2, 2016. The Government’s 
submission included Government Items 1 through 6. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was received by Applicant on March 10, 2016. He was 
afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. In his timely response to the FORM, Applicant 
submitted a set of documents, marked collectively as his Reply. Applicant noted no 
objections to Items 1 through 6 in his Reply, and they were admitted into the record. 
Department Counsel had no objections to the Reply and it was admitted. The case was 
assigned to me on November 1, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 67 years old. He has been employed by his current employer, a 
defense contractor, since 1995. Applicant is legally separated from his wife. They 
separated in 2012. (Item 3; Answer; Reply.) 
 
 As alleged in the SOR, Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2009 through 2012 in a timely manner, and was delinquent on 
seven debts, in a total exceeding $24,347. Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations 
His delinquent debts are identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. (Answer; 
Item 5; Item 6.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial delinquencies to his wife’s addiction to 
prescription pain killers during the course of their marriage. She hid bills from him and 
did not pay them. Further, the amount of alimony he had to pay his wife as part of their 
legal separation agreement prohibited him from addressing the delinquent debts in an 
expedient manner. He worked two jobs to make ends meet, but has suffered cutbacks. 
(Answer; Reply.) Because he worked two jobs, he would let mail build up, unopened. 
He believes that is ex-wife threw out his tax documents. (Reply.) 
  
 As alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b, Applicant failed to file his Federal 
and state income tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2012 in a timely manner. He 
explained that he “was trying to keep [the] office for [his] business going but things were 
always moved around. Several things turned up missing in [his] house, [his] business 
paperwork and tax papers were taken out [of his] filing cabinet, [he] think[s] in trying to 
find out [his] total income for divorce.” (Reply.) Applicant produced e-file confirmations 
that show that his 2012, 2013, and 2014 Federal income tax returns were filed between 
February 26, 2015, and May 11, 2015. He presented an email from a certified public 
accountant that stated Applicant’s “2011 tax return could not be e-filed, but it was 
mailed. [His] Federal and [state] tax filings are up to date through 2014 and the 2015 tax 
returns are on extension.” (Reply.) Applicant failed to provide documentation specifically 
relating to his 2009 and 2010 Federal income tax returns and his state income tax 
returns for 2009 through 2012, other than this blanket statement from his CPA.  
 
3 
 
 As alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.c, Applicant is delinquent on a medical 
account in the total amounts of $115. This debt has been delinquent since 2013. In his 
Answer, Applicant indicated he was not aware of this debt, but had health insurance 
that should have covered all medical expenses. In his Reply, he indicated, “This Item I 
think was paid to credit agency[.] I am still working this one doctor’s office won’t accept 
payment . . . Did not open [two] bills I received.” This debt is unresolved. (Item 5; 
Reply.) 
 
As alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d, Applicant is delinquent on a medical 
account in the total amount of $66. This debt has been delinquent since 2011. Applicant 
claimed he paid this bill on December 1, 2016. However, the documentation provided 
does not appear to match up with this debt. This debt is unresolved. (Item 5; Reply.)  
 
As alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e, Applicant was indebted to a cable 
company in the amount of $124. This debt became delinquent in 2011. Applicant 
presented an account statement from this creditor that shows a zero balance. This debt 
is resolved. (Item 5; Reply.) 
 
As alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.f, Applicant was indebted to a collection 
agent in the amount of $22,766. This debt became delinquent in 2014. Applicant 
claimed that this debt was for student loans, which he has rehabilitated. He presented 
an account statement from a subsequent collection agent, stating that his current 
balance on this debt is $16,901.36. Applicant is resolving this debt. (Item 5; Reply.) 
 
As alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.g, Applicant is indebted to a 
telecommunications company in the amount of $341. This debt has been delinquent 
since 2010. Applicant claimed this debt was paid, but failed to present documentation to 
support his claim. It is unresolved. (Item 6; Reply.) 
 
As alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.h, Applicant is indebted to a collection agent 
in the amount of $785. This debt became delinquent in 2012. Applicant claimed to have 
disputed this debt, but failed to present documentation to support this claim. It is 
unresolved. (Item 6; Reply.) 
 
As alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.i, Applicant was indebted on an unpaid 
speeding ticket in the amount of $150. This debt became delinquent in 2010. Applicant 
presented a copy of a bank statement that shows he resolved this debt in full on 
December 2, 2015. (Item 6; Reply.)  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence establishing his current income or household 
budget. He offered no evidence of financial counseling or of other indicators of financial 
responsibility. The record lacks any evidence concerning the quality of Applicant’s 
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record 
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I 
was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he 
elected to have his case decided without a hearing.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports in evidence, which substantiate all of the allegations. While he has resolved the 
debts identified in subparagraphs 1.e and 1.i; and is making payments toward the debt 
in subparagraph 1.f, he remains indebted the creditors listed in subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d, 
1.g, and 1.h. He has been unable or unwilling to address these remaining 
delinquencies. Moreover, Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2009 through 2012, as required by law. The evidence raises 
security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden 
to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. Four of Applicants seven delinquent 
accounts remain unresolved. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems 
are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant established that his delinquencies and failure to file his Federal and 
state tax returns were caused, in part, by events that were beyond his control including 
his wife’s addiction and their separation. However, he failed to establish that he has 
acted responsibly under these circumstances. He has been separated from his wife 
since 2012, but did not address his debts or delinquent tax returns in a timely manner. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. There are no clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. Further, 
while he provided a statement from his CPA that some of his delinquent Federal and 
state income tax returns were filed in 2015, he failed to demonstrate reasonable or 
responsible actions with respect to his annual tax filing obligations. As a general rule, 
"[f]ailure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with 
well-established governmental rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules 
and systems is essential for protecting classified information.1 Further, Applicant’s 
history of not fulfilling his legal obligation to file income tax returns demonstrates a lack 
of the judgment and reliability required for access to classified information.2 The Appeal 
Board has noted: "A security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal 
Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other 
obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an Applicant's reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information as reflected in the Guideline 
F concerns that were alleged."3 Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20 (d) was not 
established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) has not been established. 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016.) 
2 ISCR Case No. 98-0608 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2000). 
3 ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015). 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
financial problems remain largely unresolved. While he was given the opportunity to 
document the status of his debts, he failed to produce evidence of actions on his 
remaining delinquent accounts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
