 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05490 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 10, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 29, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On May 6, 2016, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 15, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 8, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for September 29, 2016. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered one post-hearing Exhibit 
 
2 
 
(AppX) A on October 31, 2016, which was admitted without objection. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf, as did his wife who handles their finances. The record then closed on 
October 31, 2016. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on October 7, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. (GX 1 at page 5,) He has been employed with a 
Government contractor as a “Tool Maker” for “about eight years.” (TR at page 20 lines 
12~24.) He is married and has three children. ( TR at page 21 line 24 to page 22 line 9.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified two medical debts to the same provider totaling approximately $46,000. 
Applicant denied these medical bills, explaining that they should have been paid 
through his employer’s health insurance.  (Answer) The alleged debts were listed on a 
December 2014 credit report (CR), but do not appear on the Government’s most recent 
September 2016 CR.  (GXs 3 and 5.) 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
 Due to having jobs in different states, Applicant and his wife were living apart in 
2012, when he had a medical emergency. (TR at page 32 line 24 to page 39 line 5, and 
Answer.)  He had two gall bladder operations.  (Id.)  After his recovery, Applicant took 
his present job in the same state where his wife lived; and as a result, they both reside 
together.  (TR at page 32 line 24 to page 39 line 5.)  However, the medical bills, which 
should have been covered by his former employer’s health insurance, were sent to 
Applicant’s former address.  (Id.) 
 
 1.a.  The alleged past-due medical debt to Creditor A in the amount of $45,857 
“has been resolved and the status has been updated as paid”; and as such, does not 
appear on the Government’s most recent September 2016 CR.  (TR at page 23 at lines 
10~19, at page 39 line 6 to page 41 line 18, at page 43 at lines 2~16, AppX A at page 2, 
and GX 5.)  I find that this debt has been paid. 
 
 1.b.  The alleged past-due medical debt to Creditor A in the amount of $260 has 
also been paid; and as such, does not appear on the Government’s most recent 
September 2016 CR.  (TR at page 41 at line 19 to page 42 line 12, AppX A at pages 
3~5, and GX 5.)  I find that this debt has also been paid. 
 
  
 
     
 
  
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
Applicant accumulated a significant amount of medical debt, which arguably, had 
he checked the mail at his prior residence more often, would not have become past-
due. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
  
  One Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 is potentially 
applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. . . . unexpected medical emergency . . .), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 The evidence shows that the alleged past-due debts have been paid. His 
behavior happened so long ago, and occurred under such circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) provides mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
5 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
