 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
                
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07791 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
         For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On February 23, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
In his SOR response from March 15, 2016, Applicant admitted seven of the eight 
allegations raised and requested a determination based on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. On May 6, 2016, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
containing 10 attachments (“Items”). Applicant timely responded to the FORM with 
additional material. The case was assigned to me on March 21, 2017. Based on my 
review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate alcohol 
consumption security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old senior systems engineer who has worked for the same 
employer since 2007. In 30 years of service as a Federal Government contractor, he has 
never been cited for a security violation. Applicant is excellent at his job and in his field. 
He writes that he attends Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), received a coin for 18 months of 
sobriety, and undergone other counseling. Applicant has earned a high school diploma 
and a bachelor’s degree. Divorced, he is the father of three sons over the age of 18.  His 
children live with him while he helps see them through college 
 
From approximately 1979 through 2000, then again from 2007 through 2014, 
Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication. In 1980 
and in 1987, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence. He was convicted in 
both incidents. In about May 1989, he was determined to be an alcohol abuser while 
attending a state alcohol safety action program (ASAP), which he successfully 
completed.1 In about August 1992, Applicant was arrested for public intoxication, after 
demonstrating “foolish” behavior before the birth of a child. (Applicant’s SOR Response 
at 2) From 2000 through 2007, he remained sober until his wife left the home and took 
their children. This triggered a period of difficult times and, with regard to his alcohol 
abuse, a relapse.  
 
In about October 2009, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence and 
convicted of the charge in approximately March 2010. He was also sentenced to 60 days 
of imprisonment, with the sentence suspended. In approximately December 2011, he was 
charged with driving under the influence and resisting arrest. Applicant noted that during 
the arrest he was accosted by one of the officers and beaten to the ground, resulting in 
an ethics investigation against the officer, but he provided no corroborating official 
documentation. He further noted that the case was adjudicated nolle prosequi. 
 
In approximately August 2014, Applicant was charged with driving under the 
influence after his work team had lost a significant contract. He was convicted and 
sentenced to one year of probation and 180 days of imprisonment, of which he served 20 
days. He has practiced abstinence since October 2014.  
 
Applicant loves his job and working in support of the United States military armed 
services. He has completed numerous trainings, received multiple certifications, and has 
received several recruitment offers. His resume reflects a man who has held significant 
positions throughout his career.  
 
Applicant has sought help for his alcohol issues and provided certificates related 
to alcohol awareness and counseling from September 2015 and April 2015, as well as an 
attendance record for ASAP, reflecting sessions attended between October 24, 2014, 
through April 2015.    
 
                                                          
1 In the state at issue, not all ASAP training includes treatment with a licensed substance abuse counselor.  
 
 
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
Applicant has a troubled history with alcohol, including an ASAP finding and his 
admission that he suffers from alcohol abuse, although it is unclear whether that finding 
was made by a qualified medical provider or a licensed clinical social worker (LCSW). 
Regardless, he was charged with driving under the influence in 1980 and 1987. During 
that period he was also charged with public intoxication in 1992. Then, following a period 
of abstinence (between 2000 and 2007) interrupted by domestic upset, he was again 
charged with driving under the influence in 2009, 2011, and 2014.  
 
The following Disqualifying Conditions are available under AG ¶ 22:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence;  
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program;  
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, 
treatment, or abstinence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Under these facts, disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 22(a), (c), and (f) apply. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are available under AG ¶ 23:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and 
is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of [AA] or a similar organization and has received 
a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program.  
 
Applicant reinitiated sobriety in October 2014. Consequently, he has abstained for 
over two, but less than three years. Although he is now older and more mature, it cannot 
be dismissed that his 2000-2007 attempt at sobriety failed after six years of controlled 
alcohol consumption. However, there is no red line as to how long is appropriate in these 
cases. Other factors must be considered, as noted below.  
 
What is particularly worrisome here is the frequency of the very serious alcohol-
related offenses, offenses that not only reflect poor self-control, but demonstrate reckless 
behavior toward both himself and others. It can only be hoped five charges for driving 
under the influence and two separate sentences to imprisonment, including 20 days in 
confinement, have proved to be a wakeup call. It is in his favor that despite a relapse after 
his earlier therapy, he now continues with AA, is sustaining abstinence, and openly 
acknowledges his alcohol abuse. Although there are insufficient facts to raise AG ¶ 23(a) 
and (d), AG ¶ 23(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
 
 
 
6 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under the 
guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a), where 
available, were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old defense contractor with a long history of meritorious 
work in support of the defense industry. In no manner is his loyalty or work performance 
at issue. He has received considerable advanced training and success. He is divorced, 
but housing and helping his three adult sons as they matriculate through college.  
 
In disclosing that he maintained sobriety for six years between 2000 and 2007, 
Applicant reduced the number of years at issue in terms of alcohol abuse. At the same 
time, he also highlighted the fact that upset and turmoil can trigger relapse. There, the 
situation was dramatic, including his wife leaving him and taking their children. However, 
even the loss of a work contract contributed to his reckless driving of a car under the 
influence and being charged with the appropriate offense.  
 
Applicant is to be congratulated for his success with AA and his recent period of 
sobriety. It helps to some degree overcome concerns related to his earlier relapse after 
treatment and lack of a subsequent, successful repeat of treatment. However, in light of 
a nearly 35-year span, albeit interrupted, period of alcohol abuse, more time is needed to 
establish a record of sustainable abstinence or responsible alcohol use. This is 
particularly true absent a positive prognosis by a qualified medical practitioner or LCSW. 
At present, I find alcohol consumption security concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
