 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 15-04126  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
CURRY, Marc, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 15, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.   
 
On January 12, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR, admitting subparagraphs 
1.a and 1.c, and denying the remainder of the allegations. Applicant requested that a 
decision be reached without a hearing. On March 14, 2016, Department Counsel 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received a copy of the FORM 
on April 1, 2016, and did not file a response. The case was assigned to me on February 
13, 2017.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Note on Evidence 
 
The FORM included a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted 
on September 11, 2014. (Item 4) The PSI was not authenticated as required by 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to 
comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, 
deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. Applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM waived any objections to the 
PSI summary. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are 
expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. 
ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old married man with three children, ages 22, 17, and 10. 
He earned an associate’s degree in 1998. Since 2013, he has been working for a 
federal contractor as a computer technician. (Item 5 at 10) 
 
Since 2009, Applicant has incurred approximately $55,000 of delinquent debt, 
including a mortgage account and the deficiency remaining from a repossessed 
automobile (subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e). Applicant attributes his financial problems to a 
one-year period of unemployment beginning in September 2012. In August 2014, 
Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, as alleged in 
subparagraph 1.a. (Item 2 at 1) It was dismissed after he failed to appear at a meeting 
of the creditors. (Item 5 at 58) Applicant filed another petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection in 2015, as alleged in subparagraph 1.b. (Item 2 at 1) It was dismissed for the 
same reason that the earlier petition was dismissed. 
 
The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.c, totaling, $584, is a charged-off credit card 
account. In Applicant’s answer, he asserted that he would have this balance satisfied 
within 30 to 60 days. (Item 2 at 1) Applicant had an opportunity, through the filing of a 
response to the FORM, to submit proof that he kept this promise to satisfy this debt. He 
did not do so.  
 
The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.d, totaling $35,364 is Applicant’s mortgage 
delinquency. The property was foreclosed on January 15, 2015. (Item 2 at 9) In July 
2015, Applicant sued the mortgagor, alleging wrongful foreclosure. (Item 2 at 7) The 
court dismissed Applicant’s complaint in January 2016. (Item 7 at 1) 
 
Applicant contends that he is no longer responsible for the remaining SOR debts 
because the statute of limitations on their collectability has expired. Applicant consulted 
with a credit counseling agency in April 2013. He was told that he could not participate, 
at the time, because he was unemployed. (Item 4 at 2)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
3 
 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
4 
 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.” 
Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers the application of AG ¶19(c), “a history 
of not meeting financial obligations,” and AG ¶19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts.” 
 
  The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant’s financial problems were significantly related to a lengthy period of 
unemployment between 2012 and 2013. This triggers the first prong of AG ¶ 20(b). 
Applicant produced scant evidence to establish that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, as two bankruptcy petitions were dismissed because of his failure to 
attend meetings of the creditors. Moreover, he has provided no evidence that he has 
either paid or arranged payment plans for any of the delinquent debts. AG 20(b) only 
applies partially. 
 
  Applicant disputes the legitimacy of the foreclosure, as alleged in subparagraph 
1.d, filing suit for wrongful foreclosure. The court dismissed this claim. Consequently, 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
  Applicant’s contention that the he has no responsibility to pay the debts alleged 
in subparagraphs 1.e through 1.aa because they are no longer legally collectible may 
5 
 
be valid, but has no bearing on security clearance assessments. Per the Appeal Board, 
uncollectible debts remain relevant for the purpose of a security review even if they 
could not “be legally listed on a credit report after the passage of seven years.” (ISCR 
Case No. 98-0111 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 1998)) Neither AG ¶¶ 20(c) nor 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the whole-
person factors in my analysis of the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guidelines F, and they do not warrant a favorable conclusion.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.aa:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Marc Curry 
Administrative Judge 
