 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04003 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about her finances. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 14, 2016, and she elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 24, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on March 8, 2016. She was afforded 
an opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
She did not provide a response. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 2017.  
 
On February 16, 2017, I reopened the record to permit the parties to supplement 
the record. On February 28, 2017, Applicant provided a submission, and the record was 
closed on March 1, 2017.1 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-7.2 FORM Items 2 
and 4-7 are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 2 and 4-7, without 
objection. 
 
FORM Item 3 is an unauthenticated summary of an August 28, 2013 interview 
with a government background investigator. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised 
Applicant that she could object to FORM Item 3 and it would not be admitted, or that 
she could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it 
accurate. Applicant was informed that her failure to respond to the FORM or to raise 
any objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered 
by me. Applicant raised no objections. Given the Government’s advisement and 
Applicant’s education and work experience, I find her waiver to be knowing and 
intelligent.3 Therefore, FORM Item 3 is admitted into evidence as GE 3.  
 
Applicant’s submission included a cover email and bankruptcy records.  These 
documents are admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges two bankruptcies (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) and Applicant’s failure 
to pay her 2002 and 2003 state taxes (SOR ¶ 1.c.). Applicant admitted the bankruptcies 
and denied the tax debts.4 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. From 1990 to 2011, she served in the U.S. military, 
from which she was honorably discharged. She received a bachelor’s degree in June 
                                                          
1 This order and the accompanying email are admitted into the record as Administrative Exhibit (AX) I. 
Applicant’s February 17, 2017 email and Department Counsel’s March 1, 2017 email are admitted into 
the record as AX II and III, respectively. 
 
2 FORM Item 1 consists of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR. These documents are 
pleadings and are included in the record. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.).  See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”). 
 
4 Response to SOR. 
 
3 
 
2011. She has been employed full time since August 2011, including with her current 
employer, a DOD contractor, since July 2012. She has been married since 1988, and 
she has three children – ages 20, 25, and 29.5  
 
 In September 1995, Applicant and her husband separated for about eight 
months, leaving Applicant as the sole household income. They reconciled in May 1996, 
and they filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in August 1996. The dischargeable debts were 
discharged in 1999.6  
 
 Applicant and her husband have owned and operated multiple businesses since 
2001. Applicant started her business in 2001, and it failed in 2011. Her husband’s 
business opened in 2009 and closed in 2010. Applicant attributed her financial 
difficulties and January 2011 Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing to these business failures. 
The bankruptcy petition lists liabilities totaling $514,767, including state tax debts for tax 
years 2002 and 2003 in the approximate amount of $2,427.73. The April 2016 
discharge order noted that some debts, including taxes, may not be discharged in 
bankruptcy. Applicant has not provided evidence to establish that her state taxes were 
discharged in bankruptcy, pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 523. Without the final report of the 
bankruptcy trustee or equivalent records, there is no evidence demonstrating that the 
state tax debts were paid through the bankruptcy.7  
 
 Applicant denied owing taxes for State #1 for tax years 2002 and 2003 and 
claimed that she was living in State #2 at the time; however, her security clearance 
application reveals that she was in fact residing in State #1 from 2001 to 2005. She has 
not provided any documentation or further explanation as to why she is not liable for 
income taxes for State #1, particularly as she listed these delinquent taxes on her 
bankruptcy petition.8 There is no evidence of a plan to resolve these delinquent taxes. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
5 GE 2; Response to SOR. 
 
6 Response to SOR. 
 
7 Response to SOR; GE 7; AE B . 
 
8 Response to SOR; GE 2; GE 7.   
 
4 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
 
5 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s two bankruptcy filings and delinquent state taxes raise the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.9 
  
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant demonstrated that both bankruptcies were discharged; however, she 
provided no evidence that she has resolved the state tax debts. More importantly, she 
did not provide any evidence to show that the circumstances leading to her recent 
bankruptcy are unlikely to recur or to show financial responsibility. Accordingly, AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances largely beyond her control and (2) Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.10 Because the business failures hindered 
                                                          
9 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
10 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s ability to address her delinquent debts, they constitute circumstances 
beyond one’s control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances.11 Applicant made payments in accordance with two bankruptcy plans, 
and both bankruptcies were discharged. Although she is not required to have satisfied 
all of her delinquent debts to demonstrate financial responsibility, there is no evidence 
that she has developed a plan to resolve the delinquent taxes or taken steps towards 
resolution. Given Applicant’s two discharged bankruptcies, AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.   
 
There is neither record evidence of credit counseling nor record evidence, such 
as a monthly budget, to conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are under control. Given her recent bankruptcy, Applicant has failed 
to demonstrate that she is financially responsible. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”12 
Applicant provided documentation that her two bankruptcies were discharged following 
payments pursuant to a bankruptcy plan. She has not made good-faith efforts as to her 
delinquent tax debts. Thus, AG ¶ 20(d) only partially applies.   
 
To the extent Applicant disputes the delinquent tax debts (SOR ¶ 1.c.), she has 
provided no documentation to substantiate her dispute. Her security clearance 
application states that she resided in State #1, and her bankruptcy petition lists her 
delinquent taxes owed to State #1. She has not established a reasonable basis for her 
claim that she is not liable for the alleged delinquent taxes. Thus, AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply.  
 
Although there is no requirement that Applicant satisfy all of her delinquent debts, 
there is no evidence that she has developed and implemented a reasonable plan to 
resolve her delinquent taxes. Given her history of financial difficulties, Applicant has not 
demonstrated that that she is financially responsible and able to meet her current 
monthly financial obligations. Thus, I find that financial considerations security concerns 
remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010)(Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment.).  
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent state taxes. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   For Applicant 
  
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
