1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ADP Case No. 15-01243 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On August 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
regarding her eligibility to occupy a position of public trust designated ADP-I/II/III. The 
action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006.  
In a letter dated November 7, 2015, Applicant admitted the allegations raised 
under Guideline B and requested a hearing. I was assigned the case on June 6, 2016 
On September 8, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice setting the hearing for September 21, 2016. It was convened as scheduled.  
The Government offered two documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection, as exhibits (Exs.) 1-2. In addition, it offered a request for 
administrative notice concerning the Russian Federation (Russia), which was accepted 
into the record without objection as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant gave testimony. 
The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was received on September 29, 2016. With no 
additional materials received by October 5, 2016, the record was closed. Based on a 
     03/13/2017
 
 
 
 
2 
thorough review of the case file, I find that Applicant carried her burden in mitigating 
trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline B.  
 
      Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Russia. The request materials were admitted in evidence and 
designated as hearing exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant posed no objection, and I have taken 
administrative notice of the information set forth therein.  
 
Russia has a highly centralized, weak multi-party political system dominated by 
the president. It has significant human-rights problems, marked by restrictions on civil 
liberties, discrimination, denial of due process, torture, prisoner mistreatment, and the 
government’s failure to prosecute officials who commit serious violations. Government 
officials also engage in electronic surveillance without proper authorization.  
 
Russia is one of the most aggressive countries conducting espionage against the 
United States, focusing on obtaining proprietary information and advance weapons 
technologies beneficial to Russia’s military modernization and economic development. 
Russia is one of the most capable and persistent intelligence threats and aggressive 
practitioner of economic espionage against the United States. Russia’s intelligence 
services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to exploit 
Russian citizens or persons with family ties to Russia who can use their access to 
corporate networks to steal secrets. They have offered financial incentives to U.S. 
government officials and citizens to encourage the compromise of classified information.  
 
Russia’s attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic information 
represent a growing and persistent threat to U.S. security. In particular, many Russian 
immigrants with advanced technical skills who work for leading U.S. companies may be 
targeted for recruitment by Russian intelligence services. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old cardiac telemetry technician who has worked for her 
present employer for nearly three years. Originally from Russia, she is a naturalized 
United States citizen with family remaining in Russia as residents and citizens. 
Applicant has a United States passport. She is divorced and has a four-year-old child.  
 
Born and educated in Russia, Applicant majored in linguistic studies. In June 
2005, at the suggestion of an academic advisor, she undertook a foreign study program 
that would provide her with the opportunity to come to the United States to work and 
focus on English language skills. While traveling within the United States, she met a 
United States citizen, who she married in December 2005. They married due to mutual 
attraction, not “just to satisfy any type of residency requirement.” (Tr. 25) After the 
 
 
 
 
3 
wedding, Applicant filed for a green card that was predicated on her remaining married 
for three years in order to become a citizen. (Tr. 23) The couple separated and divorced 
at the end of 2007.1 Applicant returned to Russia to complete her degree in 2008, then 
returned and applied to remain in the United States permanently.  
 
In 2012, Applicant and a subsequent boyfriend, a United States citizen, had a 
child. The boyfriend lives in Applicant’s region and works for a private company. At 
present, the child lives with the now-former boyfriend. Arrangements regarding the child 
are made between the child’s parents. Applicant is close to her young daughter and on 
good terms with the child’s father. Applicant is free to visit at any time in a manner that 
works with her work schedule. At present, she only has one or two days free from work. 
(Tr. 37). Therefore, she visits with the child one or two days a week. (Tr. 26) Applicant 
provides her ex-boyfriend with $300 a month for the child’s upkeep. 
 
Applicant’s mother and father are 67 and 75 years of age, respectively. They are 
citizens and residents of Russia, where they have always lived. Both parents are retired. 
Applicant’s mother worked in the private sector. Applicant’s father is a medical 
practitioner who provided medical services while in Russian military service until he 
retired about 30 years ago. Subsequently, he worked in private practice. Both parents 
receive a pension from the government. Their overall income makes them “very middle 
class.” (Tr. 30) They own an apartment in which they live. Applicant does not send them 
any money because they prefer Applicant spend her income on herself and on their 
grandchild. They maintain regular telephonic contact with Applicant, generally 
discussing health and Applicant’s child.   
 
Applicant also has a half-sister who is a citizen and resident of Russia. She is the 
child of Applicant’s father from a previous marriage. This half-sibling lives far from 
Applicant’s parents in Russia. Applicant and her step-sister were not raised together. 
Applicant maintains limited contact with the woman. (Tr. 32) She noted: “I’m just busy 
and, you know, she’s older than me by 20 years. . . . We don’t have really any interests, 
so we don’t talk” (Tr. 23) They have not spoken in a number of months. (Tr. 32) 
Applicant does not have contact with any other individuals, family, or friends in Russia.  
 
Applicant does not have any property or financial interests in Russia. At best, she 
could inherit her parent’s apartment, or it might either pass to her half-sister or be split 
between the two women. Applicant does not know the value of the unit. 
 
In the United States, Applicant rents an apartment. She has no significant 
savings and only recently gained access to a 401k retirement plan through her current 
position.2 She currently earns about $45,000 a year. She has a car. Applicant takes 
classes and enjoys ballroom dancing. Dancing is her hobby, as is working out at a gym. 
Most of all, her scant free time is spending time with her child.  
                                                          
1 Applicant noted: “We didn’t get along. He wasn’t treating me right. I couldn’t stay . . . .” (Tr. 24)  
 
2 Applicant’s present position is her first full-time employment. Previously, she balanced multiple part-time 
and on-call positions. 
 
 
 
 
4 
In 2013, Applicant became a naturalized United States citizen. She has not been 
to Russia in over two years. Having surrendered her Russian passport to her facility 
security officer at work, she was told by Russian authorities that she could not obtain a 
visa to visit Russia on a United States passport unless she first renounced her Russian 
citizenship. (Tr. 37-40) She informed the Russian Embassy she was willing to do so, but 
she has found the process confusing, complicated, and protracted. Without guidance, 
she is unsure as to how to proceed with a formal renunciation of citizenship. (Tr. 38-39) 
 
Overall, Applicant asserts that she cannot be compromised by foreign interests 
because she does not possess or have access to any information or anything of 
interest. In her position, she cannot access patient information, noting that only the 
doctors and nurses have access to that information. (Tr. 42) She does not perform 
automated data processing, only cardiac telemetry studies.  
 
It is Applicant’s intent to remain in this country. She enjoys her work and her life 
in the United States, stating: “I love this country . . . I’m very loyal to it. . . .” (Tr. 47) 
Applicant loves this country because of its system of government, people, language, 
and opportunities. (Tr. 45) Her daughter is here, and her child is her focus. (Tr. 44) In 
concluding, she emphasized: “My life is here. My daughter is here. That’s the most 
important thing to me.” (Tr. 44)  
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [position of public trust].”3 As Commander in 
Chief, the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on 
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to 
have access to such information. Positions designated as ADP-I and ADP-II are 
classified as “sensitive positions.”4 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment 
to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, 
reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.”5 DOD contractor personnel 
are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.6 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
4  Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.1.2.3, and C3.1.2.2. See also Regulation app. 10, ¶ 10.2. 
 
5  Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
6  Regulation ¶ C.8.2.1.  
 
 
 
 
5 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a public trust 
position.  
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision.  
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.” The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.7  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
Furthermore, security clearance determinations, and by inference, public trust 
determinations, should err, if they must, on the side of denials.8 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s parents and half-sister are citizens and 
residents of Russia. The ADP eligibility concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 
as follows:  
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
8 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
 
 
6 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a trustworthiness concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
Thus, I have considered Applicant’s relationships to her Russian parents and half-sister 
in relation to these conditions. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with 
the United States, and its human rights record are also relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country 
has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent 
upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against 
the United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. AG ¶ 7(a) requires 
substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required to raise one 
of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a 
risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government.  
 
I am satisfied that the activities of Russian government agencies against U.S. 
interests are sufficient to establish the “heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a), and the potential 
conflict of interest in AG ¶¶ 7(b). Russia pursues active and aggressive intelligence 
activity against the United States, and is one of the most capable and persistent 
collector of economic espionage against the United States. Russia’s intelligence 
services, as well as private companies and other entities, frequently seek to exploit 
Russian citizens or persons with family ties to Russia. It has been known to target 
Russian emigrants with advanced technical skills who work for leading U.S. companies 
 
 
 
 
7 
for recruitment by Russian intelligence services. In light of these circumstances, 
although Applicant’s diagnostic studies are relatively mundane within a medical setting, 
the serious concerns that are raised by an individual with family members in Russia are 
still present in this case. Accordingly, Applicant’s mitigation case must be examined 
through the lens of heightened scrutiny. (See ISCR Case No.01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2003); see generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision where an administrative judge was determined not to have 
considered terrorist activity in an area where family members resided).  
 
In meeting this higher standard of proof and persuasion, an applicant is not 
required to sever all ties with a foreign country before she can be eligible for a position 
of public trust. What factor or combination of factors will mitigate concerns raised by an 
applicant with family members in a foreign country, however, is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable. An administrative judge’s predictive judgment in these types of cases must 
be guided by a commonsense assessment of the evidence and consideration of the 
adjudicative guidelines, as well as the whole-person factors set forth in the Directive. A 
judge’s ultimate determination must also take into account the overarching standard in 
these cases, namely, that any doubt raised by an applicant’s circumstances must be 
resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant in this matter:  
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S;  
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant was born in Russia, but came to this country in 2005 for collegiate 
study in English language. After a brief marriage in this country, she completed her 
degree in Russia, then returned to the United States with the goal of immigration. She 
applied for United States citizenship, which was granted in 2013. She surrendered her 
Russian passport to her facility security officer. She has expressed her willingness to 
renounce her Russian citizenship, but finds Russia’s protracted process to be 
cumbersome and confusing. It is her sincere hope and goal to remain in this country 
with her daughter, and to continue her career and life in a country she loves.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Applicant’s contacts with her parents are telephonic, and she is presently barred 
from returning to Russia to visit for technical reasons related to visa ineligibility. 
Applicant’s mother worked in the private sector, but receives retirement income from the 
Russian government. Applicant’s father, a medical provider, served in the Russian 
military in a medical capacity until retiring 30 years ago. He subsequently worked 
privately in his chosen field. He, too, receives a state retirement pension. Despite their 
pensioner status, their lifestyle and home ownership make them “very middle class.”  
 
Applicant has little contact with her Russian half-sister. There is no evidence 
suggesting any of these relations are currently influenced by Russian politics or are 
involved in government work. There is no evidence any of them are under scrutiny by a 
foreign government or foreign interests. As for her daughter, Applicant clearly has 
strong ties to her only child. Those ties are similarly possessed by the child’s father, with 
whom she shares the responsibility of the child’s rearing. In light of their present 
arrangement, it appears the parents are intent on both remaining in the child’s life, 
emotionally and geographically. Given Applicant’s sincere expressions regarding the 
child, her work, and her life, it seems clear that even in the unlikely event a risk should 
arise, she would choose in favor of the United States’ interests. After weighing the 
evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, and considering the heightened risk of 
potential foreign influence raised by Applicant’s family in Russia and in light of her life in 
the United States, I find that she met the standards set forth above and mitigated the 
foreign influence concerns. AG ¶¶ 8(a)-(c) apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 Specifically, I considered those findings of facts and described above that are 
relevant in light of the AG ¶ 2(a) adjudicative factors. I have also considered them in 
light of AG ¶ 2(c) and the Guideline B considerations. In particular, I note that Applicant 
voluntarily sought to emigrate from Russia in order to start a new life. I am persuaded 
by Applicant’s decision to immigrate to this country, enter her profession, and utilize her 
English language skills. I am also impressed by her devotion to her daughter, her 
putting the child’s best interests over her own, and the amicable arrangement under 
which both Applicant and the child’s father are raising the child. I am convinced that her 
contacts to Russia have been sufficiently mitigated in terms of risk. Overall, the record 
leaves me without questions about Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of turst.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
  
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of security to find Applicant eligible to occupy a 
position of public trust. Eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
