 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 15-03336  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that she resolved any of her delinquent 
debts. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 2, 2016, and requested that her case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
On May 6, 2016, Department Counsel prepared the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was 
mailed to Applicant the same day. She received it on May 12, 2016. The FORM notified 
her that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. She did not submit any 
additional information or file objections to the Government’s Items; hence, Items 2 
through 6 are admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on March 6, 
2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the four allegations contained in the SOR. (Item 2.) Her 
admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and divorced three times. She has five children: three 
adult children, a 16-year-old, and a 3-year-old. She is a high school graduate. She has 
worked for a defense contractor since May 2014. In June 2014, she completed a 
security clearance application (SCA). (Item 3.) 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts that she attributed to: (1) her divorce 
in August 2010, after which her income dropped; and (2) periods of unemployment 
from: March 2003 to November 2006; August 2010 to Mach 2011; April to May 2011; 
July to August 2011; November 2011 to January 2012; and August 2013 to May 2014. 
She received unemployment benefits during those periods. (Items 2, 4.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from June 2014 and March 2015, the 
SOR alleged four delinquent debts, totaling $11,530, including a May 2012 judgment for 
$1,759. These debts were reported to the credit bureaus between 2010 and 2014. In 
addition to admitting that they were her debts, Applicant stated that her former husband 
was responsible for half of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. (Items 2, 5, 6.) Applicant did not 
submit documentation to show that any of the alleged debts are paid, resolved, being 
resolved, or formally disputed. All of them remain unresolved. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she obtained credit or financial 
counseling, or sought other assistance to resolve her delinquent debts. She did not offer 
a budget or a plan to address the delinquent debts.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and (c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
 
4 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet her financial 
obligations, which began in 2010 and continues to date. The evidence raises security 
concerns under the above two disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant failed to produce evidence that she addressed any of alleged 
delinquent accounts or that similar problems are unlikely to recur. She provided some 
evidence that the delinquencies were caused by her 2010 divorce and periods of 
unemployment. Those were circumstances beyond her control; however, she did not 
provide evidence that she acted responsibly under those circumstances. She presented 
no evidence of financial counseling or a budget. There are no clear indications that her 
financial problems are being resolved in good faith, or are under control. She did not 
present documentation that she formally disputed any of the SOR-listed debts, or that a 
legitimate basis exists for her to do so. Accordingly, the record is insufficient to establish 
mitigation under any of the above conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for her financial obligations. After submitting Item 2, she received the 
Government’s FORM, which notified her that she failed to provide documentation that 
she resolved or was resolving any debt and indicated that she had 30 days to submit 
proof of the debts’ status. Applicant did not submit any information. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. She did not meet her burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:           Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
