 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------------------ )  ADP Case No. 15-05517 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for a public trust position. She produced sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the concern stemming from two delinquent student loan accounts 
for which she cosigned for a nephew. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on January 14, 2015. About one later on March 11, 2016, after 
reviewing the application and the information gathered during a background 
investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort 
Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), detailing a 
trustworthiness concern under Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR is 
similar to a complaint. The action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program (Jan. 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
2 
 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 She answered the SOR by admitting 
the allegations and providing a one-page memorandum in explanation.  
 
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so the case 
will be decided on the written record. On May 23, 2016, Department Counsel submitted 
all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.2 The file of 
relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on June 1, 2016. 
She replied to the FORM on July 26, 2016, with documentation concerning the student 
loans, and those matters are made part of the record as Exhibit A. The case was 
assigned to me on March 24, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the April 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of 
the Directive.3 Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant 
that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a 
waiver of the authentication requirement. Nevertheless, the record does not 
demonstrate that Applicant understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and 
admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that she understood the implications of 
waiving an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 3 is 
inadmissible and I have not considered the information in the ROI.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old customer service representative for a health-care 
contractor to the Defense Department. She has worked for this company since 2002. 
She is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public trust for her job 
responsibilities. Eligibility is necessary because her job involves access to sensitive but 
unclassified information.  
 
 The SOR allegations are limited to two student loan accounts that were charged 
off in the amounts of about $17,668 and $28,635, respectively. The SOR allegations are 
established by Applicant’s admissions and explanations as well as credit reports from 
January 2015 and February 2016.4 In addition, the credit reports reflect joint contractual 
                                                          
1 The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The 
AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting 
documentation, some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge 
Ra’anan notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some 
to present a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan 
raises a number of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a 
pro se applicant.). 
 
4 Answer to SOR; Exhibits 4 and 5.  
 
3 
 
liability on the student loan accounts. Other than the two student loan accounts, the 
credit reports do not reflect any past-due accounts.  
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant explained the following circumstances 
surrounding the two delinquent student loan accounts: (1) she cosigned the loans for 
her nephew who assured her that she would not have to worry about the loans, but she 
has since learned that he has not made payments since 2011; (2) she contacted the 
creditor to  make payment arrangements; (3) she learned that her nephew is in jail and 
cannot assist her with the payments; and (4) she stated that she has been a dedicated 
employee for the last 14 years or so. In her reply to the FORM, she provided 
documentation showing that in April 2016 both loans were settled for lesser amounts 
and that she would be issued IRS forms 1099-C for the 2016 tax year.5 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,6 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about a [person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information.7 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
                                                          
5 Exhibit A.  
 
6 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
7 AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
4 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) [t]here are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. She incurred joint 
contractual liability on two student loans when she cosigned the loans for her nephew. 
Her nephew then defaulted on the loans, a circumstance she was unaware of until this 
process commenced. She has since taken reasonable and responsible action to 
address the delinquent loans, which resulted in settlements for lesser amounts. She will 
be required to address the phantom income as reflected in IRS forms 1099-C when she 
files her income tax returns for tax year 2016. These circumstances show that she has 
acted in good faith to address the delinquent student loan accounts, and that the 
problem has been resolved and is under control. 
 
 To conclude, the record evidence leaves me with no doubt or concern about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. In reaching this conclusion, 
I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant produced sufficient 
information to explain and mitigate the trustworthiness concern.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:           For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:           For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
