                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 15-01801
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On October 18, 2015, The Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security  clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865 (Exec. Or.), Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 16, 2015, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on February 29, 2016, and did not respond with any information within
the 30 days permitted.  The case was assigned to me on December 16, 2016.  Based
upon a review of the case file,  pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated eight delinquent debts,
exceeding $41,000. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the listed debts with
explanations. He claimed he incurred student loan debts from five different lenders to
finance his education and could not address them all simultaneously as required with
the modest salary he earned with his first post-graduation employment. He claimed that
when his first job was eliminated by his employer, he was laid off and was out of work
for over a year. He claimed to have achieved a number of accomplishments: working
with a local police officer in building a local municipal skate park and receiving awards
recognizing his work efforts at a local academy, and other noted contributions to his
community. And he claimed that with promotions within his company, he will be able to
address his student loans.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old welder for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant has never been married and has co-habited with a woman since July
1992. (Items 4 and 6) He has two children from this relationship. (GEs 4 and 6) He
earned an associate’s degree in May 2009 and has never served in the military. 
Applicant has worked for his current employer since July 2014 as a welder. He
reported unemployment between July 2013 and June 2014. (Item 4) Between May
2009 and June 2013 he worked as a help desk technician for a non-defense employer.
Previously, he was unemployed between September 2007 and May 2009. (Item 4) Prior
to his unemployment, he was employed as an administrator for a non-defense
contractor between March 1998 and September 2007. (Item 4)
Finances
Applicant incurred a number of delinquent debts between 2012 and 2013. Most
of the listed SOR debts involve delinquent student loans that Applicant signed for and
received in 2007. (Item 5) Applicant’s listed debts are comprised of the following: SOR
debt ¶ 1.a ($51); SOR debt ¶ 1.b ($1,934); SOR debt ¶ 1.c ($1,021); SOR debt ¶ 1.d
($13,734); SOR debt ¶ 1.e ($9,874); SOR debt ¶ 1.f ($4,907); SOR debt ¶ 1.g ($7,211);
and  SOR debt ¶ 1.h ($6,234).
2
To date, Applicant has not addressed any of his listed debts that he can
substantiate, and they remain outstanding. (Items 3 and 6) He attributed his delinquent
debts to extended unemployment between July 2013 and August 2014 and expiration
of his unemployment benefits. (Item 6) Since returning to full-time employment in July
2014, he has made no documented efforts to address his delinquent debts. (Item 6) 
Endorsements
                                
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf. 
Nor did he provide any proof of community and civic contributions. 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
3
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
4
Analysis  
Applicant is a welder for a defense contractor who accumulated a number of
delinquent debts (mostly defaulted student loans) during recurrent periods of
underemployment. His accumulation of delinquent debts and his failure to address
these debts after returning to full-time employment in 2014 warrant the application of
two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the debts covered in the SOR negate the
need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). 
Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his latest credit reports and
provide ample corroboration of his debts.
Judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s unexplained delinquencies
and his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in addressing his listed debts
once the underemployment conditions that contributed to the delinquencies had
passed or eased, and his finances had improved. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3
(App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004).  Not only are his listed debt delinquencies ongoing, but he
has failed to address them in any tangible way.  Mitigation credit is not available to
Applicant based on the evidence developed in this record.         
                                          
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to his recurrent periods of
unemployment. His largest debts involve defaulted student loans. These delinquent
student loans (five in all) exceed $41,000 that fell into default and have not been
restored by Applicant to current status since he returned to gainful employment in
2014.
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay off or otherwise resolve
his debts. Available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibly.” Because Applicant has not taken
more responsible steps in resolving his delinquent debts, the second prong of MC ¶
20(b) is not available to him.   
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts and failure to
5
address them once he returned to full-time employment.  Resolution of his delinquent
accounts is a critical prerequisite to his regaining control of his  finances.
While unemployment played some role in his accumulation of delinquent debts,
Applicant failed to provide sufficient explanatory information about his failure to
address his debts after he returned to full-time employment in 2014. Endorsements
and performance evaluations might have been helpful in making a whole-person
assessment of his overall clearance eligibility, but were not provided. Overall,
clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited amount of
information available for consideration in this record does not enable him to establish
judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of his
accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, his lack of sufficient explanations for his debt
accruals, and his failure to provide any proof of  corrective actions taken to address
his old debts, it is still soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability
to repay his debts and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with the
minimum requirements for holding a security clearance. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.h:                Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
6
  
7
