1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-06689 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
    For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On March 23, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In his response, Applicant admitted two allegations, admitted two allegations with 
explanations, attached three documents and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was 
assigned the case on September 8, 2016. The matter was scheduled on September 8, 
2016, for a September 28, 2016, hearing. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
The Government offered six documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-6. Applicant offered testimony and offered no documents. The 
record was held open through October 13, 2016, in the event the parties wished to 
 
 
 
 
2 
submit additional material. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 11, 2016. With 
no additional documents forthcoming, the record was closed on October 13, 2016. After 
review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been in his 
present position since mid-2015. He is single and has no children. Applicant is a pastor 
who has earned a bachelor’s degree in business administration. Applicant was 
previously determined to be eligible for a public trust position. He received mandatory 
financial counseling in conjunction with both his Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition filings.  
 
 From December 2002 to January 2005, Applicant was a contracted project 
administrator earning $56,000 a year at a technical center. He was laid off when his 
company’s contract was not renewed. At the time, he had a rental apartment, an 
automobile loan, credit cards, unspecified medical bills, and a car note on which he 
cosigned for a former girlfriend. (Tr. 18-19) He quickly found employment as an interim 
business education teacher at a local public school, earning $47,000 a year. He worked 
at the school from January 2005 to April 2006. The $9,000 decrease in salary led him to 
“give up a lot of things, even down to the fact of moving back home with my parents 
because of the types of things I was going through financially with the changes in 
employment,” including losing a vehicle through repossession. (Tr. 17)  
 
In about April 2006, Applicant began a full-time position at a local college earning 
$42,000 a year. The job would last until May 2008. The $5,000 decrease in salary was 
the cause of concern. In the interim, in August 2006, he filed a petition for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection. His debts were discharged in November 2006.1  
 
In May 2008, after his collegiate position was eliminated, Applicant began 
working as a researcher for a temporary services agency, earning $10 an hour. In 
January 2009, things improved somewhat when he began working as a full-time 
substitute teacher earning $125 a day. In January 2010, he began a new job as an 
educational support specialist earning $19,000 a year. Then in May 2015, Applicant 
began his current position, earning $52,000 a year.  
 
Today, Applicant continues to live at his family’s home, paying approximately 
$500 a month in rent and, at times, contributing toward utilities. (Tr. 29) He has also 
been making monthly payments ($608) on a car loan for a pre-owned 2011 BMW, which 
returned him to vehicular ownership after several years of ride-sharing.2 (Tr. 25, 28) In 
                                                          
1 With regard to the sum at issue in the bankruptcy petition, Applicant stated: “it has to be at least 20 
grand or more.” (Tr. 20-21) 
 
2 Applicant opened two car loans, in 2012 and in 2013, respectively, for vehicles repossessed in 2014. A 
Lexus truck was for his mother and he does not recall the other vehicle. (Tr. 32-34) Therefore, it appears 
he was not continuously without a vehicle between the mid-2000s and the mid-2010s.  
 
 
 
 
3 
June 2015, however, he filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. His more recent debts 
were thusly discharged in October 2015. He had been advised by counsel to pursue 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, rather than a petition under Chapter 13, because he had no 
significant assets in need of preserving. (Tr. 34) Applicant thinks the amount of debt 
involved was between $50,000 and $70,000. (Tr. 31-32) He points to his reduced 
income, credit cards, living expenses, student loans, and helping his mother financially 
as the reasons behind this more recent bankruptcy petition. (Tr. 29)  
 
Every two weeks, Applicant generates a net salary of about $1,400. Aside from 
his monthly rent and auto loan payments, he pays for a cell phone, gas, groceries, car 
insurance, tithing, credit cards, and student loans. (Tr. 39-40) He continues to financially 
help his mother as she manages her household, which includes Applicant, his sister, his 
infant niece, and a young relative.  
 
Applicant has two student loans, reflected in the SOR as allegations 1.c and 1.d 
for $28,340 and $14,380, respectively, have been consolidated. No payments were 
made on the student loans between 2005 and July 2016. (Tr. 57) The student loans 
have been delinquent multiple times, most recently in 2011, after the expiration of a 
deferral. This led to a default caused by “a lot of circumstances . . . home things again, 
trying to help out in areas and neglecting my own bills.” (Tr. 42-44)  
 
Applicant is not presently in default status on his student loans. (Tr. 44) After a 
loan rehabilitation effort initiated in 2015, he was considered to be in “repayment - good 
standing” status as of May 2016. (SOR Response, attachment) This repayment plan 
calls for monthly payments of $175.3  As of September 28, 2016, he had made two 
$100 payments on his loans for the 2016 calendar year, for the months of July and 
August 2016, although no documentation to that effect was offered. (Tr. 44-48) He 
hoped to make another $100 payment sometime in October 2016. (Tr. 56) No evidence 
of additional payment was made before the record was closed on October 13, 2016.  
 
Today, Applicant has the recent addition of a car expense and needed insurance 
priced at a higher rate due to his classification as a high risk driver.4 To regain control of 
his finances, he tried to offer some ideas “that are on the top of [his] head” to improve 
his financial situation. He stated that he is thinking about trading in his automobile. 
Applicant testified that he maintains a budget, but did not submit a copy of it for review. 
He concedes that his home life and helping his mother financially is “very 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
3 See SOR Response, attachment. Applicant provided a student loan obligation statement, dated May 3, 
2016, reflecting an original loan amount of $29,686 with a total current balance of $48,779. It indicates 
that he was in good standing as of May 2016 on loans opened in 2003, with an adjustable payment 
schedule projecting through June 2034.  
 
4 Applicant has received multiple speeding tickets. His driving record has led to monthly car insurance 
payments in excess of $220 a month. (Tr. 38, 65)  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
overwhelming.” (Tr. 66) He is living paycheck to paycheck. (Tr. 67) He believes he is not 
currently able to improve his financial situation.5 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
 
 
                                                          
5 When asked if there is anything that he can do at present to improve his financial situation, Applicant 
conceded that he is not ready to implement any measures at this time. (Tr. 67) 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced evidence showing Applicant successfully filed 
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005 and again in 2015. In addition, he has approximately 
$42,720 in outstanding student loan that has been in default, been delinquent multiple 
times, and undergone rehabilitation. Since that time, he has been late in his payments, 
and the payments made have been for notably smaller amounts than those scheduled 
under his payment plan. He concedes he is living paycheck to paycheck, and notes that 
he is not presently able to implement additional steps to improve his financial outlook. 
This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 
 
 
6 
           Applicant has had a work history that saw his salary generally decrease from 
2005 until he started his present job in 2015. He now earns close to what he made in 
2005. To economize in the early years of this downward slump, he moved into his family 
home and paid a nominal rent. Standing alone, these facts would generally raise 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) in full; as it is, however, it is only raised in part. That 
move also led to his contributing to the household utilities and coffers to a point where 
his own financial resources have been stretched.  
 
            In addition, Applicant mentioned that some of his debt was medical. This could 
raise AG ¶ 20(b), but that mitigating condition requires a showing that the individual 
behaved responsibly at the time. Here, Applicant did not describe the medical services 
obtained or relate how he handled the medical debts when they came due.  
 
While Applicant had one vehicle repossessed before his 2005 bankruptcy, two 
more autos were repossessed before his second bankruptcy filing in 2015. This 
occurred despite his recent ascent to a considerably higher paying position. At present, 
less than two years after his last bankruptcy discharge, he is living paycheck to 
paycheck. He has considered trading in his pre-owned 2011 BMW, although he has yet 
to take any steps to do so. Moreover, he is unable to timely meet the full amounts owed 
on his monthly student loan payments. Applicant has the willingness to honor his debts, 
as well as those acquired in aid of his mother and family, but he simply lacks sufficient 
income to meet his all financial undertakings and obligations.   
 
Finally, Applicant received financial counseling in conjunction with his two 
bankruptcy filings. However, there is no documentary evidence reflecting that he has 
implemented concepts from that training to better his financial condition. Moreover, 
because he did not submit a copy of the budget he devised in counseling, his budget 
cannot be better examined. Given all these considerations, none of the available 
financial considerations mitigating considerations apply in whole.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed in the analysis 
section, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a highly credible and earnest 36-year-old employee of a defense 
contractor who has worked for his present employer since mid-2015. He is single and 
lives in his family home, where he provides limited support to the household. He earned 
a bachelor’s degree in business. He has twice received financial counseling, in 
conjunction with his 2005 and 2015 Chapter 7 bankruptcy filings. It is noted that filing for 
bankruptcy, in itself, is not a bar to security clearance eligibility. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Applicant’s downward financial spiral began in 2005, when he lost a job. While 
his debts were then addressed through Chapter 7 bankruptcy, almost every succeeding 
job saw him earning less until 2015. He economized by moving into his family home. 
Standing alone, these facts tend to mitigate finance related security concerns. 
Contributions for the home and his mother, however, proved to be costly and lead him 
to lose two vehicles through repossession. Another bankruptcy petition was initiated in 
2015. This occurred despite his recent return to a salary level very close to what he 
originally had made in 2005. A year later, it was again difficult to make full and timely 
payments on his student loans and he conceded he was living paycheck to paycheck.   
 
This process does not require that an applicant satisfy all delinquent debts before 
the granting of a security clearance. It does, however, expect that an applicant employ a 
reasonable strategy to address one’s delinquent debts. It then requires documentary 
evidence that such a plan has been successfully implemented. Applicant has failed to 
do that here. This was not through sloth, an unwillingness to make timely payments on 
debts, or negligence. He simply lacks the income at present to address his debts in a 
timely manner, and he concedes that he is currently living paycheck to paycheck.  
 
With more time to implement concepts learned in financial counseling, and better 
planning with regard to his contributions to his mother’s household, Applicant has  
potential for better addressing his student loans and avoiding the need for bankruptcy 
again in the future. In light of the limited documentary evidence he presented, however, 
I find that financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1d:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
