 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-03169  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s October 2014 credit report showed old reports of two formerly 
delinquent joint credit card debts that were repaid from proceeds of her late husband’s 
life insurance. Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 1, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On December 1, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 31, 2015. She denied the two SOR 
allegations concerning delinquent debts, and requested that her case be decided by an 
administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On February 16, 
2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed to Applicant 
on February 18, 2016, and received by her on March 2, 2016. The FORM notified 
Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. She did not file any 
objection to the Government’s FORM, submit additional material for consideration, or 
request additional time to respond within that 30-day period. DOHA assigned the case 
to me on January 13, 2017. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. Her husband died in September 2010. She has no 
children. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 1992, and has worked for a major defense 
contractor, as a subcontract administrator, since January 2001. She has no prior 
Federal employment or military service, and has not previously held a security 
clearance. (Item 2.)  
 
 The SOR alleged two delinquent credit card debts, which totaled $23,971. The 
debts became delinquent in January 2008, according to the October 15, 2014 full data 
credit report obtained by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). (Item 5.) 
Applicant listed a number of formerly delinquent joint debts, which were incurred by her 
husband, on her SF-86. She explained that he had been unemployed for some time 
during the period leading up to his death, and used joint credit card accounts to 
purchase things without her knowledge. He had life insurance, and she used the 
proceeds of that policy to pay off all of those debts after his death. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 
3; Item 4.)  
 
 The $15,581 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was reported as a charged-off 
account in August 2009. (Item 5 at 5.) In September 2009 it was transferred to a 
collection agency, which reported that the debt was paid in full during January 2011. 
(Item 5 at 6.) Applicant’s October 2015 credit report confirms that this debt is no longer 
outstanding. (Item 4.)  
 
 The $7,990 credit card debt owed to a collection agency, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, 
was reported by Equifax during January 2011 on the OPM full data credit report. (Item 
5.) Applicant’s October 2015 Equifax credit report shows no outstanding debt to that 
collection agency, and the only credit card account reported by the bank that issued the 
card in question shows that it was paid as agreed, and paid and closed. (Item 4.)  
 
   
  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had two joint credit card accounts that her late husband used, without 
her knowledge, to accrue some delinquent debt before his death in 2010. No delinquent 
debt has been shown to be attributable to Applicant’s conduct, and she used the 
proceeds from her husband’s life insurance to resolve all of the debt he had previously 
incurred in their joint accounts. Applicant’s most recent credit report reflects no 
delinquent debt, and she has been fully employed since 2001. The record evidence 
does not establish security concerns under either of these disqualifying conditions.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s two allegedly delinquent debts were incurred by her former husband 
without her knowledge or participation. She learned of them after his death, and used 
the proceeds of his life insurance to fully resolve them. These facts establish clear and 
convincing mitigation of any resulting security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 
20(a) through 20(d). 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 
6 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took prompt action to resolve the financial issues created by her late husband, 
which underlie the security concerns expressed in the SOR. The alleged delinquent 
debts arose in 2008 while her husband was unemployed. She fully resolved all of the 
financial issues he had created with the proceeds of his life insurance policy. The 
likelihood that similar problems will recur is minimal; and the potential for pressure, 
coercion, or duress is eliminated by resolution of all formerly outstanding debt. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance. She fully met her burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
