 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 15-05986 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a lengthy history of delinquent debt that he continues to be unable or 
unwilling to resolve. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of 
the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on March 27, 2014, for a 
periodic reinvestigation. On April 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 
2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on June 30, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on August 12, 2016. The case was assigned to me on August 29, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on November 17, 
2016, setting the hearing date for December 6, 2016. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered no documentary evidence, and testified on his own 
behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until December 20, 2016, to 
permit him to submit documentary evidence. On December 9, 2016, he submitted Exhibit 
(AE) A, to which Department Counsel had no objection. AE A was admitted into the 
record, which closed as scheduled. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 16, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has worked 
since May 2003; except during a 13-month lay-off period when he worked for another 
defense contractor at a reduced hourly wage. He has held a security clearance without 
incident since 2004 in connection with this employment. He is a high school graduate. He 
served honorably on active duty in the U.S. Navy from August 1992 to October 1996. He 
has been married and divorced three times, and has two teenage children who live with 
him. (GE 1; Tr. 6-8, 27-30.) 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the ten allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d, 1.f 
through 1.h, and 1.j through 1.m, involving delinquent debts totaling $18,579. He denied 
the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, and 1.i. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in the 
following findings. 
 
All of the SOR-listed delinquent debts are reported on the record credit bureau 
reports (CBR) dated February 3, 2009; April 9, 2014; June 29, 2015; and/or August 12, 
2016. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) As noted above, he admitted the validity of ten 
delinquent consumer debts, some dating back more than five years, which total $18,579. 
Despite this admission, my review of the credit reports convinces me that the two $2,406 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c (to “AHM”), and 1.m (to “AMER HONDA”) are duplicate 
listings of the same debt by two different credit bureaus. Accordingly, the admissions only 
concern nine debts totaling $16,173. (See GE 4 at 3 and 9.) Applicant testified that he has 
not taken action to resolve these debts because he had no funds available to do so. He 
said that he intends to file for bankruptcy, but could not afford the cost of retaining an 
attorney or filing the action in court. (Tr. 37-49, 52, 55-56.) 
 
In January 2015, the state in which Applicant formerly lived and worked filed a tax 
lien against him in the amount of $7,459 (SOR ¶ 1.j). Applicant testified that he owed 
these delinquent taxes for 2012 and 2013. He said that he made voluntary payments of 
$250 per month to the state until September 2016, when the check he sent was returned 
for insufficient funds. As a result, the state began garnishing $300 per month from his 
 
 
3 
 
 
wages in November 2016. Applicant submitted a recent payroll form documenting the 
legally-ordered after-tax deduction of $150 from his biweekly wages. He provided no 
evidence concerning the current outstanding balance on this debt. (GE 5; AE A; Tr. 
44-46.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a concerns a $7,308 debt for a car loan Applicant opened in January 
2006 to buy a car for a woman to whom he was engaged at the time. He titled and 
registered the car in his name, but let her take the car when they broke up. She made the 
loan payments until the car was stolen at a time when the car was insured in her name. 
He denied this debt because he claimed that she told him that her insurance had paid the 
car off. He has not contacted the insurance company or the creditor to dispute the debt or 
otherwise attempt to resolve it, and offered no documentary evidence to support his 
explanation. The debt remains on his credit reports as a charged-off collection account. 
(Answer; GE 4 through GE 6; Tr. 20-21, 33-39.) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.i allege delinquent medical debts that Applicant denied because 
he said he had medical insurance. The former involves an $800 debt that first became 
delinquent on August 21, 2012. The second is a $75 debt that first became delinquent on 
July 23, 2014. Applicant testified that both debts involved the same hospital, but were not 
for any services he or his children had received. He said he had spoken to someone at the 
hospital to dispute the debts, but was told they were in his name and he owed them. He 
has done nothing to formally dispute, pay, or otherwise resolve them. (GE 6; Tr. 21, 
40-42.)       
 
 Applicant testified that he could barely afford to meet his current month-to-month 
living expenses, and had no funds available to address his delinquent debts through 
repayment or bankruptcy proceedings. He offered no evidence of financial counseling.  
      
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, A[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: A[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
 
5 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a lengthy history of not meeting his financial obligations, which   
continues to date. He admits having insufficient income to pay his delinquent debts, which 
exceed $24,000. His monthly income is barely sufficient to meet ongoing obligations. The 
evidence raises both of the above disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
Applicant’s delinquencies are ongoing, and he made no effective effort to 
voluntarily address any of his SOR-listed debts, including three that involved less than 
$120. His budget barely provides sufficient funds to meet his regular monthly expenses. 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). There is insufficient 
evidence that the financial problems are primarily attributable to circumstances beyond 
Applicant’s control, or that he has acted responsibly concerning his financial obligations, 
which would be necessary to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant participated in no financial counseling, and his inaction toward his 
admitted delinquent debts demonstrated that his financial problems are not under control. 
His only current payment toward those debts is an involuntary wage garnishment action 
for delinquent state taxes. Overall, the evidence does not establish mitigation under AG 
¶¶ 20(c) or (d). He did not provide any substantiated basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
SOR-alleged debts, so no mitigation was established under AG ¶ 20(e). However, 
Government evidence established that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.m are the 
same account. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a sincere and 
mature individual, with a consistent professional history of service in the defense industry. 
However, he has a lengthy history of financial irresponsibility and all record evidence 
indicates that his situation is more likely to deteriorate than to improve. His actions have 
neither eliminated the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress, nor made the 
continuation or recurrence of security concerns unlikely. Overall, the record evidence 
creates significant doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant (Duplicate of 1.c) 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
