                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  15-03338           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On January 17, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DoD
on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 26, 2016, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on August 12, 2016, and was scheduled for hearing on October
25, 2016. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on November 1, 2016.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documented payments of SOR
¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h.  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to
supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded three days to respond.
Applicant did not supplement the record with any documented evidence.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accumulated seven delinquent debts
exceeding $12,000 and (b) incurred a judgment against him in 2005 for $886. Allegedly,
these debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted two of the alleged debts: SOR ¶¶
1.a and 1.c. He denied the allegations pertaining to SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d-1.h. He claimed
that the accumulated debts became delinquent while he was unemployed. For those
debts he denied, he will be disputing the covered charges with the credit bureaus. And he
claimed he paid the imposed traffic fine alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. in connection with his
reported May 5, 2005 traffic citation.    
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31-year-old customer contact representative for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant never married and has no children. He earned a high school diploma in
June 2000 and claims no college credits. Applicant never served in the military. (GE 1)
Applicant has worked for his current employer since August 2014. (GEs 1 and 5)
Previously, he worked for another employer between October 2011 and August 2014.
Between March 2010 and July 2011, he was unemployed. (GE 1; Tr. 47)
Applicant’s finances
Between 2005 and 2012, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts.
Some of these debts were attributable to periods of unemployment. Others resulted from
disagreements with creditors and a co-tenant over payment responsibilities. Based on the
3
information supplied by his credit reports, he incurred delinquent debts (inclusive of a
judgment covered by SOR ¶ 1.d) as follows: SOR debt ¶ 1.a ($152); SOR debt ¶ 1.b
($696); SOR debt ¶ 1.c ($89); SOR debt ¶ 1.d ($886); SOR debt ¶ 1.e ($185); SOR debt
¶ 1.f ($10,881); SOR debt ¶ 1.g ($353); and SOR debt ¶ 1.h ($611). (GEs 2-5; Tr. 21-23) 
To date, Applicant has provided no documentary evidence addressing any of his
SOR debts. While he disputed several of the debts on grounds that some do not belong
to him (e.g., the SOR ¶ 1.b debt based on his claim of misuse of his credit card by a
family member) and others he cannot identify, he provided no written evidence to
document his disputes. (GE 5; Tr. 22) His largest debt is a delinquent rental balance on
an apartment unit that Applicant shared with a roommate between 2008 and 2010. (GEs
2-3 and 5) 
In his interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in December 2014, Applicant told the investigator that for those debts he could not
identify, he would research them and pay them once he confirmed they belonged to him.
(GE 5) Because Applicant did not provide any evidence to document the debts he paid
and those he disputes in the SOR, there is no practical way of documenting those he paid
and those subject to good-faith disputes. Applicant’s accumulated debts remain
unsatisfied and unresolved at this time. (GEs 2-5)
Applicant did not provide any evidence of financial counseling or budgeting. Nor
did he furnish any character references, performance evaluations, or evidence of
community and civic contributions.
    P   o  l i c  i e  s     
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
4
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
5
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts
(inclusive of an adverse judgment covered by SOR ¶ 1.d) To date, Applicant has failed
to provide any documentary proof of his addressing any of the listed debts.
Applicant’s accumulated adverse judgment and delinquent debts in issue warrant
the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts, inclusive of one judgment, merit
only limited application of any of the mitigating conditions. His extended periods of
unemployment between 2010 and 2011 account for some of his problems in meeting
his financial obligations and entitle him to some application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances.” Because he provided no evidence of his addressing his identified debts
after he returned to gainful employment in October 2011, he cannot satisfy the condition
in  MC ¶ 20(b) that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.
Without more documented information about his delinquent debts and corrective
steps he has taken to mitigate the Government’s financial concerns, Applicant cannot
demonstrate the level of financial progress required to meet the criteria established by
6
the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial
condition with responsible efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No.
08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s lack of documented repayment
actions of his own with the resources available to him prevent him from meeting the
Appeal Board’s requirements for demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan.
12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No.
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant has provided no evidence of
demonstrated efforts to date to address and resolve his debt delinquency problems and
provided no evidence of character references, performance evaluations, or community
and civic contributions.  Based on the information provided, a whole-person assessment
of Applicant’s overall trustworthiness is quite limited. It does not entail much weight to
his work experience, community and civic involvement, and management of his debts.
More substantial than any credit he is entitled to as an experienced customer contact
representative of his employer are the judgment lapses he exhibited in his handling of
his finances.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s payment
delinquencies (including the creditor 1.d judgment), Applicant’s actions to date in
addressing his delinquent debts are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements
imposed by the guideline governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are
warranted with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h. of
Guideline F. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.h:                      Against Applicant
Conclusions                                 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
7
                                        
  
8
