 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-02399 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 28, 2015, and he elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 14, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on March 18, 2016. He was afforded 
an opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns.  
He did not provide any response. The case was assigned to me on February 17, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-6.1 FORM Item 4 
is an unauthenticated summary of a January 22, 2013 interview with a government 
background investigator. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that he 
could object to FORM Item 4 and it would not be admitted, or that he could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered by 
me. Applicant did not respond to the FORM.2 Therefore, I admitted the FORM Items 3-6 
into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 3-6, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges six student loan accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.d., 1.j., and 1.k.) and 
five other delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e.-1.i.). Applicant admitted all of the alleged debts 
in his response to the SOR. He claimed to be participating in a student loan 
rehabilitation program; however, he provided no corroborating evidence.3 After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He graduated from high school in 2000, and he 
attended undergraduate-level classes from 2000 to 2005. He was gainfully employed 
full time from June 2005 to September 2012. After a brief break in employment, he has 
been employed full time for a DOD contractor since October 2012. He has been married 
since 2007, and he has a six-year-old child.4  
 
 The 11 alleged debts are listed within Applicant’s December 2012 and February 
2015 credit reports, as delineated below: 
 
SOR ¶  Creditor Balance Date of Delinquency Evidence 
1.a. Student loan $16,820 3/2011 GE 6 
1.b. Student loan $248 12/2014 GE 6 
1.c. Student loan $12,698 3/2011 GE 6 
                                                          
1 FORM Items 1 and 2 consist of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR. These documents are 
pleadings and are included in the record. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
4 GE 3. 
 
3 
 
1.d. Student loan $8,821 8/2013 GE 5; GE 6 
1.e. Personal loan $5,106 1/2012 GE 5; GE 6 
1.f. Medical $503 7/2013 GE 6 
1.g. Credit card $475 9/2010 GE 5; GE 6 
1.h. Utility $350 9/2011 GE 6 
1.i. Consumer account $216 12/2013 GE 6 
1.j. Student loan $11,492 3/2011 GE 5 
1.k. Student loan $14,751 3/2011 GE 5 
  
 Applicant attributed his financial indebtedness to becoming financially 
overextended using credit cards. He provided no evidence of circumstances beyond his 
control that may have contributed to his indebtedness or hindered his ability to resolve 
these debts. On his security clearance application and in his response to the SOR, he 
referenced a debt-consolidation program; however, he did not provide any 
documentation as to which debts were included or what payments he made. Likewise, 
his efforts to rehabilitate his student loans are uncorroborated. During his January 2013 
security interview, Applicant admitted the alleged debts and expressed an intent to 
address these debts. He has not provided evidence demonstrating payments or debt 
resolution on the 11 alleged debts.5 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 GE 2-4. 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The 11 alleged debts, which became delinquent between 2010 and 2014, total 
approximately $71,480. Accordingly, the evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The Government established a case for disqualification, thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
facts.6 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government.7 Conditions that could mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.8 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing, and there is no evidence that he has 
taken any steps to resolve or repay the 11 alleged debts. As a result, doubts remain as 
to his good judgment and financial responsibility. Thus, AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both (1) Applicant’s financial indebtedness 
resulted from circumstances beyond his control and (2) Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.9 Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to becoming 
overextended on his credit cards. His employment history reveals only a short gap 
between jobs. He has identified no circumstances beyond his control that contributed to 
his indebtedness or hindered his ability to address his delinquent debts.  Therefore, AG 
¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
There is neither record evidence of credit counseling nor record evidence, such 
as a monthly budget, to conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are under control. Rather, the absence of evidence of payments or 
other steps to resolve the alleged delinquent debts undercuts such a conclusion.  
Therefore, AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
8 Because Applicant has not disputed any of the alleged debts, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
 
6 
 
Although Applicant claimed that he was taking steps to rehabilitate his student  
loans, he provided no corroborating evidence. He provided no evidence of any 
payments made or steps taken to resolve any of the 11 alleged debts. Therefore, AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply. Absent evidence of debt repayment and financial responsibility, I 
find that financial considerations concerns remain. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant was provided an opportunity in his SOR response and in response to 
the Government’s FORM to show what steps he has taken to resolve these 
delinquencies, and to provide documentation. He presented no evidence of any 
payments or efforts to resolve his delinquent debts or that he can maintain his current 
monthly financial obligations. As a result, the totality of the record evidence leaves me 
with doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.k.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
