 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03844 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant used marijuana from 
1991 through 2012. In November 2003, he had been granted a security clearance. He 
has failed to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
  
History of the Case 
 
 On January 12, 20161, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,2 the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing drug involvement 
security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it was clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. On February 18, 2016, 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. On May 18, 2016, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for a 
hearing to be convened on June 9, 2016. 
                                                          
1 The SOR is incorrectly dated January 12, 2015. 
 
2 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Ex. A 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The record was kept 
open to allow Applicant to present additional documents. One additional character letter 
was submitted and admitted as Ex. B. On June 21, 2016, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted using marijuana and admitted 
some of the use occurred after having been granted a security clearance. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old engineer who has worked for a defense contractor 
since June 2001. He seeks to retain a security clearance granted in November 2005. 
(Ex. 1, Tr. 13) In September 2005, he divorced. He has a son, age 19, and a daughter, 
age 13. (Ex. 1, Tr. 13)  
 
 Applicant’s manager states Applicant has established a positive record of 
accountability, reliability, team performance, and ethics. (Ex. A, Tr. 21) His manager has 
known Applicant for 15 years and has never known Applicant to improperly handle or 
misuse classified information. (Ex. A) Applicant’s former manager stated Applicant 
informed him and the facility security officer (FSO) of his family situation. His former 
manager stated that throughout the situation Applicant maintained a great attitude and 
conducted himself professionally. (Ex. B) 
 
 In 2005, Applicant went through a “pretty nasty divorce” and custody battle and 
went “wild” for a bit of time following his divorce. (Tr. 22) He stated immediately 
following his divorce, he was “pretty hell-bent on destruction.” (Tr. 27) He was drinking, 
chasing women, and engaging in self-destructive behavior. (Tr. 27) For a year or two, 
he was a pretty regular weekend marijuana user. (Tr. 27) He then cut back to special 
occasions such as fishing, camping, and the New Year’s Eve party. (Tr. 27) In 2010, he 
purchased a home and started getting his life back in order.  
 
On Applicant’s March 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he stated he had frequently used marijuana from 1991 through 
2005 and occasionally used marijuana from 2005 through 2010. (Ex. 1) He used 
marijuana infrequently since 2010. (Ex. 1) He stated he did not intend to use it again for 
four reasons: first, he feared losing his job; second, he would be ashamed if his children 
found out; third, he no longer found it enjoyable; and, fourth it caused him severe 
paranoia. (Ex. 1, Tr. 18)  
 
 On April 20, 2013, Applicant had a personal subject interview (PSI) during which 
he provided an unsworn declaration. (Ex. 2) During his PSI, the only date he could 
specifically recall using marijuana was December 31, 2012. (Ex. 2) He was at a New 
Year’s Eve party when he took two puffs of marijuana. (Ex. 2) This was the last time he 
used marijuana, and he intends not to use in the future. In December 2015, Applicant 
 
3 
 
responded to written interrogatories stating he had been completely drug free for three 
years and had only occasionally used marijuana for many years before stopping. (Ex. 2, 
Tr. 18) He again stated he had no intention of using illegal drugs in the future because 
his family and job were too important to him. (Ex. 2) 
 
 During Applicant’s PSI, he stated from 1991 to 1998 he smoked marijuana daily. 
From 1998 through 2005, he decreased his use of marijuana to once a week, because 
he had children. (Ex. 2) He says this was only an estimate3 because there where 
periods of time when he abstained from all substance abuse. (Tr. 26) He also stated 
during his PSI that he had decrease his marijuana use from 2005 to December 2012. 
He stated his use decreased because he no longer enjoyed it and because he and his 
friends were getting older. (Ex. 2) However, he continued to use on a weekly basis. (Ex. 
2)  
 
 Ten years earlier, in April 2003, Applicant provided a sworn statement in which 
his marijuana usage was discussed. (Ex. 3) In that statement, he stated he had first 
used marijuana after graduating from high school in 1991. He said he had last used it in 
March 1998.4 (Ex. 3) He estimated he had used marijuana approximately 200 times and 
would normally purchase a $20 bag every two weeks. At that time, he stated he had 
stopped using illegal drugs before his son was born5 and he “knew it was time to grow 
up.” (Ex. 3) He was thirty years old at the time of the statement. He stated his intent not 
to use illegal drugs in the future. (Ex. 3)  
 
 Following Applicant’s December 2012 New Year’s Eve use, he regretted what he 
had done; he became fearful, and paranoid. (Tr. 28) He was ashamed of himself for 
“screwing up.” (Tr. 28) After 2005, his use was not continuous but had periods of 
abstinence. (Tr. 33) He did not illuminate the dates of those periods of abstinence. He 
asserts his use of marijuana never caused trouble in his personal life. (Tr. 35) He says 
he will never use marijuana again. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
3 Applicant stated, “The frequency, as I stated before was a little vague,” it was “fair enough to say” from 
1998 to 2005, he used marijuana weekly. (Tr. 31) 
 
4 Applicant’s statement concerning that he last used marijuana in March 2003 was untruthful because he 
was using marijuana weekly in 2003. (Tr. 31) 
 
5 Applicant’s son was born in March 1998. (Ex. 1) 
 
4 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
5 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
From 1991 to 1998, Applicant used marijuana daily. From 1998 through 2005, 
he used marijuana weekly. In November 2001, he was granted a security clearance. 
He continued using marijuana weekly until December 31, 2012, when he used at a 
New Year’s Eve party. He asserts there would periods of abstinence, but gave no 
information as to when those periods occurred or how long the periods of abstinence 
lasted. AG ¶ ¶ 25 AG (a), (b), and (c) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides two conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
   
Applicant’s period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate his intent not to 
use illegal drugs in the future. In 1991, Applicant started using marijuana after 
graduating from high school. He used marijuana for 21 years. During part of that time, 
he used marijuana daily and then weekly, although he claimed there were periods of 
abstinence. In his April 2003 sworn statement, he stated he had not used marijuana 
since March 1998. However, that statement was not true for he was using marijuana 
weekly at the time. In 2003, at the time of his sworn statement, he was 30 years old and 
gave as one reason for not using marijuana was that he knew it was time to grow up. 
However, he did not stop using marijuana and continued to use it until December 31, 
2012. 
 
Applicant continued to use marijuana for 11 years after he obtained his security 
clearance in November 2003. He asserts his most recent use is not recent and states 
he does not intend to use again, but he made a similar statement in 2003. Applicant’s 
November 2005 divorce and custody battle were traumatic events, but the possibility of 
 
6 
 
encountering difficult circumstances is a part of life. Additionally, his use of marijuana 
was not confined to the few years following his divorce. 
 
AG ¶ 24 (a) does not apply. Applicant’s use was frequent and did not occur 
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board stated 
in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997) if the evidence shows “a 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”6 
Applicant has a lengthy history of marijuana use while holding a security 
clearance. He used marijuana frequently, claims to have abstained for some period of 
time, and returned to using. His current period of abstinence is insufficient to 
demonstrate his intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. AG ¶ 26 (a) and (b) do not 
apply. Although more than three and a half years have passed since his last usage, his 
many years of marijuana use cause me concern. But I have not discounted Applicant’s 
statement that he will not use illegal drugs in the future. However, I have not given it 
great weight in light of his having made a similar statement in the past only to return to 
marijuana usage.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has good work 
performance, is professional, and has a positive record for accountability and reliability. 
To his credit he acknowledged his marijuana usage on his March 2013 e-QIP. However, 
he used marijuana frequently over more than a 20-year period. His use between 
November 2003 and December 31, 2012 occurred when he had a security clearance. 
He claimed in his 2003 sworn statement that he had stopped smoking marijuana in 
March 1998, but he was using weekly at the time he made the statement. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance.  
  
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances it is simply too soon 
for a clearance to be granted, but should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply 
for a security clearance in the future, with the passage of additional time, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E, Drug Involvement:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
