 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03916 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kel McClanahan, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. He amassed over $280,000 in delinquent debt, which remains 
unresolved. His efforts to address his delinquent accounts and the unfortunate 
circumstances that contributed to his financial situation are insufficient to mitigate security 
concerns raised by the sizeable amount of delinquent debt at issue. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for 
continued access to classified information. 
  
 Applicant’s hearing was initially scheduled for September 12, 2016. He 
subsequently retained counsel, who requested a continuance. The continuance was 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
granted and the hearing was rescheduled for November 21, 2016. The hearing was held 
on this later date.2  
 
 Applicant testified at the hearing and the exhibits offered at hearing and post-
hearing were admitted into the administrative record without objection. (Government 
Exhibits 1 – 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits A – X.)3 The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
November 29, 2016, and the record closed on December 13, 2016.4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a contract employee working for a federal agency. He has been 
working as a contractor for the same agency for over 10 years. He started as a mail 
courier and two years ago was promoted to logistics manager. He recently received an 
award for his exemplary work in support of the agency’s mission. He has held a security 
clearance since about 2009.  
 
Applicant married in 2014, and he and his wife recently welcomed their first child. 
They purchased a home in 2016. Due to Applicant’s poor credit history, the mortgage 
loan is only in his wife’s name.5 
 
 Applicant’s financial troubles began in around 2008. He had purchased a home 
two years earlier with his then fiancée. The home cost approximately $282,000, and they 
financed the purchase price with a first and second mortgage. Applicant subsequently 
called off the wedding and sometime thereafter his fiancée moved out. She refused to 
contribute to the mortgage and later filed for bankruptcy, which relieved her of financial 
responsibility for the mortgages.6  
 
Applicant submitted an application to the lender for the primary (first) loan seeking 
to modify his mortgage so he could pay it on his income alone. The lender refused, and 
Applicant’s efforts to sell the property to satisfy the debt proved unsuccessful. He stopped 
                                                          
2 Correspondence, documents regarding first continuance request, the notice of hearings, case 
management order, and documents regarding second continuance request were marked Appellate Exhibits 
(App. Exh.) I – V. 
 
3 Applicant’s index and Department Counsel’s position regarding Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits were 
marked App. Exh. VI – VIII. Department Counsel’s objection to the statements made by Applicant’s counsel 
in the index is overruled, as the index is not evidence. I have, however, considered the Government’s 
objections in assessing what weight to extend to the post-hearing documents. Directive, ¶ E3.1.19; ISCR 
Case No 03-21434 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2007). 
 
4 The record was originally left open until December 12, 2016. The following day Applicant submitted Exhibit 
X. The late submission was excused and the exhibit was admitted without objection. 
 
5 Tr. 12-13, 17, 66-70, 79-81; Exhibit 1; Exhibit W. 
 
6 Tr. 14-33, 51-55, 59-71. 
 
3 
 
 
paying the mortgage in late 2007 or early 2008. He was served with a foreclosure notice 
in 2013. He then moved out of the property and it was foreclosed in 2015.7  
 
Applicant incurred other delinquent debt between 2008 and 2015. He explained 
that, despite not paying the mortgage, he was still spending money on maintenance and 
upkeep of the property. After moving out of the property in 2013, Applicant’s expenses 
increased as a result of having to pay rent.8 
 
As of the close of the record, the status of the SOR debts is as follows: 
 
 First and second mortgages totaling about $280,000 (SOR 1.a and 1.b). These 
are the two mortgages for the property Applicant purchased with his former fiancée. He 
presented documentation reflecting his efforts to resolve the debts through loan 
modifications and short sale. His efforts were frustrated by his ex-fiancée who refused to 
cooperate and by the recent economic downturn which saw his former home’s value 
decrease substantially. Applicant also presented documentation showing that, following 
the 2015 foreclosure, the first mortgage was sold by the lender to its subsidiary. He 
recently attempted to contact the creditor for the second mortgage to work out a payment 
plan. He provided no documentation showing that either loan was canceled, forgiven, or 
otherwise resolved. As of the close of the record, the mortgage debts remain unresolved.9  
 
 Car debt (SOR 1.c). Applicant was involved in a car accident in February 2014. 
The car was deemed a total loss. Applicant was informed that, after deducting the amount 
paid by insurance, he still owed $2,800 on the car loan. After the hearing, he contacted 
the creditor and agreed to settle the debt through two $435 payments. He provided no 
proof of payment. The debt remains unresolved.10  
 
 Charged-off credit card accounts (SOR 1.d and 1.e). After defaulting on the 
mortgages for the property he purchased with his former fiancée, Applicant obtained two 
credit cards to re-establish his credit. He defaulted on both cards. In his Answer, he stated 
that both accounts were the result of fraud and he had hired a debt verification firm to 
dispute the matter. At hearing, he acknowledged both debts were his. Both delinquent 
credit card accounts remain unresolved.11 
 
 Charged-off jewelry and clothing store accounts (SOR 1.f and 1.g). Applicant 
provided documentation showing that he satisfied both debts.12 
                                                          
7 Tr. 14-33, 51-71; Exhibit X. 
 
8 Tr. 62-74. 
 
9 Tr. 14-33, 51-71; Exhibits A, G – P, S, X. 
 
10 Tr. 33-36, 55, 71-73; Exhibit T. 
 
11 Tr. 36-42, 73-74; Exhibits A, U. 
 
12 Tr. 42-44, 58; Exhibits D, E. 
 
4 
 
 
 Collection account for cable service (SOR 1.h). Applicant disputes the amount 
claimed by the collection company. A recent credit report reflects a $399 outstanding 
balance. Applicant acknowledges he is indebted in some amount for this debt, which he 
incurred in 2010. He provided documentation showing he returned some cable equipment 
that should have reduced the outstanding balance. The debt remains unresolved.13  
 
 Applicant received some financial counseling when going through pre-marital 
counseling with his wife. He was counseled during those sessions to take immediate 
steps to fix his poor credit. He hired a credit verification firm in January 2016, which 
advised him not to pay any of the delinquent accounts appearing on his credit reports 
until they had a chance to verify the debts. He also received some money management 
advice through the firm. As of the close of the record, the firm was in the process of 
sending out a second set of dispute letters. 
 
Applicant earns a yearly salary of approximately $75,000 and his wife earns about 
$55,000 as a public school teacher. Applicant states that, after paying his monthly 
expenses, he has about $250 a month in disposable income that he can use to pay his 
debts. He claims to have saved about $700, which he plans to use to pay his debts.14 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to classified 
information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
                                                          
 
13 Tr. 44-48; Exhibits A, D, E. 
 
14 Tr. 48-50, 74-82. 
 
5 
 
 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of financial problems from 2008 to the present raise the financial 
considerations security concern, which is addressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
Thus, the security concern is not limited to a consideration of whether a person 
with financial problems might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage 
in other illegality to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the 
circumstances giving rise to a person’s financial problems cast doubt on their judgment, 
self-control, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.15 
 
In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation was caused by a combination of financial 
mismanagement and some matters largely beyond his control. He made some efforts 
over the years to address and resolve his debts. Notably, he satisfied the delinquent debts 
listed at SOR 1.f and 1.g, and provided documentation to substantiate the basis of his 
dispute regarding the delinquency listed in SOR 1.h. These three SOR debts are resolved 
in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 Notwithstanding these favorable matters, Applicant did not fully mitigate security 
concerns raised by his past financial issues. Of note, he failed to adequately explain how 
he continued to incur delinquent debt while not paying his mortgage for five years from 
2008 to 2013. During that time, he took out credit cards to re-establish his credit 
worthiness. He then promptly defaulted on the cards. He has been aware of the security 
significance of the relatively minor accounts referenced in SOR 1.c – 1.e, including the 
delinquent credit card accounts, since at least December 2015, when the SOR was 
issued. As of the close of the record, these debts remain unresolved.  
 
 Moreover, even if I were to set aside the security concerns raised by these minor 
delinquent debts, the sizeable amount of debt referenced in SOR 1.a and 1.b and, more 
importantly, the serious security concerns associated with this significant amount of debt 
remains. Applicant’s efforts to address this debt are not enough to mitigate the concerns 
that such a large sum of unresolved delinquent debt poses as a potential source of undue 
 
7 
 
 
influence, pressure, or coercion.16 Also, Applicant defaulted on the mortgages in 2008 
and the property was foreclosed in 2015. He did not provide sufficient evidence of 
financial reform to mitigate concerns that similar financial issues will not recur.  
 
 Accordingly, I find that the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 20(a) – 20(e) have 
some applicability. However, even when these matters are considered together with the 
favorable whole-person factors present in this case (some of which are noted below), they 
are insufficient to mitigate the security concerns at issue.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
whole-person factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Applicant has held a clearance for over five years without apparent issue. His 
exemplary work has been rewarded by a recent promotion. This evidence, coupled with 
the mitigating matters noted above and the other favorable record evidence, raises 
favorable inferences regarding Applicant’s overall eligibility. On the other hand, a sizeable 
amount of delinquent debt, which was initially incurred by Applicant in 2008, remains 
outstanding as of the close of the record. Furthermore, Applicant did not present sufficient 
evidence from which I could draw a favorable conclusion regarding the likelihood of 
recurrence of similar issues. 
 
 Clearly, this case presents the proverbial “close call.” Under the Directive, DOHA 
administrative judges must decide any unmitigated doubts raised by the evidence in favor 
of protecting national security. See AG ¶ 2(b). Here, despite the strong and favorable 
evidence presented by Applicant, doubts about his eligibility, which were raised by his 
financial circumstances, persist. Consequently, Applicant failed to meet his heavy burden 
of persuasion for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f - 1.h:         For Applicant 
 
                                                          
16 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 15-02903 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2017) (remanding case to judge to explain how 
applicant’s efforts in addressing $125,000 in delinquent debt, which led to the debts cancellation, did not 
sufficiently mitigate Guideline F security concerns raised by the debt). 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
