1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-04679 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his eligibility 
for access to classified information. Applicant mitigated the security concern based on his 
use of marijuana. He did not, however, present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concern stemming from his conduct indicating a preference for a 
foreign country.  Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on January 21, 2015. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. Just over a year later, on February 10, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
     03/30/2017
2 
 
information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guidelines known as Guideline C for conduct indicating 
Applicant’s foreign preference and Guideline H for Applicant’s drug use. He answered the 
SOR on April 25, 2016, and admitted all factual allegations. He also requested a decision 
based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On June 10, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant and material 
information (FORM) .2 Included in the FORM were three items of evidence, which are 
admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits 1 through 3. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it on June 21, 2016.  Applicant submitted a written response to 
the FORM, which was received on July 14, 2016. The case was assigned to me several 
months later on March 10, 2017. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 3, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interviews that took place during the March 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of 
the Directive.3 Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant 
that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver 
of the authentication requirement. Applicant’s response to the FORM specifically cited 
that ROI by page and paragraph to support mitigation of his marijuana use.  Therefore,  
Applicant’s reliance on the ROI demonstrates that he understood the concepts of 
authentication, waiver, and admissibility.  Accordingly, Exhibit 3 is admissible, and I have 
considered the information in the ROI.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for his job  
with a defense contractor. He has worked for that contractor since 2014. This is the first 
time he has applied for a security clearance. He is a college graduate with bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees.  He has never married and has no children.   
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were published in the 
Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
 In his January 2015 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that he is 
a citizen of Italy, as well as being a natural-born U.S. citizen, and that he had a valid  
Italian passport. Because of the lapse of time between Applicant’s response to the FORM 
and its assignment to me, on March 20, 2017, I re-opened the record to ascertain whether 
Applicant still possessed a valid Italian passport.  On March 23, 2017, Applicant advised 
Department Counsel that he still held a valid Italian passport. In his January 2015 security 
clearance application, Applicant also disclosed that between 2005 and 2014, as a 
resident of State A, he used medically prescribed marijuana to treat insomnia.4  In his 
response to the FORM, he referred to the ROI pointing out that the Government’s brief 
was incorrect about the number of times he used marijuana in that time period (60 to 70 
times as opposed to 900+ times).5 
  
 Under Guideline C for foreign preference, the SOR alleged that Applicant (1) 
sought and obtained Italian citizenship in 2011, (2) possessed a valid Italian passport and 
used that passport to travel to certain foreign countries in 2011 and 2012, (3) used his 
Italian citizenship to receive health-care benefits and “non-foreign status” while he was 
employed in Italy as a professional baseball player. Under Guideline H for drug use, the 
SOR alleged that Applicant purchased and used marijuana with varying frequency 
between 2005 and 2014.6     
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.7 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”8 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.9 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.10 
                                                          
4 Exhibit 2.  
 
5 Exhibit 3.  
 
6 Exhibit 1. 
 
7 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
8 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
9 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
10 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
4 
 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.11 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.12 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.13 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.14 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.15 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16 
 
Discussion 
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
 
 Under Guideline C for foreign preference,17 the suitability of an applicant may be 
questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has acted in a way to indicate a 
preference for the foreign country over the U.S.: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she be prone to provided 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States.18 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 10(a)(1) possession of a current foreign passport;  
 
AG ¶ 10(a)(3) accepting…medical benefits…from a foreign country; and  
 
                                                          
 
11 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
13 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
15 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
17 AG ¶¶ 9, 10 and 11 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
18 AG ¶ 9. 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 11(d) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Under AG C the evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant obtained Italian 
citizenship in 2011, obtained and possesses a valid Italian passport, used that passport 
to travel in Europe, used his Italian citizenship to receive health care while living and 
working in Italy, and gained “non-foreign status” while living and working in Italy.  The 
evidence also supports the conclusion that Applicant lived in Italy from March 2011 until 
August 2012 while he was employed as a professional baseball player in an Italian 
baseball league.  Applicant needed to become an Italian citizen in order to play in that 
league.  He also needed an Italian passport whenever his team played in European Union 
countries.  When he played in non-EU countries, Applicant used his United States 
passport. He received health-care benefits while employed in Italy, but he never voted in 
Italy and owes no obligations to the country of Italy. It appears that gaining Italian 
citizenship and obtaining and using an Italian passport and receiving health care were the 
normal requirements and indicia of living and working in Italy.  I conclude that they do not 
indicate Applicant’s preference for the country of Italy.  Nevertheless, Applicant’s current 
possession of a valid Italian passport triggers disqualifying condition AG ¶ 10(a)(1).  The 
only potentially applicable mitigating condition is AG ¶ 11(d) (the passport has been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated). 
Because the record does not show that Applicant’s Italian passport has either been 
destroyed, surrendered, or otherwise invalidated, as required, this mitigating condition 
does not apply. 
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement  
 
 
 Under AG H for drug use,19 suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put 
into doubt because drug use can both impair judgment and raise questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to with laws, rules and regulations: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 25(a) any drug abuse (use of illegal drugs); 
 
 AG ¶ 25(c) illegal drug possession, including…purchase [and] sale…; 
                                                          
19 AG ¶¶ 24, 25 and 26 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment, and   
 
AG ¶ 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future such 
as:  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence.  
 
 Applicant admitted that he purchased and used marijuana with varying frequency 
from May 2005 to December 2014. His use was disclosed in his security clearance 
application.  In that application Applicant explained that at the time of usage he was a 
resident of State A and had a medical prescription to use marijuana to treat occasional 
insomnia.  He repeated that explanation in the ROI. There is no dispute that medical 
marijuana has been legal in State A since 1996.  Nevertheless, the purchase and use of 
marijuana, even medical marijuana, is contrary to federal law.20  In his security clearance 
application, Applicant stated that he does not intend any further use of marijuana, and he 
repeated that lack of intent to further use in his ROI.  In addition, the last time Applicant 
used marijuana was in December 2014, almost two and a half years ago.  I conclude that 
Applicant’s use of marijuana is mitigated under AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 26(b)(3).      
 
 In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if 
the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, 
I conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:           For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:           Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:           For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:           For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:           For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H                 For Applicant 
                                                          
20 Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance and its possession is regulated by the federal government 
under the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 811 et. seq.  The knowing or intentional possession of 
any controlled substance is unlawful and punishable by imprisonment and or a fine.  See 21 U.S.C. § 844.  
In an October 24, 2014 memorandum, the Director of National Intelligence reaffirmed that the disregard of 
federal law concerning the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana is relevant to national security 
determinations, regardless of changes to state laws concerning marijuana use. For more information on 
drug schedules, go to http://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml.  
7 
 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:              For Applicant  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
