 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04271 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal tax return for tax year 2013. His evidence is 
insufficient to show that he has good judgment and is a law-abiding person. He knew of 
his legal obligation to file his return and he failed to do so. He failed to establish a track 
record of financial responsibility and his ability to abide by rules and regulations. The 
financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 4, 2014. 
On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 14, 2016, and requested a decision based on the 
written record. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant by transmittal letter dated May 23, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on May 
31, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide 
material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not respond to the 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
FORM or submit any additional evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 21, 
2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
January 14, 2015. Applicant was informed he could object to the summary of his interview 
and it would not be admitted, or that he could make corrections, additions, deletions, and 
update the document to make it accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to 
respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be construed as a waiver, and the 
evidence would be considered by me. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM, submitted 
no documents, and raised no objections. I admitted the document and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole SOR factual allegation – that he failed to file his federal 
income tax return for tax year 2013. Applicant’s SOR admission is incorporated herein as 
a finding of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He completed high 
school in 1982, and that same year he enlisted in the U.S. Navy. He honorably served for 
20 years until he retired in September 2002. While in the service, he was granted a secret 
clearance in 1992, which he held until his retirement. There is no evidence of security 
violations or issues of concern, except for those in the SOR. Applicant married in 1992, 
and became a widower in 2003. He married his current wife in 2014. Applicant has four 
adult daughters, ranging in age from 35 to 24.  
 
Applicant’s relevant work history shows that he worked for a private company from 
2005 to March 2013. According to Applicant, the government shut down the company for 
Medicare violations. Applicant was unemployed between March and May 2013; worked 
as an auto salesperson between May and August 2013; was unemployed between 
August and November 2013; and employed between November 2013 and October 2014. 
Applicant also disclosed that he held a part-time job between 2009 and 2015. He has 
been working for his current employer, a federal contractor, since October 2014.  
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s 2014 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed that he had failed to file his federal income tax return for tax year 2013. 
Applicant claimed that he did not receive a W-2 Form from any of the four employers he 
worked for during 2013. He explained that he did not know to whom or how to request 
the 2013 W-2 Forms to file his tax return. (FORM, Item 3) 
 
During his January 2015 interview with a Government investigator, Applicant was 
made aware of the security concerns raised by his failure to file his 2013 tax return. He 
promised to contact the IRS within two weeks to resolve his problem, and promised to file 
his 2013 income tax return by April 2015.  
 
3 
                                         
 
In his April 2016 response to the SOR, Applicant stated that as of the date of his 
response, his 2013 income tax return had not been filed. He explained he had not filed 
his 2013 tax return because he did not have the 2013 W-2 Form; did not know how to get 
it; and he had procrastinated. Applicant anticipated filing his 2013 tax return in the next 
two to three months because he worked 10-hour night shifts and needed more time.  
 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM and failed to provide any evidence of his 
efforts to obtain his 2013 W-2 Form, to contact the IRS, or to show that he filed his 2013 
income tax return. Applicant’s 2016 credit report is clean, showing no delinquent 
accounts. There is no information to indicate whether he has participated in financial 
counseling or hired an accountant or a tax professional to assist him with his preparing 
and filing the overdue tax return.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
 
4 
                                         
 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s failure to file his 2013 income tax return is established by his SOR 
response and his 2015 statement. His behavior raises a disqualifying condition under AG 
¶ 19: “(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same.” The Government established the disqualifying condition 
in AG ¶ 19(g), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
 
5 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are recent and ongoing. He presented no evidence to show that he 
filed the 2013 tax return. Applicant presented no evidence of efforts taken to obtain his 
2013 W-2 Form, to contact the IRS, or to resolve his tax problem. In light of his lack of 
action, Applicant failed to establish that he was financially responsible.  
 
 Applicant was aware of the Government’s financial considerations security 
concerns when he completed his 2014 SCA. The Government’s security concerns were 
reinforced during his 2015 interview, when he received the 2016 SOR, and when he was 
provided the FORM. He was allowed a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to 
produce evidence in extenuation and mitigation. He failed to provide any documentary 
evidence to show that he is a law abiding, diligent, and financially responsible person. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered that Applicant honorably served 20 years on active duty in the Navy 
while possessing a security clearance (without concerns), and that he has worked for a 
federal contractor since 2014. Notwithstanding, Applicant did not submit sufficient 
evidence to show his financial responsibility. Applicant submitted no documentary 
evidence of efforts to file his 2013 tax return, or of efforts to contact the IRS to resolve his 
 
6 
                                         
 
tax problem. His evidence failed to show that he has good judgment and is a law-abiding 
person. He knew of his legal obligation to file his tax return, and he failed to do so. 
Questions remain about his reliability, trustworthiness, and his ability to abide by rules 
and regulations and to protect classified information. 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. 
Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed 
as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary 
for award of a security clearance in the future. With a track record of behavior consistent 
with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his 
security clearance worthiness. The financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
