1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-00605 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
    Statement of the Case 
On August 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
and Guideline C (Foreign Preference) regarding his eligibility for a security clearance.1 
In a timely response, Applicant admitted the allegations raised under Guideline B and 
Guideline C, and requested a hearing. I was assigned the case on October 28, 2016. 
On January 23, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice setting the hearing for February 28, 2017.  
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered two 
documents, which were accepted into the record without objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-
2. Applicant gave testimony and offered seven documents, accepted into the record as
Exs. A-G, including a request for administrative notice concerning certain facts related 
to the State of Israel (Israel). The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was received on 
March 8, 2017, and the record was closed. Based on a thorough review of the case file, 
1The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
I find that Applicant carried his burden in mitigating security concerns arising under 
Guideline B and Guideline C.  
 
      Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings  
 
The Government requested I take administrative notice of information regarding 
Israel. Applicant made a similar request, and offered what was accepted as Ex. A for 
consideration. After reviewing the documents submitted, as well as official documents 
issued by the United States State Department and other frequently cited country 
information offered in these proceedings, I take administrative notice of the following:  
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy of about 7.71 million people with a modern 
economy with ongoing regional security concerns. Despite the instability and armed 
conflict that have marked Israel’s relations within the region since it came into existence, 
Israel has developed a diversified, technologically advanced market economy focused 
on high-technology electronic and biomedical equipment, chemicals, and transport 
equipment. Israel occupied the West Bank, Gaza Strip, Golan Heights, and East 
Jerusalem as a result of the 1967 war. In 1994, the Palestinian Authority was 
established in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, although the Islamic Resistance 
Movement (HAMAS), a U.S. designated foreign terrorist organization (FTO), took 
control of the Gaza Strip in June 2007. Terrorist attacks are a continuing threat in Israel, 
and may be directed at American interests. The U. S. State Department advises U.S. 
citizens to take due precautions when traveling to the West Bank, Gaza, and Israel.  
 
The relationship between Israel and the United States is friendly and yet 
complex. Since 1948, the United States and Israel have a close friendship based on 
common democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. The Government 
notes that United States-Israeli defense, diplomatic, and economic cooperation has 
been close for decades. U.S. aid for Israel has been designed to maintain Israel’s 
qualitative military edge over neighboring militaries since Israel must rely on better 
equipment and training to compensate for a manpower deficit in any potential regional 
conflict. Arms sales, information sharing, and co-development of technology between 
the United States and Israel raises questions about what Israel might do with the 
capabilities it acquires. To minimize any such concerns, the United States enacted the 
Arms Export Control Act (AECA) that specifically enumerates the purposes for which 
foreign governments can use U.S. military articles and limits their ability to transfer the 
products to third-parties without prior consent of the U.S. President. 
 
The Government also cites to the 1986 case of Jonathan Pollard, who pled guilty 
to selling classified information to Israel; the 2005 Lawrence Franklin case, where the 
individual pled guilty to disclosing classified information to an Israeli diplomat and two 
lobbyists; and a 2011 case where a U.S. Government scientist pled guilty to attempted 
espionage, believing he was providing classified information to an Israeli information 
officer. (Ex. 3, Request for Administrative Notice at 5) In addition, the Government cites 
to five source documents, ranging from 2015 materials from the Congressional 
Research Service, the U.S. Department of Justice, and the U.S. Department of 
 
 
 
 
3 
Commerce; a 2014 document from the U.S. Department of State concerning travel 
information; and a 2006 Office of National Counterintelligence Executive Annual Report.  
 
Concerning the Government’s request that I take administrative notice of the fact 
that Israeli military officers have been implicated in collecting or attempting to collect 
protected technology from the United States, the incident reported in the Intelligence 
Threat Handbook occurred in 1986. Like the Jonathan Pollard case, that information 
must be evaluated in light of its dated nature. The anecdotal evidence of criminal 
wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens is of decreased relevance to an assessment of 
Applicant’s security suitability, given there is no evidence that Applicant or any member 
of his family was involved in any aspect of the cited cases.     
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old man born in Israel, but also a United States citizen due 
having a parent of United States citizenry. He is a registered United States voter and 
has voted in federal and state elections since coming to the United States to settle 
permanently in about 2005. He has worked as a security researcher for the same entity 
since 2010. He has been married for a decade to a life-long United States citizen. The 
couple has one infant child, who is solely a citizen of the United States. (Tr. 17)  
 
Growing up, Applicant’s time was constantly split between Israel and the United 
States, due to his mother’s dual United States-Israeli citizenship and constant 
movement. He found the experience frustrating. (Tr. 17-19) By the age of 13 or 14, he 
had become something of a shut-in, unable to speak Hebrew or play the popular sports. 
As a self-described “geek,” he felt he did not fit in with his peers. (Tr. 20) He dropped 
out of high school because, despite excellent grades, he was punished for low 
attendance. He appealed a failing grade based on low attendance because attendance 
was not supposed to be part of the grade, but his efforts were rebuffed. This added to 
his feelings today that he has no happy memories of living in Israel. (Tr. 22) He dropped 
out of high school, later coming to the United States to earn a General Educational 
Development (GED) credential. 
 
Applicant came to the United States and earned his GED, but then his mother 
returned to Israel with him. He was so desirous of being done with his life in Israel, he 
specifically gained the necessary weight to be found physically unfit for compulsory 
service in the Israeli Defense Force (IDF). (Tr. 39-41) This brought his service to a 
premature end. As a result, it also made him constructively unemployable within Israel 
for failing to honorably serve his compulsory term. While there, he once voted in an 
Israeli election. Noting that he was 20 and still employable at that time, Applicant stated, 
“I was told if I went to go vote I could take the day off, so I was like, I’ll vote.” (Tr. 42) It 
was the only time he voted in a foreign election. Shortly thereafter, in 2005, he came 
back to the United States for college.2 He has remained a U.S. resident ever since. 
                                                          
2 There, he graduated at the top of his class and met his future wife. He was offered a scholarship in an 
esteemed graduate institution where he earned a master’s degree in his field. During that program, he 
started interning for the entity for which he now works. At present, he is studying toward a doctorate.  
 
 
 
 
4 
Applicant’s parents have been divorced for as long as he can remember. His 
father, a citizen of Israel, left the family home. By the time Applicant entered school, 
Applicant “basically just wrote [his father] off.” (Tr. 23) When Applicant was a teen, his 
father tried to resume a relationship with Applicant, but that reconnection was foiled 
when his father replaced his most recent companion with a long lost acquaintance. (Tr. 
23) Applicant no longer cares to hear of his father’s various relationships, including a 
more recent female friend who is about Applicant’s age. Their contact is by telephone. 
Generally, Applicant tends to not take calls from his father, not caring to hear his father 
“show off.” (Tr. 25) Every month or so, Applicant will accept a call and listen until his 
father has stopped “talking about whatever horrible thing he has to say. . . .” (Tr. 25) 
Other than the occasional phone calls, Applicant depicts his relationship with his father 
as “estranged.” (Tr. 26) He describes their telephonic conversations as “one ways 
communications.” (Tr. 47) Applicant last saw his father at Applicant’s wedding, about a 
decade ago. 
 
Applicant was never happy living with his mother or with their relationship Seeing 
his wife’s relationship with her mother, he does not believe his unhappy maternal 
relationship was normal. (Tr. 26) He noted that with his mother, “everything is focused 
on her. Everything is about how things affect her, and there’s no concept for other 
people, to an almost pathological degree.” (Tr. 26-27) He cites to her taking him back 
and forth between the United States and Israel as contributing to his childhood 
unhappiness. Generally, they speak by phone about once a month.3 She has no regard 
for Applicant’s own wishes and desires, placing her own wants above his, even in 
situations involving his wife and child. (Tr. 29-30) Applicant avoids dealing with her as 
much as he can. (Tr. 31) As with his father, he tries to fend off parental contact by 
sending them pictures of his baby in lieu of conversation or interaction. (Tr. 31) Having 
spent much time in this country, Applicant’s mother visits the United States 
occasionally. She attended Applicant’s wedding and, more recently, forced herself upon 
him and his wife as his wife was in the hospital giving birth to their child. (Tr. 29-31, 47) 
 
Neither of Applicant’s parents know about his work. He would have no hesitation 
reporting them for any incident or act he found suspicious. He prefers not having 
contact with either parent. His familial focus is on his wife and child. He has a paternal 
aunt for whom he has no respect and scant contact. (Tr. 34-35) He no longer maintains 
regular contact what her son. (Tr. 50-51) At most, Applicant has sent his cousin 
electronic pictures of his child in order to avoid any other form of contact.4 (Tr. 51) 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
3 Telephonic communications have been increased of late, only so they can sort out his late 
grandmother’s affairs. Applicant noted that his best familial relationship was with this woman. She was a 
citizen and resident of the United States. He considers her house in this country to be his favored 
childhood home. Applicant also noted that his grandmother specifically left him her home so her daughter, 
Applicant’s mother, would not sell it or squander the proceeds. (Tr. 27).  
 
4 Applicant repeatedly noted that it is his habit to send photos by mail or Internet in order to avoid contact 
with family. See, e.g., Tr. 51) 
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant has no other family or friends in Israel with whom he maintains notable 
contact. He has some foreign Facebook contacts with whom he might send a note on a 
birthday. (Tr. 32-33). Time has diminished his knowledge of former contacts. (Tr. 50) He 
eschews social media and only signs in on Facebook three or four times a year, usually 
at his wife’s urging regarding a specific issue or item. (Tr. 33).  Working in the field of 
security, he is suspicious of using social media. (Tr. 52) His own page is structured so 
as to avoid individuals and advertisers from culling his data. (Tr. 52)  
 
Applicant does not miss his time in Israel. He has no “endearing childhood 
memories about friends in Israel.” (Tr. 33) One contact from his childhood served in his 
wedding party. This was at Applicant’s mother’s insistence, before he realized he was 
being manipulated by her to do so. (Tr. 33) He is no longer vulnerable to such attempts.  
 
Applicant has no investments or interests in Israel. In the United States, in 
contrast, he has his family’s home and the home he recently inherited from his 
grandmother. Combined, they represent about $160,000 in real estate holdings. (Tr. 35-
36) All his other financial interests, including his career, are also in the United States.  
 
When he was two years of age, Applicant was granted an Israeli passport based 
on his birth in that country. He has only used it to travel to Israel because Israeli law 
requires anyone considered to be an Israeli citizen to only enter and exit that country on 
an Israeli passport. He last used the document about two years ago, when he took his 
wife to show her the country. The trip resulted in her acknowledging, “’now I know why 
you hate going.’ Because she got to see what my family is like in a native environment.” 
(Tr. 37) He has since relinquished his foreign passport to his security office. (Tr 37) No 
longer being able to visit Israel without use of the Israeli passport is “a great way to get 
out of being pressured” to visit his foreign kin. (Tr. 37) In the future, should he need to 
go to Israel, he will use his United States passport in conjunction with a letter of transit 
from the Israeli consulate, a solution suggested to him in response to a letter to his 
United States Congressman. (Tr. 38) He is willing to have his Israeli passport 
destroyed. (Tr. 39) It expired in 2015 and he has no plans to renew it. (Tr. 44) 
 
Applicant has no intention to ever move back to Israel. (Tr. 43) He had a difficult 
childhood there and sees the country as having “a lot of issues.” (Tr. 17) He noted that 
“it doesn’t run like we run stuff here.” (Tr. 18)  Specifically, he has issues with its 
government, he does not want to be with his biological family there, and he prefers the 
United States. (Tr 43-44) He has no preference for Israel. (Tr. 44) He has no contacts 
with any acquaintances from his time in the IDF or the Israeli government.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines are not 
 
 
 
 
6 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. 
The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, 
reliable information must be considered in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Under AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
 
 
 
7 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.  
 
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 As a threshold issue, the evidence reflects that interests within Israel have been 
shown to use United States citizens to obtain protected information. Consequently, on 
its face, there is a risk that Applicant could be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or be 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Such evidence demands that 
the facts be examined in terms of a “heightened risk.” Here, Applicant’s mother, father, 
an aunt, a cousin, and former contacts from his youth are citizens and residents of 
Israel. These facts raise the above-referenced disqualifying conditions. Accordingly, 
Applicant’s mitigation case must be examined through the lens of heightened scrutiny.  
 
In meeting this higher standard of proof and persuasion, an applicant is not 
required to sever all ties with a foreign country before he can be eligible for a security 
clearance. What factor or combination of factors will mitigate concerns raised by an 
applicant with family members in a foreign country, however, is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable. An administrative judge’s predictive judgment in these types of cases must 
be guided by a commonsense assessment of the evidence and consideration of the 
adjudicative guidelines, as well as the whole-person factors set forth in the Directive. A 
judge’s ultimate determination must also take into account the overarching standard in 
these cases, namely, that any doubt raised by an applicant’s circumstances must be 
resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant in this matter:  
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S;  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The country at issue is Israel. Applicant’s mother, father, an aunt, and a cousin, 
plus some contacts from his past, are citizens and residents of Israel. There is no 
evidence any of these individuals has any nexus with the Israeli government or military, 
barring the fact the male kin most likely completed compulsory service in the IDF, as 
regularly required. Regarding his aunt, cousin, and former contacts, Applicant’s contacts 
can best be described as irregular, scant, and casual. They are not close.  
 
Applicant’s contacts with his parents are, at best, complicated. He has had and 
still has what he described as an unhealthy relationship with these two individuals, 
people he described as being more interested in themselves than they are in him. He 
has gone from wanting to normalize relations with them to simply minimizing their 
contact. To avoid disruption and complete acrimony, he occasionally listens to their 
comments by telephone. Otherwise, he sends them photos of his child to keep them at 
bay. He is not intimate with them and his contact is haphazard. Indeed, he has gone to 
extremes just short of barring them from his life to minimize his contact with his parents. 
 
In contrast, Applicant is devoted to his wife of a decade and their new child. He 
enjoys his profession and his ability to work happily as a “geek.” He owns two homes in 
the United States, maintains his profession in this country, and has built a life here over 
the past 12 years. He is firmly settled in the one country where he found comfort as a 
child, namely, the United States, where his late grandmother maintained her home. 
Given the content and passionate delivery of his testimony, I find it highly unlikely that 
he would put the interests of his family in Israel over the interests of the United States, 
his wife, his child, or his life in this country.  I find AG ¶ 8(a) through AG ¶ 8(c) apply. 
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference   
 
 AG ¶ 9 sets out the security concern relating to Foreign Preference:   
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.   
 
 Applicant possesses an Israeli passport, served in the IDF, and voted in an 
Israeli election. These facts are sufficient to raise:  
 
 
 
 
9 
 Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 10(a):   
  
. . . exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; . . . (7) voting in a 
foreign election. 
 
 Mitigating conditions under Guideline C are:   
 
AG ¶ 11 (a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country;  
 
AG ¶ 11 (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
AG ¶ 11 (c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when 
the individual was a minor;  
 
AG ¶ 11 (d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant 
security authority;  
 
AG ¶ 11 (e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
AG ¶ 11 (f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United 
States Government  
 
 Dual citizenship is not a bar to a security clearance. However, it is notable that 
Applicant’s United States-Israel dual citizenship is based on a circumstance of his birth. 
His Israeli passport was obtained when he was a minor. It was surrendered to his 
security office, it is now expired, and he has no intent to renew it or travel on again 
travel on a foreign passport. These facts give rise to AG ¶ 11(a), (c), and (e). 
 
 Regarding AG ¶ 10(a)(2), although service in the IDF is generally acknowledged 
as a compulsory obligation of Israeli citizenship, he purposefully and knowingly 
rendered himself physically unfit in order to discontinue his service as soon as possible. 
Indeed, he did so to his detriment to the extent it made his constructively barred him 
from gainful employment in that country.  
 
 Regarding AG ¶ 10(a)(7), Applicant admits he voted in a foreign election. Having 
obtained citizenship in both the United States and Israel at birth, his singular incident of 
voting in Israel cannot be readily mitigated under AG ¶ 11, alone. However, that act was 
 
 
 
 
10 
obviously the act of a 20-year-old seeking a day off from work, not an conscientious and 
intentional expression of foreign preference. Since becoming free to support himself and 
settle permanently in the United States, he has lived in this country and voted in U.S. 
elections exclusively. These factors are significant under the whole-person analysis. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. Specifically, I considered those findings of facts 
and described above that are relevant in light of the AG ¶ 2(a) adjudicative factors. I 
have also considered them in light of AG ¶ 2(c) and the considerations set forth under 
Guideline B and Guideline C.  
 
 The record is replete with testimony and evidence demonstrating Applicant’s 
unhappy upbringing, and how it has soured him with regard to both his parents and 
Israel. His testimony clearly rebuts the assumption that a child has a warm and close 
relationship with his parents and blood relatives. He supports his sentiments in this 
regard with credible explanations. He keeps his parents at arm’s length, minimizing 
contact with them as much as he can. His relations with his aunt, cousin, and former 
acquaintances are just as credibly depicted as distant. Applicant has also gone through 
great strides to distance himself in other ways from his Israeli family and that country. 
He has no interest in returning. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns generally 
associated with foreign influence. 
 
 Applicant’s relinquished his now expired Israeli passport and he has no intention 
to renew it. While he was subject to compulsory service in the IDF, he purposefully and 
knowingly vexed the system by gaining weight and becoming eligible for continued 
military service. He did so to his disadvantage to the extent his act of not supporting that 
government constructively barred him from employment in that country. Although 20 
 
 
 
 
11 
years of age at the time, his motivation in voting in an Israeli election on one occasion 
was completed not to exercise his rights as an Israeli citizen, but as a method for 
gaining a day off from work. These are not facts that reflect a preference for another 
country over his clear commitment to the United States. Given all these facts, I find it 
unlikely that Applicant would be compromised over secure information by his foreign 
relatives or past life in Israel. Overall, the record leaves me without questions about 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
