 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-07110 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his drug involvement. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 18, 2016, and he elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 17, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on June 27, 2016. He was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
responded to the FORM on July 23, 2016. The case was assigned to me on February 
17, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-4. FORM Item 3 is 
admitted into evidence as Government Exhibit (GE) 3, without objection.1 
 
FORM Item 4 is an unauthenticated summary of a July 15, 2015 interview with a 
government background investigator. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised 
Applicant that he could object to FORM Item 4 and it would not be admitted, or that he 
could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it 
accurate.  Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise 
any objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered 
by me. Applicant responded to the FORM, and he raised no objections. Given 
Department Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s education and work experience, I 
find his waiver to be knowing and intelligent.2 Therefore, FORM Item 4 is admitted into 
evidence as GE 4, without objection. 
 
Applicant’s response to the FORM included a cover letter and a letter of 
recommendation. These two documents are admitted into evidence as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He attended college from March 2012 to December 
2014, and he received an associate’s degree. He has been gainfully employed as a 
technician since January 2010, including with a DOD contractor since May 2015.3  
 
 On his June 2015 security clearance application (SCA) and during his July 2015 
security interview, Applicant admitted that he used marijuana every other week from 
October 2004 to November 2014. In his FORM response, Applicant recanted the 
frequency of his marijuana use and claimed that he has used marijuana approximately 
100 times over this period. Given that Applicant listed his frequency of marijuana use on 
his SCA and during his security interview as “every other week” and admitted his drug 
use without clarification in his Answer, I find that he used marijuana about “every other 
week” or approximately 250 times during this ten-year span. He had multiple 
                                                          
1 FORM Items 1 and 2 consist of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR. These documents are 
pleadings and are admitted into the record. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”). 
 
3 GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
opportunities to correct or clarify his frequency of marijuana use prior to his FORM 
response and did not do so. He has continuing contact with the individuals with whom 
he used marijuana in the past.4  
 
 In his FORM response, Applicant included a letter of recommendation from a co-
worker that highly praised his work performance and character. This letter does not 
indicate whether the co-worker was informed as to full extent of Applicant’s drug 
involvement.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”6 Under Egan, EO 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an 
applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor of 
protecting national security.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
4 GE 3; GE 4; AE A; AE B. 
 
5 AE B. 
 
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). See Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 
988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
4 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.”  
 
 Between October 2004 and November 2014, Applicant illegally used marijuana 
approximately 250 times. AG ¶¶ 25(a) applies.  
 
The Government established a case for disqualification, thereby shifting the  
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.7 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the 
drug involvement was recent. There are no bright-line rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@8  
 
 In the present case, Applicant’s admitted drug involvement spanned a decade, 
beyond his college education and well into his professional career. His regular 
marijuana use only ended 20 months before the close of the record. His illegal drug use  
violated federal and state law, and he continues to associate with the individuals with 
whom he used marijuana. Although he has changed his employment since his 
cessation of illegal drug use, there is no evidence of other changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation. Applicant’s conduct 
casts doubt on his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.    
 
 Juxtaposing Applicant’s 20-month period of abstinence against his 10-year 
period of regular marijuana use, he has not established an “appropriate period of 
abstinence.” He continues to associate with friends with whom he used marijuana, and 
there is no evidence that he avoids environments wherein he previously had used 
drugs. He has not provided a signed, sworn statement of intent not to use illegal drugs 
in the future. AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s lengthy drug history, insufficient evidence of reform and rehabilitation, 
and the absence of evidence that he has disassociated himself from other drug users, 
cast doubt as to his judgment and reliability. I find that drug involvement concerns 
remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). 
 
 
6 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In light of all the facts, I 
have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline H and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant voluntarily disclosed his drug use, and he has performed well during 
his employment with a DOD contractor. Nonetheless, the frequency and span of his 
marijuana use and his continued contact with his drug-using associates, leave doubts 
as to his reliability and good judgment. As a result, the totality of the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
