 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05058 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and criminal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and J (criminal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 12, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
19, 2016, scheduling the hearing for October 5, 2016. The hearing was postponed and 
convened as rescheduled on November 16, 2016. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
 
2 
 
9 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 30, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since September 2014. She is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. She attended college for a period without earning a degree. She has 
never married, and she has no children.1 
 
 Applicant was arrested in June 2011 and charged with theft by deception for 
issuing checks on a closed account in August 2009. She pleaded guilty, and she paid a 
$100 fine, fees, and $159 in restitution. In December 2012, the judgment was set aside 
and the charge dismissed.2 
 
 In October 2010, a citation in lieu of arrest was issued against Applicant, and she 
was charged with issuing a bad check – less than $200 – in July 2010. She paid the 
check and fees, and the charge was dismissed in November 2010.3 
 
 Applicant testified that she did not intentionally write bad checks. She stated that 
she moved from Location 1 to Location 2, closed her bank account in Location 1, and 
did not realize that there were still checks from Location 1 to be cleared. However, two 
of the checks were issued in 2009, and her Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) shows that she did not move from Location 1 until 2010. Applicant 
stated that while she did not “officially” move to Location 2 until 2010, she frequently 
stayed with her sister in Location 2 and helped her sister care for her sister’s children. 
Additionally, two checks were written on a closed account from a different bank that was 
located in a state where Applicant had not lived since 2007. Applicant also stated that 
she was unaware that she wrote bad checks, and that she paid them the same day she 
was notified. The receiver of a December 2009 check informed the police in May 2010 
that he had contacted Applicant “some time ago,” and she stated that she would take 
care of it. She had not by the time he filed a police report in May 2010.4 
 
 Applicant was arrested in December 2012 and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI). She completed the court-imposed requirements, and the charge was 
reduced to reckless driving.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23, 41-42, 45; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 23-24, 27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 7; AE A. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 7; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 18-19, 24-30, 42-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 7. 
 
5 Tr. at 25, 44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE C. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant has a history of employment-related issues. She was terminated from a 
job in October 2012 after she missed several afternoons of work due to emergency 
appointments. She worked for another company from about November 2012 through 
March 2014. She signed an agreement not to compete with the company (“non-
compete agreement”). She was released from her employment, but not for 
performance-related issues. There is insufficient evidence for a determination that she 
later violated the non-compete agreement. In August 2014, she was terminated from a 
job that she had held for about a month for what the company described as 
insubordination. Applicant admitted that she was terminated, but she denied that she 
was insubordinate.6 
 
 Applicant worked for a company (Company A) from April 2014 through July 2014. 
She signed an employment contract and a separate confidentiality agreement, with non-
disclosure clauses. A few months earlier, her boyfriend established a company 
(Company B) that was in competition with Company A. Applicant was terminated just 
before her 90-day probationary period ended for what Company A described as “poor 
work performance.”7 
 
 In September 2014, Company A filed a lawsuit against Applicant, her boyfriend, 
and Company B. Company A alleged that Applicant “purposely infiltrated [Company A] 
and conspired with [boyfriend] in order to steal and misappropriate [Company A’s] 
confidential and valuable business information and trade secrets for use in their new, 
competing business, [Company B].8 
 
 In March 2016, the judge in the case sanctioned Applicant for not preserving 
evidence when she traded in her smart phone and laptop computer. The judge found 
that she provided inconsistent and contradictory testimony. The judge concluded: 
 
The bottom line here is there’s sufficient proof in my mind to grant this 
adverse inference that [Applicant] sent things that belonged to [Company 
A] to [boyfriend] and [Company B] that were just not available for her to 
produce in discovery for the reason that she chose to turn her phone in 
after she filed a counterclaim and chose not to make any effort to preserve 
what was on the laptop.9 
 
 The parties settled the case in May 2016. The defendants agreed to pay 
$100,000, over the course of 24 months, with Applicant paying half of that amount. 
Applicant denied providing Company A’s proprietary information to Company B.10 I did 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 30-35, 39-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
7 Tr. at 35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-6. 
 
8 Tr. at 31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-6. 
 
9 GE 5. 
 
10 Tr. at 31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4; AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
not find her testimony credible. After considering all the evidence, including the court 
records from the lawsuit, I find by substantial evidence11 that Applicant provided 
Company A’s proprietary information to her boyfriend and Company B in violation of her 
contract with Company A.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
11 Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” ISCR Case No. 10-09035 at 
5 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the 
weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence 
does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal 
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than 
a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994); ISCR 
Case No. 04-07187 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2006). 
 
12 Tr. at 20-22, 31-41, 51; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
5 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; and  
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
6 
 
Applicant provided Company A’s proprietary information to her boyfriend and 
Company B in violation of her contract with Company A. That conduct reflects 
questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It 
also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(d), 16(e), 
and 16(f) are applicable to SOR ¶ 1.b.  
The remaining personal conduct allegations were unsubstantiated, did not raise a 
disqualifying condition, or were too minor to raise unmitigated security concerns. 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant’s denials of providing propriety information to her boyfriend and 
Company B were not credible. The judge in her lawsuit did not find her worthy of belief, 
and neither do I. There are no applicable mitigating conditions. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s check charges and DUI establish AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) as 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
7 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant testified that she did not intentionally write bad checks. She stated that 
she moved, closed an account, did not realize that there were still checks to be cleared, 
and covered the checks as soon as she learned they did not clear. However, checks 
were written on two closed accounts; two checks were from a bank that was located in a 
state where Applicant had not lived since 2007; two checks were written on a closed 
account the year before Applicant moved from Location 1; and the recipient of one of 
the checks was not paid even though he contacted Applicant well before he reported 
her to the police. Applicant’s testimony about the returned checks was not credible. 
None of the mitigating conditions are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and J in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant has a history of questionable conduct. She gave her company’s secrets 
to a competitor. It would be unwise to trust her with our nation’s secrets.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
