 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04368 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
July 8, 2014. On December 14, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order (Ex Ord.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. 
¶ 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 1, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief 
with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was 
submitted by Department Counsel on April 11, 2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who had an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant received the FORM on April 18, 2016. She responded to the FORM 
and submitted a modified answer to the SOR and supporting documentation, marked as 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on February 6, 2017. All exhibits 
are admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has eight delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$12,349, a foreclosure, and a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy discharged in 2004.3 Applicant 
admitted all the allegations, and provided explanations in her answer to the SOR and 
response to the FORM. Her admissions, explanations, and documentary evidence are 
incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor since 
2012. She is unmarried and has one daughter, who is 16 years old. She completed high 
school in 1995, and is seeking to renew her security clearance. She was unemployed 
from October 2011 to September 2012.  
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in 2004, because she was unable to pay her 
debts while working in a low-paying job.4 (SOR ¶ 1.a) Her debts were discharged in 2004. 
Applicant and her boyfriend, her child’s father, bought a house together in 2007. She had 
relied on his income for support until he left in 2008. Applicant fell behind on the mortgage 
loan in 2008, due to the loss of a job and secondary income,5 but continued to live in the 
home until 2010.6 It was finally foreclosed and sold in 2014. Applicant owes a deficiency 
balance of approximately $35,000.7 (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
 
 In addition, she owes approximately $8,887 on a personal loan that she stopped 
paying on in 2008. (SOR ¶ 1.f)  The debt is now in a collection status and unresolved. 
She owes approximately $801 to a satellite television provider that is unresolved because 
she did not return equipment when she left her home in 2010. (SOR ¶ 1.d) Likewise, she 
                                                     
3 The answer to the SOR states she filed Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in July 2014.  This appears to be an error. 
 
4 GE 4 and AE A. Applicant had several debts and a repossessed vehicle. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
6 GE 4. 
 
7 GE 4. 
 
3 
 
continues to owe approximately $235 on a cell phone provider debt that is in collection. 
(SOR ¶ 1.h)  SOR debts ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j, have been paid and are resolved.8  
 
 Applicant did not provide documentary information about credit or budget 
counseling, performance evaluations or character. She indicated in her interview with an 
Office of Personnel Management investigator that her financial status is “tight” and that 
she generally lives from paycheck-to-paycheck.9 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance decision.10 
The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the 
evidence.11 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” It is well-established law that no 
one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in Egan, “the 
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if 
                                                     
8 AE A contains documentation establishing resolution of these debts. 
 
9 GE 4. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
11 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security clearance). 
 
 
4 
 
they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Ex. Ord. 10865, and the Directive, any 
doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will 
be resolved in favor of protecting national security.12 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Ex. Ord. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Ex. Ord. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has longstanding delinquent debts that have not been resolved. She filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004, but incurred additional delinquent debts. Her home was 
foreclosed in 2014. She resolved five SOR debts, but four debts listed in the SOR have 
not been resolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(b), as 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
                                                     
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following may be potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant resolved SOR debts ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies. 
The remaining debts, including the foreclosure, remain unresolved. Accruing additional 
delinquent debts, after obtaining a Chapter 7 discharge, raises concerns of financial 
irresponsibility, an unwillingness or inability to pay financial obligations, or both. Applicant 
has been gainfully employed, except for a one-year period from 2011 to 2012. Since 2012, 
she has been unable to satisfy the largest delinquent debts, nor has she shown efforts to 
negotiate settlements or seek assistance from a credit counselor. I have no information 
about her current financial status that would show similar issues are unlikely to recur in 
the future. Generally, Applicant’s financial problems are not resolved or under control.  
Her past financial irresponsibility and her current unresolved delinquencies cast doubt on 
her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Overall, the absence of evidence of resolution of delinquent debts and an improved 
financial status leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.h:  Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
