 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ADP Case No. 15-05668 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
      For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire 
   For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
regarding her eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position 
designated ADP-I/II/III. The action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant timely responded to the SOR, admitting all allegations, and requested a 
determination based on the written record. On June 6, 2016, the Government issued a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) with five attachments (“Items”). Applicant timely 
responded to the FORM with a letter and financial attachments (10 pages). The case was 
assigned to me on March 23, 2017. Based on my review of the case file and submissions, 
I find Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
          Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old quality auditor. She has worked for the same employer 
for almost 10 years. She earned an associate’s degree in 1992 and a non-degree diploma 
 
 
 
 
2 
for other studies in 1995. She is married and has one adult child. She has maintained 
some level of clearance since 2006. (FORM,Item 2 at 24-26) 
 
 In 2000, Applicant started having financial difficulties when her husband lost his 
job. He was unemployed off and on until 2012. During that time, they got behind on their 
bills, but still managed to meet their regular obligations. In 2013, Applicant’s husband was 
in an automobile accident. His injuries demanded a protracted period of time off from his 
new place of employment. Meanwhile, while the couple lived off her income, a 
replacement family car had to be obtained. In the end, the accident led to some accounts 
going into collection.  
 
Applicant no longer acquires debt. She apparently did not know the full extent of 
her old debt issues until she met with investigators in 2015. She acted on most of the 
debts noted in the April 2016 SOR before responding to the June 2016, FORM. She now 
lives within her means and has both expressed and demonstrated her willingness to pay 
her delinquent debts, but has not received financial counseling. [FORM, Item 3]  
 
 At issue are eight delinquent debts, amounting to about $15,400. They are 
reflected in the SOR under allegations 1.a-1.h and are based on a credit report.1 The 
related debts are noted below with comments by the Applicant and, where applicable, 
reference to offered documentation: 
 
1.a-1.b – Student loans - $3,981, $2,839 – “In the process of making payment 
arrangements with [named entity],” but no documentary evidence was offered reflecting 
these efforts. 
  
1.c – Telecommunications collection - $70 –“I have paid this balance off.” Applicant then 
noted a balance paid ($70) and a reference number, but no documentary evidence 
concerning the transaction for verification. 
 
1.d – Collection account - $1,686 – “Paid off,” with an account number and reference 
number provided. The Government’s Ex. 5 reflects considerable improvement on this 
general merchandise card balance since the credit report at Ex. 4, including a reduced 
balance of $286. Applicant’s materials include a letter from the creditor with an account 
number reflecting the one at issue noting it was paid in full. (FORM Response) 
 
1.e – Bank collection - $1,859 – “Payment arrangement.” Applicant provided documentary 
evidence reflecting she made a payment of $158 on this credit card account on May 31, 
2016, thus reducing her balance. (FORM Response)  
 
1.f – Bank collection - $4,708 – “I have made payment arrangements.” Applicant provided 
a June 3, 2016, letter showing that a repayment plan had been negotiated, including a 
                                                          
1 The FORM includes two credit reports. Item 4 is a full data credit report dated October 18, 2004, and 
February 10, 2015. Item 5 contains Equifax reports dated March 11, 2016, and June 5, 2016. The 
Government noted that the June 5, 2016, shows three accounts charged-off and two accounts in collection. 
See FORM at 2. 
 
 
 
 
3 
schedule for future payments toward this credit card balance, but no evidence was 
submitted showing repayments have commenced. (FORM Response) 
 
1.g – Telecommunications collection - $171 – “Made payment arrangement for 7/21/16 & 
8/21/2016 to pay off.” Applicant provided a reference number for the contemplated 
transaction, but no corroborative documentary evidence was offered for verification.  
 
1.h – Medical account - $111 – “I called, no one answered. I will call back. I don’t recall a 
medical bill. Will make a payment arrangement.” No documentary evidence reflecting an 
arrangement was offered for verification.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a position of trust, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. The adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to protected information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
in making a decision. The protection of secure information is paramount.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.”  
 
A person who seeks a public trust position enters into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government predicated upon trust and confidence that transcends normal duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard information. Section 7 of Executive Order 
10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
      Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth the applicable trustworthiness concern: 
failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
 
 
 
 
4 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Here, the Government 
introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has eight delinquent debts. Such facts 
raise the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these financial concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
From 2000 through 2012, Applicant’s husband went from losing a job, then 
bouncing between periods of unemployment and employment for a dozen years. Despite 
these setbacks, Applicant struggled to make ends meet. Then, in 2013, Applicant’s 
husband was in a car accident. Injured, he missed work for a period of time as he 
recuperated. Meanwhile, a replacement vehicle needed for family transportation was 
acquired. Applicant’s use of credit and store cards in times when money was tight can be 
seen through the delinquent credit card balances. Throughout that time, Applicant 
maintained steady employment and endeavored to ward off the acquisition of new 
delinquent debt. It appears that since her husband’s accident, Applicant has been able to 
pay off the balance on at least one of those credit cards. Given the circumstances and 
Applicant’s efforts to manage their debts in a way to diminish their acquisition of more 
delinquencies, AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant’s explanations are helpful for her cause, but her lack of documentation 
does her a disservice. This is true even though her inclusion of reference numbers for 
payments tends to be persuasive, but cannot substitute for tangible documentation in this 
proceeding. However, on her salary as a quality auditor in pursuit of ADP eligibility, it is 
notable that she paid in full the credit account at 1d, started payment on the equally 
substantial debt at 1.e, and recently negotiated a repayment schedule on the debt at 1.f.  
 
Applicant is working with her creditors to set up an appropriate plan for addressing 
her approximately $6,700 in student loans, which can be a manageable, but protracted 
and confusing process. The rest are in want of attention or better corroboration than the 
reference numbers provided. However, given the progress made between learning of all 
the debts at issue from investigators and the issuance of the FORM, I find the progress 
thus far documented reflects a good faith effort to address her debts, and measured 
movement toward resolving her debts. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 20(c)-(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the final determination 
of whether to grant eligibility for a position of trust must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporate my comments under the 
guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old quality auditor seeking new or continued eligibility for an 
ADP position. She has worked for the same employer for almost 10 years, maintaining 
some level of clearance without adverse incident. Applicant has both an associate’s 
degree and a subsequent non-degree diploma for other studies. She is married and has 
one adult child.  
 
With family coffers compromised for much of 2000 to 2012, while her husband 
maintained intermittent employment, Applicant continued to manage their household and 
raise her child with their varying income. In 2013, Applicant’s husband was injured in an 
automobile accident. As a result, he required time away from his new job to recuperate, 
and they had to acquire a new vehicle for family transportation. Although Applicant had 
tried to keep her creditors paid, this development was overwhelming. Credit cards, in 
particular, were overused and became delinquent.  
 
Applicant met with investigators in 2015, then received the April 2016 SOR. By the 
time she responded to the June 2016 FORM, she had paid off one notable credit card 
debt of close to $1,700; started repayment on an account with a balance of about $1,850; 
 
 
 
 
6 
negotiated and received a repayment plan and schedule from one creditor; and made 
contact with others. Clearly, more progress is needed to resolve her past debt. Today, 
however, she is living within her means. She has not only expressed, but demonstrated, 
the willingness and intent to address all of her delinquent debts.  
 
This process does not require an applicant to address all debts at issue. It does 
however, expect an applicant to demonstrate or reflect a workable plan to address 
delinquent debts, and show that the plan has been successfully implemented. Sufficient 
facts and documentation were shown to indicate progress is being made in a measured, 
manageable manner. I find financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to permit Applicant to maintain a public trust position. 
Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
