 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-03463 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 29, 2016, and she elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 22, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on May 6, 2016. She was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
responded to the FORM on June 2, 2016. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 
2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-6.1 FORM Item 3 
is an unauthenticated summary of a June 4, 2013 interview with a government 
investigator. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that she could object 
to FORM Item 3 and it would not be admitted, or that she could make corrections, 
additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate.  Applicant was 
informed that her failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be 
constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered by me. Applicant 
responded to the FORM, and she raised no objections. Given Department Counsel’s 
advisement and Applicant’s education and work experience, I find her waiver to be 
knowing and intelligent.2 Therefore, FORM Items 2-6 are admitted into evidence as 
Government Exhibits 2-6, without objection. 
 
In her FORM response, Applicant included a cover letter, an updated response to 
the SOR, two May 2016 credit reports, bankruptcy records, and two student loan 
account statements. I admitted these seven exhibits into evidence as Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A-G, without objection. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges one bankruptcy filing (SOR ¶ 1.a.), two delinquent mortgage 
loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.), three delinquent student loan accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.f., 
and 1.i.), and several other delinquent accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g., 1.h., 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., 
1.m., and 1.n.). Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.f., 1.h., 1.j., and 1.k., 
and she denied the five remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. She has been employed full time by a NATO support 
agency since October 2005. She attended college from May to December 2006, and 
she has been attending undergraduate-level classes intermittently since August 2008. 
She was married in September 2004, and she separated from her husband in 
December 2011. She has three children – ages 16, 17, and 25.3 
                                                          
1 FORM Item 1 consists of the Statement of Reasons and Applicant’s Answer, which are pleadings and 
are entered into the administrative record. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 In January 2004, Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition (SOR ¶ 1.a.). In 
October 2006, the bankruptcy was discharged. She provided no explanation for or 
circumstances leading to her bankruptcy filing.4 
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent loans attached to real property interests (SOR 
¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c). SOR ¶ 1.b. is a loan on a time-share property that has been delinquent 
since February 2009 in the approximate amount of $1,819. The foreclosure process has 
started on this account, with the total balance due of $17,675. Although she claimed 
that her estranged husband has agreed to resolve this account, Applicant herself has 
taken no steps to resolve or repay this delinquent account, and there is no documentary 
evidence to corroborate her claim.5 
 
 In January 2008, Applicant opened a mortgage loan account (SOR ¶ 1.c.) in the 
approximate amount of $356,000. This account has been delinquent since May 2009 
and was past due in the approximate amount of $125,231 as of March 2015. In her 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted that this property was foreclosed upon in 
2010. She attributed her financial difficulties, in part, to her spouse’s out-of-state military 
posting and having to support two households. She argues that the absence of this 
accounts on her May 2016 credit reports demonstrates that she bears no further liability 
on this defaulted account; however, this reliance is misplaced. The absence of a debt 
on a credit report is not equivalent to resolution or payment of the debt.6 She has 
provided no documentation from the mortgage lender demonstrating that she bears no 
further liability on this account, and there is no evidence of any steps taken by her to 
resolve this delinquent mortgage loan account.7  
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent student loan accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.f., and 
1.i.).  Applicant admitted the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f., and she denied the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. In her FORM response, she provided documentation showing 
the account balances for SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f as $3,642 and $2,506, respectively. In 
fact, the statement includes late fees in the outstanding balance. Applicant’s May 2016 
credit reports list an October 2015 payment on these loans, but there is no evidence of 
other payments.8 
 
 As to SOR ¶ 1.i., the credit reports show a student loan account opened in March 
2001 and placed for collection in the amount of $646. Although Applicant disputed this 
                                                          
4 GE 6. 
 
5 GE 3; GE 5; Response to SOR; Response to FORM. 
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 02-14950 at 4 (App. Bd. May 15, 2003) (“The removal of those debts from his credit 
report does not make them disappear as if they never existed or preclude the Judge from considering 
other record evidence that shows those debts exist.  The security significance of Applicant’s financial 
history doesn’t turn on whether Applicant’s debts could or could not be legally listed on a credit report 
after the passage of seven years.”). 
 
7 GE 2; GE 3; GE 5; Response to SOR; Response to FORM. 
 
8 AE C; AE D; AE F; AE G. 
 
 
4 
 
account, the May 2016 credit reports she submitted also list this delinquent account. 
She has provided no documentation showing a reasonable dispute concerning this 
alleged account.9 
 
 The SOR alleges one medical collection account (SOR ¶ 1.g.) and seven 
delinquent consumer accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.h., 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., 1.m., and 1.n.). 
Applicant’s credit reports establish these eight delinquent debts: 
 
SOR ¶  Creditor  Balance Date of Delinquency Evidence 
1.d. Credit Card $4,264 7/2008 GE 4; GE 5 
1.g. Medical collection $900 1/2013 GE 5; AE C 
1.h. Utility or Cable $832 2/2013 GE 5; AE C 
1.j. Collection account $53 5/2008 GE 5 
1.k. Utility or Cable $367 11/2009 GE 4 
1.l. Credit account $424 1/2009 GE 4 
1.m. Credit account $227 1/2010 GE 4 
1.n. Collection account $37 1/2013 GE 4 
 
Applicant’s claim that the account in SOR ¶ 1.d. was included in her 2004 bankruptcy is 
without merit, because this account was opened after the bankruptcy was discharged. 
Although she claimed that the accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h. and 1.k. will be included in a 
debt-consolidation program, there is no documentary evidence showing that Applicant 
has actually enrolled in such a program and has begun payments on these debts. In her 
FORM response, she claimed to have paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j. in 2014; yet her 2015 
credit report lists this account as unpaid.10 There is no evidence of any payments on 
these eight delinquent accounts. Applicant attested to favorable work performance; 
however, she did not provide any corroborating evidence.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
9 GE 4; GE 5; AE C; AE D. 
 
10 GE 5. 
 
11 GE 2; Response to FORM; AE C; AE D. 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s 13 delinquent debts total approximately $140,964. She filed 
bankruptcy in 2004, and the dischargeable debts were discharged in 2006. Accordingly, 
the evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.12 Conditions that could 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the  basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
There is no documentary evidence showing any payments on the 13 alleged 
accounts beyond one student loan payment in October 2015. Her marital separation 
continues, requiring the maintenance of two households. Most importantly, there is no 
evidence that she is making debt repayments. Applicant’s financial struggles date from 
before her 2004 bankruptcy and are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond his control and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.13 Applicant has provided no circumstances or 
                                                          
12 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
7 
 
explanation as to the cause of her 2004 bankruptcy. She has attributed her mortgage 
loan foreclosure and financial difficulties to her husband’s geographical separation and 
their marital separation, requiring the maintenance of two households. Because these 
circumstances hindered her ability to address her delinquent debts, they constitute 
circumstances beyond one’s control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances.14 Although Applicant referenced a debt-consolidation program, she has 
provided no evidence of debt repayments or steps taken to resolve her financial 
delinquencies beyond one student loan payment in October 2015. Even if Applicant 
bears no further liability on her mortgage loan foreclosure and her student loans are 
current or in forbearance, she has taken no steps to resolve the remaining delinquent 
debts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant acted responsibly to 
address her delinquent debts or to develop and implement a reasonable debt 
repayment plan.  Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
There is no record evidence of credit counseling or of a monthly budget to 
conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under 
control. Rather, the absence of evidence of payments or other steps to resolve the 
alleged delinquent debts undercuts such a conclusion. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”15 
There is no evidence of any payments on the delinquent debts beyond the single 
student loan payment. As discussed above, there is insufficient evidence of good-faith 
payments or other steps taken to resolve the alleged delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does 
not apply.  
 
To the extent Applicant disputes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., 1.i., 1.l., 1.m., 
and 1.n., she has not demonstrated a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
these debts. As discussed above, these debts were all included on her credit reports, 
and Applicant has provided no documentation to support her disputes. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply. 
 
Applicant’s 13 delinquent debts have remained delinquent for several years, with 
evidence of only one student loan payment. There is no evidence of affirmative steps by 
Applicant to address, resolve, or repay these debts. Furthermore, she has not 
demonstrated that she can maintain her current monthly financial obligations. Absent 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
 
8 
 
evidence of debt repayment and financial responsibility, I find that financial 
considerations concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control – her marital separation and her 
husband out-of-state military assignment – contributed to her financial delinquencies. 
Nonetheless, she bears the burden to demonstrate that she acted financially 
responsibly under the circumstances. There is no evidence of good-faith efforts to repay 
or resolve these debts or evidence that she meets her current financial obligations. As a 
result, the totality of the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.n.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
