                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACT] )       ISCR Case No. 15-07757
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant used marijuana between 1980 and 2014. His illegal drug involvement
also included a misdemeanor drug possession charge in 1990 that was later dismissed.
Applicant’s claim of abstinence for the past three years is not sufficient to mitigate the
security concerns raised by a history of illegal drug use that has spanned more than half
his life. His request for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On May 27, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified
information as required for his job with a defense contractor. During his background
investigation, Applicant was interviewed on July 23, 2015, by a Government
investigator. After reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of
Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest for Applicant to have access to classified information.1
On December 2, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).  On2
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
1
February 22, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a
hearing. On April 21, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR.3
Applicant received the FORM on April 29, 2016, and was advised he had 30 days from
the date of receipt to submit additional information in response to the FORM. The record
closed after Applicant did not submit additional information by the May 29, 2016
deadline. The case was assigned to me on February 10, 2017.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, it was alleged that Applicant used marijuana between June
1980 and June 2014 (SOR 1.a); and that in September 1990, he was arrested and
charged with possession of a controlled dangerous substance (marijuana) and with drug
paraphernalia with intent to use (SOR 1.b). Applicant admitted, with remarks, both
allegations. Applicant had disclosed his drug use and drug-related arrest in his e-QIP.
He also discussed that information his July 2015 interview. (FORM, Items 3 and 4) In
addition to the facts established by the foregoing, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has held his
current job, an information systems position, since April 2015. (FORM, Item 3)
Applicant started using marijuana at about age 15. His use occurred in social
settings about once or twice a month. Starting around 2004, his use declined to
sporadic frequency. Applicant explained in his interview that he used marijuana less and
less as he grew older and no longer associated with the same friends who used drugs.
His last known use of marijuana was in about June 2014. At that time, was using it
mainly to ease back pain. He characterized his use at that time as isolated. Applicant
does not have a prescription for medical use of marijuana. (FORM, Items 2 - 4)
On February 2, 1990, Applicant was pulled over for speeding. A subsequent
search of his car produced a small amount of marijuana and related paraphernalia
Applicant admitted was his for personal use. Charges of possession of marijuana and
possession of drug paraphernalia were later dismissed when the court deemed the
search of his car to be improper. (FORM, Items 3 and 4)
Applicant claims he has not used marijuana since June 2014. He also claims he
does not intend to use marijuana in the future. In his e-QIP he stated he “can take it or
leave it. I do not intend to use the drug as I need a security clearance for my job.”
(FORM, Items 3 and 4)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on four enclosed3
exhibits (Items 1 - 4).
 Directive. 6.3.4
2
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Available information supports both SOR allegations. The facts established
herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition)); and 25(c) (illegal
drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
3
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). I have also considered the following
AG ¶ 26 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding
the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any
violation.
Applicant’s arrest in 1990, of course, is not recent. By itself the arrest poses no
security concern. However, it is to be considered as part of the record as a whole
regarding Applicant’s involvement with illegal drugs. That record does not support any
of these mitigating conditions. Applicant illegally used and possessed a controlled
substance with varying frequency over the course of 34 years. The fact he last used
marijuana almost three years ago, after using the drug for more than half his life, does
not constitute a sufficient period of abstinence. For the same reason, his drug use is
considered recent. Applicant claims, without corroboration, that he has changed his
circumstances and no longer associates with persons with whom he used marijuana.
His stated intent to not use marijuana in the future, as presented in his e-QIP, appears
to be conditioned on his need for a clearance rather than on an understanding that his
conduct is illegal. The record as a whole is not sufficient to resolve the doubts raised by
the Government’s information about Applicant’s drug use. Security concerns
established under this guideline are not mitigated. about Applicant’s finances remain
unresolved.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H, I have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has not produced
sufficient information to resolve doubts about his suitability stemming from his drug use. 
Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications,
those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                            
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
4
