 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03445 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 23, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 26, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The Government submitted 
documents identified as Items 1 through 5. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and he 
 
2 
 
 
received it on May 5, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM or object to the Government’s evidence. Items 1 and 2 are the pleadings in the 
case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on March 13, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His admissions and other 
comments are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact,  
 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He graduated from high school in 2002. Applicant was 
married from 2003 to 2007. He and his ex-wife have a daughter, born in 2003. He 
remarried in 2007. He and his wife have a son, born in 2008.1   
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from February 2003 until May 2006. His highest 
rank was an E-4. He had various postings in the United States and South Korea, and was 
deployed to Iraq from September 2005 to May 2006. This deployment ended when he 
was medically evacuated. He was later medically discharged under honorable 
conditions.2   
 
From May 2006 to February 2008, Applicant worked as a financial manager. In 
February 2008, he accepted a position in the defense industry as an instructor. He 
attended classes for the job from March to May 2008. He worked for the employer that 
hired him until July 2009. From July 2009 to July 2010, he worked in Afghanistan with a 
different defense contractor. He returned to the United States due to a family issue. He 
was then unemployed from July 2010 to September 2010. He did not work during this 
period, nor did he receive unemployment benefits. Since October 2010, he has been 
employed as a technician or instructor at a U.S. Army base, working for various defense 
contractors. He has held his most recent job since November 2011. There is no indication 
that any of the jobs were less than full-time positions. Applicant was granted a security 
clearance with the Army in 2003.3 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts totaling about $45,483. Nine of the debts 
are medical accounts, which are $2,095 of his debt total. The three largest debts, a 
repossessed auto and two consumer credit card accounts, total about $43,388. All of the 
SOR debts are verified by their listing on credit reports from March 2015 and May 2013.4 
                                                          
1 Item 3.   
 
2 Item 3. Applicant provides no further details in either his SCA or his SOR Response.  
 
3 Item 3.   
 
4 Items 4, 5.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant admits all the debts in his Answer to the SOR. He provides a brief 
explanation for each. He also provides excerpts from a December 2015 credit report. 
Applicant’s name does not appear on that credit report, but many of the accounts found 
on it are also on Applicant’s earlier credit reports. I find that this document is Applicant’s 
own credit report.5 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in March 2013. 
Applicant’s May 2013 credit report lists numerous delinquent debts, including SOR debts 
¶¶ 1.a-1.e, and 1.g-1.l.  
 
    Applicant states in his Answer that he has been working in the Army or as a 
contractor since 2003. In explaining the origin of his debts, he states that one job ended 
in 2010 when the contract was terminated. He then accepted a position in a different 
state, and at a substantial decrease in pay. As a result, he became financially 
overextended. He does not elaborate, and he provides no details about how he was 
financially impacted by this job change.6  
 
 Applicant notes that any extra money he has earned, such as per diem, overseas 
hazard pay, deployment pay and paying less in taxes, has gone towards repayment of 
his debts. He states that he has sought financial counseling, and has been working on a 
repayment plan.7 He provided no corroborating documentation. He provided no other 
documentation about his current income stream, his monthly expenses, credit counseling, 
or his efforts to repay or resolve his debts.     
 
 The specific SOR debts and their status are detailed as follows:  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($26,065) is a credit card account that Applicant opened in 
2008, and the date of last activity was February 2012. The account was reported as 
delinquent in September 2012. The account is now charged off.8  Applicant admits this 
debt and that he is unable to pay it. He says he has been in contact with the creditor, but 
cannot afford the monthly amount proposed. No corroborating documents were provided. 
The debt remains unresolved.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($13,355) is for a repossessed vehicle. According to his 
credit reports, Applicant purchased the auto in September 2010 (shortly before he began 
working as an instructor) and the date of last activity was February 2012.9 The account is 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 4, 5.  
 
6 Item 2 at 2; Item 3 at 17-18.  
 
7 Item 2 at 2.  
 
8 Items 4, 5.   
 
9 Item 4.  
 
 
4 
 
 
listed as being charged off on the two Government credit reports and the one Applicant 
provided. Applicant believed that the debt would be settled through the repossession. 
However, he admits the debt, and plans on paying it when he can afford it. The debt 
remains unresolved.   
  
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($3,968) is for a consumer account that Applicant opened 
in October 2010, and the date of last activity was March 2012. The account is charged 
off.10 Applicant admits the debt and plans on paying it. He offered no documents about 
this debt. It remains unresolved.   
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.l are medical debts. They total $2,095. Applicant admits 
all of them. In his Answer, he states that some of them have been paid (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.j, 
1.k and 1.l). He believes two should have been covered by insurance. (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.i). He admits three others, but does not recognize them. (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g and 1.h). 
According to Applicant’s December 2015 credit report, all these accounts have either 
been paid, or have a zero balance.11 They are resolved.   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
10 Item 6.   
 
11 Item 2. 
 
5 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.12 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has outstanding delinquent debts totaling over $45,000 that he began 
accumulating in 2010 and that remain unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support 
the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has paid or resolved his medical debts. Of the $45,483 in delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR, the three remaining debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c) total 
$43,388. He did not provide any documentary evidence of his efforts to pay or otherwise 
resolve them. He provided no evidence of his current financial situation. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. His 
ongoing delinquent debts continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to a loss of income in 2010. However, 
but for a brief period of unemployment in 2010, he has been gainfully employed in the 
defense industry since 2008. He did not provide any information to document his claim 
that his debts are due to a substantial decrease in pay, or to this brief period of 
unemployment. Further, he did not incur two of the remaining SOR debts until after his 
period of unemployment.   
 
There is some evidence to support that Applicant’s debts are attributable to 
circumstances beyond his control, due to a brief period of unemployment. However, for 
the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide evidence that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not shown sufficient evidence that he 
did so. His medical debts have been paid or are now resolved, but the bulk of his 
 
7 
 
 
delinquent debt remains outstanding, despite Applicant’s gainful employment in the 
defense industry since October 2010. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant indicated that he pursued financial counseling. He provides no 
information about his monthly income stream, his monthly expenses, or his ability to pay 
his debts. Without additional evidence, there are not clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant’s credit reports show his medical debts have been paid or otherwise 
resolved. His largest debts remain delinquent, and Applicant has not set forth a plan for 
resolving them. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the medical debts that are resolved. Applicant has 
not established a good-faith effort to repay the creditors on the larger debts remaining. 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to them.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old Army veteran and long-time defense contractor 
employee. But for a brief period of unemployment in 2010, he has been gainfully 
employed in the defense industry for many years. He has a history of financial 
delinquencies going back to at least 2010. He provided insufficient evidence that his debts 
are tied to a circumstance beyond his control. He provided insufficient documentary 
evidence of his attempts to resolve his delinquent debts, the bulk of which remain 
 
8 
 
 
outstanding. Applicant does not have a reliable financial track record at this time. His 
finances remain a security concern. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The 
record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.l:   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
