 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 15-02420 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
March 27, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 11, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On October 15, 2015, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines K (Handling Protected 
Information) and M (Use of Information Technology Systems). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 12, 2015, and requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 12, 2016, 
Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. A complete copy of the 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 6, was provided to Applicant, 
who received the file on February 2, 2016.1  
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted additional 
information on March 2, 2016. Department Counsel had no objection and the document 
is admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibit A. The case was assigned to me on May 
11, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 58 and married. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks 
to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline K, Handling Protected Information) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he has failed to comply with rules and regulations for protecting 
classified information. Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. He also provided 
additional information supporting his request for access to classified information.  
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer since 2003. During that time he 
has had two security violations. They are set forth below: 
 
 1.a. On April 10, 2009, Applicant was supposed to close and secure a classified 
laboratory. He became preoccupied and left without securing the area. In his Answer 
Applicant states, “After about 45 minutes, and realizing that I forgot to close the lab, I 
returned immediately to close and set alarm when some of my colleagues were still 
around at work (in front of the lab), and we confirmed there was one entered the lab 
during that time. I called and reported [to] security about the incident.” (Item 2 at 3.) 
(See Item 5 at 2-5.) 
 
 1.b. On July 12, 2012, Applicant sent classified information via an unclassified 
email system. In addition, he also saved the information on an unclassified server. The 
next day another employee informed the corporate security office that the subject email 
                                            
1 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is inadmissible. It will 
not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of 
Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on January 30, 2013. 
Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, and other evidence in the record, it is also 
cumulative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
contained classified information. The email was sent to 27 people, some of whom 
worked for a different company. According to corporate security, “[Applicant] stated that 
he was in a hurry to complete his report . . . and forgot that the data was classified.” 
Applicant received a written memorandum, entitled “Employee Corrective Action 
Memo,” on August 10, 2012, regarding this incident. (Item 5 at 1, 5-16.) 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant’s conduct set forth 
under Paragraph 1, above, showed noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or 
regulations pertaining to information technology systems. Applicant admitted this 
allegation. 
 
 With regard to the above incidents he states in Applicant Exhibit A: 
 
With all due respect, throughout my 33 years working for U.S. Department 
of Defense . . ., I have never had malicious or deliberate intention to abuse 
rules or regulations for protecting classified information. I am regretful that 
these past 2 unfortunate security breaches occurred under my negligence. 
I admit to making an honest mistake and will sincerely take appropriate 
steps to prevent any future infractions or violations. . . . I have had no 
infractions for almost 4 years since the last incident in July 2012. I truly 
take pride in my work and will strive to be more conscientious with 
sensitive material. 
 
 Applicant submitted no other information concerning the quality of his work. He 
submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline K - Handling Protected Information) 
 
 The security concern relating to Handling Protected Information is set out in AG ¶ 
33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 34 and especially 
considered the following:  
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
“palm” or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information. 
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35 and especially 
considered the following:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline M - Use of Information Technology Systems) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
Systems is set out in AG & 39:       
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 40 and especially 
considered the following: 
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified information on or to any 
unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology system; and 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and especially 
considered the following:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it  
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 Applicant failed to properly secure a classified laboratory in 2009. For this 
incident he received a security infraction. In 2012 he sent classified information over an 
unclassified email system, and also stored the same information on an unclassified 
computer system. This latter incident was viewed more seriously, as a security violation. 
He received counseling from his employer for both incidents. The facts are sufficient to 
support the allegations under each paragraph of the SOR, requiring Applicant to present 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the security significance of those facts. 
 
 Applicant has had no further security-related incidents in the four years since the 
second incident. The amount of time since an incident happened is viewed as a 
mitigating condition under both Guideline K and Guideline M. In addition, he forthrightly 
admitted his responsibility for each security violation, and did not attempt to excuse it or 
blame someone else. Under the particular circumstances of this case, I find that four 
years is a sufficient time to show that the conduct is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Paragraphs 1 and 2 
are found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s security violations, which 
also consisted of misuse of information technology systems, are now remote in time and 
have not been repeated. Overall, the record evidence as described above leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guidelines for Handling Protected Information, and Use of Information 
Technology Systems.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
