 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-06802 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carrol Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 6, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On May 23, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F.  The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance 
should be granted or denied. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On June 6, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On August 8, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 12, 2016, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On August 15, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for  
September 15, 2016. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were received into evidence without 
objection. On September 27, 2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with explanations.  After a 
thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old housekeeper and is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. He seeks a position as a janitor with a defense contractor. (Tr. 13-14; GE 1) 
 
Applicant was born and raised in Mexico and became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in July 2005. He graduated from high school in Mexico in June 1991. (Tr. 15-16; GE 1, 
GE 2)  Applicant married in December 2000. He has four adult stepchildren. (Tr. 22-25; 
GE 1, GE 2) 
 
Financial Considerations   
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 10 debts totaling $55,212 that have been delinquent for 
several or more years. These debts range from a $147 medical collection account to a 
$17,432 credit card collection account and are documented in Applicant’s March 2015 
and March 2016 credit reports. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.j; Tr. 27-33; GE 3, GE 4) 
 
Applicant was questioned regarding these debts during an April 2015 Office of 
Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview. During that interview, Applicant 
was unable to explain what he had done to resolve these debts or how he would resolve 
them in the future. (GE 2)  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to a 2006 move from one state to 
another, his inability to find a better paying job, and money spent upgrading his new 
home. During this transition period, he was unemployed for three months from October 
2006 to December 2006 and his wife was unable to find a job for a year. (Tr. 17-20; GE 
1) Applicant incurred most, but not all of his debts, as a result of using his credit cards to 
upgrade his home. (Tr. 22) 
 
Applicant testified that he seeks a higher paying job with a defense contractor to 
regain financial responsibility adding that he is unable to make any headway paying 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
down his debts because he only earns $12.29 an hour in his current job. (Tr. 20-22; AE 
B) Unfortunately, at his hearing, Applicant was unable to demonstrate that he made any 
progress in paying or otherwise resolving any of his SOR debts. He has not sought 
financial counseling. To his credit, Applicant is current on his day-to-day expenses. (Tr. 
26-27; 33-34; AE A-G) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the 
SOR. The facts established raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG 
¶ 18 as follows: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations). In response to the Government’s information, it 
was incumbent on Applicant to produce information sufficient to refute or mitigate the 
facts established against him. He did not submit any documents in response to the SOR 
that demonstrated he paid or otherwise resolved any of his debts.  
 
In summary, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the 
Government’s information. In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before 
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has been 
gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is presumed to be a mature, 
responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his financial 
problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for access to 
classified information. Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these 
adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
