 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------.  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06534 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 18, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 30, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 8, 2016. He answered the 
SOR in writing on April 27, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 23, 2016, and I received the case 
assignment on August 29, 2016. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 29, 2016 
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 13, 2016. The Government 
offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant testified 
 
2 
 
 
and submitted Exhibits A and B without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on September 23, 2016. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record 
open until September 30, 2016, to submit additional matters. He did not submit any 
additional exhibits. The record closed September 30, 2016. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in 
Subparagraphs 1.i, 1.j, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.r of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the 
factual allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h, 1.k to 1.m, 1.q, and 1.s of the SOR. He 
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He is divorced and has two children living. He works for 
a defense contractor. He has a master’s degree and earns $135,000 annually. He 
became unemployed in 2013 because a government contract ended. He started a 
consulting business that was not successful. Then he obtained another job with a defense 
contractor. He has had a security clearance since 1983. (Tr. 14-25; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant has 19 delinquent debts totaling $119,952 listed in the SOR. Applicant 
is responsible for these debts being delinquent and unresolved at the time the SOR was 
written.. Applicant submitted an exhibit showing his net worth is over $100,000. His bank 
statement for August 2016 shows he has about $55,000 in savings and $5,000 in his 
checking account. (Tr. 39; Exhibits A and B) 
 
 Applicant paid the telephone bill listed in SOR Subparagraph 1.g for $580. The 
debt for $86 listed in Subparagraph 1.n owed to a cable television provider was paid. 
These two debts are resolved. (Tr. 31, 34; Exhibit 5)  
 
 Applicant has $116,475 of state tax liens from 2009 to 2012 that are unreleased 
and remain in effect as of the latest credit report dated September 6, 2016. They are listed 
in SOR Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f (six tax liens). Applicant testified he worked with a 
representative of the state tax authority to recalculate and pay his state tax debts but was 
unsuccessful. He has not taken any action to resolve them after those efforts. He claimed 
he disputed the tax amounts, but did not submit any documents to show a legitimate basis 
for any dispute of the taxes. An unalleged $172,798 Federal tax lien was released in 
August 2010. The state tax liens are unresolved. (Tr. 27-53; Exhibits 2-5) 
 
 Applicant has not paid his delinquent debts because his former wife was to pay 
some of them and the divorce was not final until April 2016. Applicant did not take any 
action after that date or the date of the SOR to resolve the debts before his hearing. The 
debts unpaid are medical debts, energy bills, cable television, and telephone bills, in 
addition to the unpaid state tax debts. (Tr. 27-53; Exhibits 2-5)  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $119,952 in delinquent debt from 2009 to the present time 
that remains unpaid. Applicant has 19 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The evidence 
raises the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. No conditions are established:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is  being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
 
5 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy  of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
Applicant’s behavior is recent and has continued since 2009. His accumulation of 
significant state tax debts casts doubts on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. He has not taken any action to resolve his 19 debts except pay two of them 
totaling $666. AG ¶ 20(a) is not established.  
 
Applicant’s financial situation was not beyond his control. He earns $135,000 
annually, he has significant net worth, and money in his credit union accounts. He could 
have paid the 13 debts listed in Subparagraphs 1.g to 1.s. He only paid two of them. He 
did not resolve the tax liens listed in Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f. AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
established.  
 
Applicant has not had any financial counseling and there are no indications that 
his financial problems are under control or being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) is not established.  
 
Applicant did not demonstrate any good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts. 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established.  
 
Applicant did not establish any legitimate basis for a dispute of any debts. He did 
not provide any documents to show he filed any disputes. AG ¶ 20(e) is not established.  
 
Affluence, the final mitigating condition, is not an issue in this hearing.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant resolved two small debts. The 
six state tax liens remain unresolved. Applicant has the assets with which to pay his 
remaining 11 delinquent debts involving medical debts, utility bills, and 
telecommunications services. He had sufficient time in the past four years to negotiate 
and resolve all of these delinquent debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.h to 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.n:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.o to 1.s:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
