 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 15-06910 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant incurred delinquent debt from a failed restaurant business venture. He 
falsely denied the debt on his security clearance application. Resulting security concerns 
were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86) on March 4, 2015. On 
April 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on May 13, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on July 6, 2016. The case was assigned to me on July 18, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on July 29, 2016, setting the 
hearing date for August 16, 2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without objection. 
Hearing Exhibit I was also entered into the record. Applicant offered no documentary 
evidence, and testified on his own behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the 
record open until August 30, 2016, to permit him to submit additional evidence. On 
August 30, 2016, he submitted additional comments and documentary evidence by email. 
Department Counsel did not object to the admissibility of these statements or documents, 
which were admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The record closed as scheduled. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 24, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has worked 
since November 2013. He is a high school graduate who has completed some college 
courses. He has no military service, but worked as a civilian employee of the U.S. Navy 
from 2004 through 2011. He held a security clearance during that employment, and is 
seeking to renew it. He is married with two children, ages 12 and 8. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 7-9, 
28.) 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, 
but claimed that they represented duplicate reports concerning one underlying delinquent 
debt. He denied intentionally falsifying his SF-86 when he denied having any delinquent 
debts or outstanding judgments. Applicant’s admissions, including those contained in his 
July 8, 2015 interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator (GE 
2), are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
While he was working for the Navy, Applicant and a friend decided to open a small 
start-up restaurant business with a third friend of theirs, who had trained in French 
cuisine, serving as the chef. The restaurant opened in mid-February 2011 and went out of 
business at the end of August 2011. Throughout the time the restaurant was open, a 
long-planned project to replace a bridge close to its location made it difficult for patrons to 
park in the vicinity. Applicant withdrew about $44,000 from his 401(k) retirement savings 
account, and his wife withdrew an additional $25,000 from her 401(k) account, to invest in 
this business. He described his role in the restaurant as, “everything except cooking . . . 
paying bills, washing dishes, making drinks, bussing tables, sweeping lots . . . I just did 
whatever needed to be done. (Tr. 29-31.) In section 13A of his SF-86, Applicant 
described his position title at the restaurant as, “Owner/Dishwasher,” and said his reason 
for leaving was, “Chef had a little nervous breakdown and freaked out, also we decided to 
pull the plug rather than pour more money into it.” (GE 1 at 11-12.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant obtained a business credit card account from a major national bank for 
use in his restaurant business, for which he was also personally liable. The two debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were credit card accounts originated by this bank. 
Applicant asserted, but provided no documentary corroboration, that the smaller debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was a $5,000 sub-account for use by the chef as part of the primary 
$10,000 credit account that was in his name. However, the collection agency that 
acquired these debts from the bank obtained separate court judgments against Applicant 
for the alleged debts in 2014 and 2016. In addition, the record credit reports reflect the 
larger debt (alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a) was a business account with a personal guarantee, and 
describe the smaller SOR ¶ 1.b debt as an individual account of Applicant’s, with different 
account numbers. I am convinced that Applicant was not attempting to be deceitful about 
his understanding of these debts, but the record evidence indicates that they are separate 
debts involving different credit accounts that Applicant obtained from the bank. (GE 3; GE 
4; Answer; Tr. 31-34, 41-43.)      
 
When Applicant decided to close the restaurant, he also decided not to repay his 
credit card debt to this bank. He was still employed by the Navy, until later that year when 
he was voluntarily terminated, but chose to use his available funds to pay his outstanding 
business tax debts and take care of family expenses. He continued to receive credit card 
bills from the bank, but made no further contact or payments toward resolving the debt. In 
early 2014, the collection agency that obtained the judgments against Applicant 
contacted him concerning the debts. He offered to pay them around $1,000 to resolve 
them, but was told they would not accept less than $12,000 and, “basically told me to take 
a hike, they were going to court.” (Tr. 34-37, 43-44.)  
 
Applicant asserted that his denial of any outstanding judgments or delinquent 
debts on his March 2015 SF-86 was not a deliberate falsification because he did not know 
the collection agency had obtained the judgment against him in 2014. This explanation is 
not credible. He knowingly chose not to pay his credit card debts to the issuing bank 
starting in 2011, while he was still employed by the Navy, and engaged in unsuccessful 
negotiations to settle the debts with the collection agency in 2014 before they informed 
him they were going to court. (Answer; GE 2; Tr. 33-44.) 
 
Applicant has consulted a bankruptcy attorney who has advised him to file for 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief. No evidence was submitted that such a filing has been 
initiated. Applicant’s judgment debts remain unresolved. He provided a family budget 
plan that showed around $6,000 in net monthly income and $3,255 in living expenses. 
They incur significant medical expenses for their son’s serious medical condition, and 
often have to take leave without pay because they have used all available sick leave to 
attend to his medical needs. Applicant described the situation as follows:  
 
I have put together a budget of our normal bills. As I mentioned the medical 
bills vary widely from month to month based on my son’s health and if we 
need to be hospitalized so I haven’t included a line item for them. I have 
included . . . pay stubs . . . from my wife and I which demonstrate that when 
 
 
4 
 
 
we’re both able to work full time (or close to that) we’re able to meet our 
financial commitments; with the caveat that when [son] has to be 
hospitalized and we’re with him we’re on Leave Without Pay status as 
neither of us has a leave balance. (AE A.) 
 
 While the record was left open at his request, Applicant provided no evidence from 
supervisors, colleagues, associates, or family members concerning his character, 
trustworthiness, work performance, or track record with respect to following regulations 
and procedures relating to protection of sensitive information. There is no evidence that 
he has undergone financial counseling. (AE A; GE 2.)  
      
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, A[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: A[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
  
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has accumulated approximately $10,000 to $15,000 in delinquent debt 
over the past five years that he remains unwilling or unable to resolve. This evidence 
raises both of the above disqualifying conditions and shifts the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
Applicant’s delinquent credit card debt was voluntarily incurred and knowingly left 
unpaid, despite efforts to collect it by the originating bank and subsequent collection 
agency. It remains unresolved, despite having been reduced to two legal judgments. The 
evidence does not establish significant mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a), since his financial 
problems are ongoing, and did not arise under unusual circumstances. There is 
insufficient evidence that the financial issues are attributable to circumstances beyond 
Applicant’s control, or that he has acted responsibly to manage those financial 
obligations, which would establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). His termination from Navy 
employment was voluntary, and he knew of his son’s medical condition before he chose 
to incur the business debts that resulted in the current concerns. 
 
Applicant has not participated in financial counseling, and the budget information 
he submitted did not demonstrate that his financial problems are under control. He did not 
initiate a good-faith effort to resolve his judgment debts, and established little, if any, 
mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d). Applicant admitted that all SOR-alleged debts are 
valid, so mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) was neither asserted nor proven. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
  
 AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant falsely denied having any delinquent debts on his March 2015 SF-86. He 
admittedly knew about, and was attempting to deal with, his ongoing financial issues as 
recently as 2014. The evidence establishes a deliberate falsification as to this allegation. 
 
AG ¶ 17 includes two conditions that could mitigate the security concerns arising 
under this guideline in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) does not provide mitigation because Applicant did not make a prompt 
effort to correct the omission of his delinquent debt before being confronted with the facts 
during his OPM interview. Intentionally withholding information from the Government is 
not a minor offense and casts serious doubt on an individual’s judgment, so AG ¶ 17(c) 
does not support mitigation of this recent falsification.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant continues to owe 
about $15,000 in voluntarily incurred delinquent debt that has been reduced to 
judgments, and that he said that he cannot afford to repay. He intentionally denied the 
existence of these financial issues on his most recent SF-86. His actions have neither 
decreased the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress, nor made the continuation or 
recurrence of security concerns unlikely. He did not demonstrate rehabilitation or remorse 
concerning these irresponsible and untrustworthy decisions. Overall, the record evidence 
creates doubt as to Applicant=s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                  
 
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
