 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01711  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated the drug 
involvement, criminal conduct, and personal conduct concerns arising from incidents 
that took place when she was in an abusive relationship in 2013. She also mitigated the 
personal conduct concerns raised by her inadvertent omission of one-time drug use on 
her most recent security clearance application. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the drug involvement, criminal 
conduct, and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 On April 4, 2016, I 
issued a pre-hearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of witnesses. The parties complied 
and submitted documents by the April 15, 2016 deadline. At the hearing, which 
proceeded as scheduled on April 28, 2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibit (GE) 1 
through 4, Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through F, and Hearing Exhibits I – II, without 
objection. I left the record open after the hearing to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documentation. She timely submitted AE G, which was also admitted without objection. 
The Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) received the transcript (Tr.) on 
May 10, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 28, has worked for a federal contractor since May 2007. Over the 
years, Applicant has been promoted several times. She received her most recent 
promotion in early 2016. Applicant was initially granted a security clearance in 
approximately 2007, and completed her most recent security clearance application in 
January 2014. She disclosed a pending domestic violence simple assault charge. 
During her investigation, she also disclosed one-time heroin use in the fall of 2013. 
These issues formed the basis of the concerns alleged in the SOR.3  
 
 All of the alleged incidents occurred when Applicant was involved in a 
relationship between April and November 2013. When the relationship began, Applicant 
did not know that her boyfriend was an opioid addict and an alcoholic.  Applicant, who 
does not have a history of or experience with substance abuse, believed that his 
addiction was psychological, not physiological and that it could be conquered if he dealt 
with his suppressed emotional issues. Applicant believed she could prove this point by 
using heroin one time to show him that it was not addictive. Focused on the welfare of 
her boyfriend, Applicant did not consider the consequences of illegal drug use while 
holding a security clearance. Although she describes her motives as being altruistic and 
pure, she acknowledges that her choice to use an illegal drug for any reason was not a 
wise one.4 
  
  By July 2013, Applicant’s boyfriend began abusing her, first verbally, then 
physically. Applicant believes that, at times, she provoked her boyfriend by nagging him. 
In November 2013, Applicant’s boyfriend was visiting her home. He began drinking. As 
he became increasingly intoxicated, he started taunting and threatening her. In an 
                                                          
2 The pre-hearing order issued to the parties and the Government’s discovery letter, dated October 15, 
2014, are appended to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II, respectively.  
 
3 GE 1.  
 
4 Tr. 22-25, 41-42. 
  
 
3 
 
attempt to stop the barrage of insults, Applicant swatted him over the blanket he was 
lying under, with a light-weight, flimsy wireless keyboard. He destroyed the keyboard 
and beat her. Applicant managed to escape to her neighbor’s house. A couple of days 
later, she decided to file a police report. Applicant did not want her boyfriend to get in 
trouble; she only wanted to document the attack. She also hoped that he would be 
forced to get help. After taking Applicant’s report and talking to her boyfriend, the police 
determined that Applicant was the primary aggressor because she admitted to striking 
the first blow with the wireless keyboard. The police charged Applicant with simple 
assault and executed a warrant for her arrest. It does not appear that Applicant’s 
boyfriend suffered any legal consequences for his actions.5  
 
 Around the time that Applicant was dealing with her impending court 
proceedings, she was required to complete a new security clearance application. 
Applicant disclosed the pending charge, but did not disclose her one-time drug use. 
However, she voluntarily reported the drug use during her subject interview. At hearing, 
Applicant explained that she did not intentionally omit the drug use from her security 
clearance application; she was so preoccupied with resolving her legal problems that it 
did not come to mind. Having no prior interaction with the criminal justice system, 
Applicant was overwhelmed and focused all of her energy on dealing with the resolution 
of her legal issues. Eventually, Applicant pleaded no contest to the assault charge and 
was ordered to attend anger management counseling and to complete community 
service. She satisfied all of the terms of her sentence.6 
 
 Applicant has gone to counseling off and on throughout her life. Since December 
2014, she has received counseling from a licensed clinical mental health counselor 
(LCMHC). At first, she attended sessions twice per week, but has progressed enough to 
reduce her sessions to once per week. According to Applicant’s counselor, she is 
learning how to manage her attention deficit disorder, anxiety, and panic attacks. She 
has also learned how to set and hold good boundaries in her personal relationships. 
Applicant’s counselor believes that these efforts have improved Applicant’s self-esteem, 
which allows her to make better relationship choices. At hearing, Applicant testified that 
she is taking a break from relationships to learn how to become more comfortable with 
being alone. As a result, Applicant believes that she in a better place and will avoid bad 
relationships in the future.7 
   
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
                                                          
5 Tr. 25-31; GE 3-4. 
 
6 Tr. 32-35, 42-44; GE 1; AE A.  
 
7Tr. 32-33, 35-39; GE G.  
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant engaged in disqualifying conduct under the drug 
involvement and criminal conduct guidelines. Applicant admits to using an illegal drug 
use while holding a clearance and to pleading no contest to a simple assault charge. 
These incidents are disqualifying under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (g) and 31(a), respectively. 
Her actions raise concerns about her ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
Both instances of misconduct occurred while Applicant was involved in an 
abusive relationship with a drug addict and alcoholic. While Applicant’s one-time drug 
use shows extremely poor judgment, it was an aberration. Her desire to help her 
boyfriend, while sincere, was misguided and based on an ill-informed understanding of 
substance abuse and addiction. By ending the relationship and seeking counseling, 
Applicant has demonstrated intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. The criminal 
conduct is also mitigated as an isolated event. Applicant does not have a history of 
illegal drug use or criminal behavior. Given the changes in circumstances, it is unlikely 
similar misconduct will recur. Accordingly, the drug involvement and criminal conduct 
concerns are mitigated under AG ¶¶ 26(a) and (b) and 32 (a) and (d).  
 
 The SOR alleges, under the personal conduct guideline, that Applicant 
intentionally failed to disclose her illegal drug use while holding a security clearance on 
her January 2014 security clearance application. This omission raises concerns about 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability. Applicant denies the falsification allegation. A 
statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission of 
relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, 
inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the 
information did not need to be reported. The evidence supports a finding that 
Applicant’s omission was not intentional. She credibly testified about her state of mind 
at the time she completed her security clearance application. She was reasonably 
anxiety ridden and distracted. Also, the record contains several examples of Applicant’s 
ability to self-report adverse information as well as her tendency toward honesty. In 
filing a police report about the November 2013 assault by her boyfriend, Applicant 
reported actions that ultimately led to her being charged with a crime. In her subject 
interview, Applicant voluntarily disclosed her one-time drug use while holding a security 
clearance, an action that would have otherwise remained unknown to the Government.  
 
The SOR also alleges Applicant’s one-time drug use and her criminal misconduct 
under the personal conduct guideline. These incidents show poor judgment and raise 
concerns about Applicant’s ability to follow rules and regulations and are enough to 
support a negative whole-person assessment that Applicant may not properly handle or 
safeguard classified information under AG ¶ 16(c). However, as discussed above, 
Applicant has mitigated the underlying concerns. Applicant was involved in a romantic 
relationship that caused her to exercise poor judgment and temporarily lose track of her 
duties and responsibilities as a clearance holder. However, she recognized this and 
sought counseling so that she may make better choices in her personal life. Based on 
the statements of her counselor and my observation of Applicant at hearing, I am 
confident that she has done so and is able to choose healthier relationships, avoiding 
those that could cause her to engage in similar conduct in the future. Accordingly, AG 
¶¶ 17(a), (d), and (g) apply. 
 
Having found the concerns in the SOR mitigated, I have also evaluated 
Applicant’s ongoing security worthiness under the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). 
Applicant has held a security clearance since at least 2007, without incident. Applicant’s 
misconduct was limited to a nine-month period between April 2013 and January 2014. 
Because of the efforts she has taken toward rehabilitation, her misconduct during that 
brief period does not cast doubt on her current or ongoing security worthiness.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:       For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Criminal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct    FOR APPLICANT   
 
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
