 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-05462  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant resolved the two alleged delinquent debts. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.   
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 7, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On February 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 8, 2016 (Answer), and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  
(Item 2.) On June 17, 2016, Department Counsel prepared the Government’s written 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
case. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) mailed a complete copy of 
the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, to Applicant on June 20, 
2016. He received it on June 28, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant timely submitted two exhibits that I 
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, and admitted without objection from 
Department Counsel. Applicant did not file any objections to the Government’s FORM; 
hence, all seven Items are admitted. DOHA assigned the case to me on March 2, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted both allegations contained in Paragraph 1 of the SOR and 
provided evidence that they were paid. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and unmarried. He graduated from high school in 1995. 
He has worked for a federal contractor since January 2014. He was unemployed from 
March 2007 until December 2007, and from March 2013 until December 2013. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant disclosed two previous financial issues in his November 2014 SCA: a 
$9,586 federal tax lien that was entered in 2009 and paid in 2011; and a $6,000 civil 
action that was initiated in April 2012 for an unpaid credit card, and was resolved in May 
2012 with a $6,000 payment.1 (Item 3.) Applicant explained that he and his parents 
used the same accountant to prepare their tax returns. The accountant miscalculated 
both of their taxes, which resulted in federal liens being filed against them. He no longer 
uses that accountant, and has not had additional tax problems. (Item 4; AE A.) 
Applicant said the credit card account became delinquent in 2009, at which time he did 
not have sufficient money to pay it. (Item 4.)  
 
         Applicant attributed his financial problems to long layoffs in 2007 and 2013. In 
addition, he helped care for his parents after his father had a heart attack in 2007 and 
was unable to work. When Applicant obtained employment in December 2007, he 
earned about $14 per hour, which was insufficient to cover his bills. After a nine-month 
layoff in 2013, Applicant returned to work part-time in January 2014, which continued to 
cause some monetary problems. Applicant acknowledged that his prior financial 
immaturity and poor decisions also contributed to his financial issues. (Item 3; AE A.)   
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from 2014 and 2015, the SOR alleged 
two delinquent debts; one became delinquent in 2008 and the other in 2009. They 
totaled $28,560. (Items 5 and 6.) Both debts are resolved. 
 
                                                 
1. The SOR did not allege the federal tax lien or delinquent credit card as security concerns. Those facts 
will not be analyzed as potential disqualifying conditions, but may be considered under the analysis of 
mitigating conditions, the whole-person concept, and Applicant’s credibility.   
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a was a $223 unpaid credit card debt owed to bank. Applicant paid it on 
February 26, 2016. (Answer.) 
   
  SOR ¶ 1.b was a $28,337 unpaid credit card debt. Applicant settled it for $8,501 
and paid it on March 4, 2016. (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant did not submit a budget or provide evidence that he participated in 
credit counseling. He stated that his current financial situation “is good,” and that he has 
a decent credit score. (AE A.) A most recent CBR from June 2016 indicated that he has 
a balance of $21,696 on seven revolving credit accounts, all of which are in good status. 
The CBR did not list any delinquent accounts. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor submitted a letter of recommendation. The supervisor has 
known Applicant since 2014 when Applicant began his employment. The supervisor 
stated that Applicant is a “responsible, trustworthy employee.” (AE B.) He said that 
customers comment positively on Applicant’s work. (AE B.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
 
 
4 
 
 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant accumulated two delinquent accounts totaling over $28,000 in 2007 
and 2009, which he did not resolve until 2016. That history and inability or unwillingness 
to pay lawful debts, raise security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, 
and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) because 
Applicant did not resolve the two old delinquent debts until 2016. There is some 
evidence that Applicant’s financial problems were attributable to long periods of 
unemployment and under-employment, and caring for his father in 2007. Those were 
circumstances beyond his control. However, Applicant acknowledged that his previous 
financial immaturity and poor decisions also contributed to the problems, which were 
circumstances within his control. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) applies minimally.  
 
Applicant established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). He did not submit 
evidence of financial counseling or a solid budget, but a recent CBR indicates that his 
financial problems are under control. Applicant demonstrated some good-faith effort to 
resolve the debts and establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). He submitted evidence 
that he paid and resolved both SOR-alleged debts within a month of receiving the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who takes full responsibility for his financial matters. He honestly acknowledged his past 
mistakes and lack of financial judgment. He is aware that future financial problems may 
jeopardize his employment. At this time, the potential for pressure, coercion, and duress 
related to Applicant’s two delinquent debts is diminished. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:             For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
