 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-06829 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 4, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 4, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department 
of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 21, 2016. He answered the 
SOR in writing on June 1, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 9, 2016, and I received the case 
assignment on August 16, 2016. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 31, 2016, 
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 14, 2016. The Government 
offered Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and 
 
2 
 
 
did not submit any exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
September 27, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the sole factual allegation in 
Paragraph 1 of the SOR, which stated Applicant had a “current French passport with an 
expiration date of November 1, 2021.” He also provided additional information to support 
his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 27 years old. He works for a defense contractor. He has three siblings, 
all of whom were born to his U.S. citizen father and French citizen mother. Only his oldest 
sister was born in the United States. His two other siblings were born in France and 
Germany. All of them are dual U.S. and French citizens. His father was in the U.S. Air 
Force and Applicant was born in France when his father was stationed there. (Tr. 13-18, 
22; Exhibits 1 and 2)  
 
 Applicant has a French passport. It expires on November 1, 2021. Applicant grew 
up in France until he was 23 years old. While there he obtained a master’s degree in 
mechanical engineering. From September 2010 while studying for that degree he 
obtained a contractual job with a defense contractor. He came to the United States in 
2013 to be with his American grandparents and work for his defense contractor employer. 
He stated he was hired for his engineering expertise. (Tr. 18, 19, 43, 53, 54; Exhibits 1, 
2) 
 
 Applicant has a U.S. passport issued in 2009 and he used that passport to enter 
the United States. He obtained his first French passport in November 2011 when he 
wanted to travel to India and would have had to travel to the United States to obtain a 
visa on his U.S. passport to travel to India. It was easier for him to go to Paris to obtain a 
French passport and visa for the India trip. It was also convenient for him to use the 
French passport with a Cameron visa to travel to that country. (Tr. 20, 21, 24, 25)  
 
 Applicant’s father has dual U.S. and French citizenship, while his mother has only 
French citizenship. (Tr. 22) 
 
 Applicant stated in his security interview and confirmed at the hearing he was not 
willing to surrender his French passport. He also voted in a French election in 2008 and 
the French presidential election in 2012. Applicant also has voted in the United States, 
registering at his grandparents’ address. (Tr. 26-29, 40, 41; Exhibits 1 and 2)  
 
 Applicant testified he has equal allegiance to France and the United States, such 
that he could not choose between them should they be in conflict. He stated it would 
depend on the issue. When he travels back to France he uses either his French or U.S. 
passport in whichever line at the airport is shorter. He uses his French passport when 
 
3 
 
 
going to France and his U.S. passport when entering the United States. (Tr. 30, 31, 33, 
34) 
 
 On his e-QIP Applicant could only name four people who knew him well in the past 
seven years, three of whom were in France. (Tr. 32, 33; Exhibits 1 and 2) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
4 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that 
are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two may apply: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship.¶ 
 
 Applicant is a French citizen with a French passport that he refuses to surrender. 
His action of refusing to surrender that passport shows allegiance to France. AG ¶ 
10(a)(1) and (d) are established.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual 
was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security authority. 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
 Of these six conditions only one is partially applicable. Applicant’s birth occurred 
in France to a U.S. citizen who was in the U.S. Air Force and married to a French citizen. 
However, AG ¶ 11(a) is not fully mitigating because Applicant‘s dual citizenship can no 
longer be said to be “solely” attributable to his birth in France. Applicant has taken active 
steps to exercise his dual citizenship like obtaining a valid French passport and voting in 
French elections. These actions, along with his expressed intent to remain a dual citizen 
of both France and the United States, do not diminish the security concern present in this 
case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant considers himself a dual French 
and United States citizen. He is not willing to renounce his French citizenship or surrender 
his French passport because he travels to France to visit his family living there. It is more 
convenient for him to use his French passport when traveling to France.  
 
 Applicant stated he was hired by his defense contractor employer for his technical 
engineering expertise, not his citizenships. Applicant’s motivation for the conduct is that 
he views himself as a true dual citizen of two democracies and does not perceive any 
conflict between them and his dual citizenship and his duties.  
 
 Applicant’s duality on citizenship raises a substantial potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. There is the likelihood of continuation or recurrence of 
 
6 
 
 
his use of both his French and U.S. passports as he determines their convenience to him 
in his travels.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his foreign preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
