 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-07182 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jonathan Bell, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 21, 2014. On May 
5, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent 
him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix 
H (2006), and they replaced the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 1, 2016, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 28, 2016, 
and the case was assigned to me on December 14, 2016. On December 16, 2016, the 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for January 10, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through Q, which were admitted without 
objection. I kept the record open until January 17, 2017, to enable Applicant to submit 
additional documentary evidence. He did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 2017. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Tunisia. The request and supporting documents are attached to the record as 
Hearing Exhibits (HX) II and III.1 I took administrative notice as requested. Applicant also 
submitted documents regarding Tunisia (AX A through C) and I considered them in my 
decision to take administrative notice. The facts administratively noticed are set out below 
in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
and 1.d. He admitted SOR ¶ 1.b in part. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old linguist employed by defense contractors since August 
2008. He held a security clearance from 2011 to May 2015, when it was administratively 
terminated. (Tr. 28, 45.) He is seeking a clearance in order to accept a linguist position in 
Iraq. (Tr. 46-47.) 
 
Applicant was born in Tunisia, came to the United States in July 1998, and became 
a U.S. citizen in August 2005. He married in November 2007 and divorced in April 2013. 
He has no children. His ex-wife was born in Tunisia but was a citizen and resident of the 
United States when they married. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 Applicant attended various colleges in the United States. He received an 
associate’s degree in December 2002, a bachelor’s degree in political science in 
September 2004, and a master’s degree in international relations in July 2007. (AX P; AX 
Q; Tr. 25-26.) 
 
Applicant enlisted in the Army National Guard in April 2009, deployed to Iraq from 
April to July 2011 with a military intelligence unit, and received an honorable discharge in 
November 2012. He was discharged before completing his eight-year service 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is a procedural document unrelated to the request to take administrative notice. 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
commitment in the National Guard because of service-connected injuries to his back and 
knees, and he receives benefits as a 40% disabled veteran. (GX 2 at 8; AX L; AX N; Tr. 
40, 71.) His injuries do not interfere with his duties as a linguist, which are mostly 
sedentary. (Tr. 71.) 
 
 As a civilian linguist employed by defense contractors, Applicant worked in the 
detention facility in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, from October 2012 to May 2013 and from 
August 2013 to December 2013. He had regular contact with detainees, who regarded 
him as a traitor and infidel, and he was subjected to cursing, insults, and being splashed 
with feces and urine. (Tr. 29-30.) He served with the U.S. military forces in Africa from 
March 2014 until May 2015. (GX 1 at 10; AX D; Tr. 45-46.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he joined the National Guard to repay the United States for 
giving him the opportunity to obtain an education. He testified that Tunisia is “just a land 
of birth” and his life is in the United States. He considers his employment as a linguist as 
“a continuation of my military duty to contribute again for the safety and the interest of my 
country.” (Tr. 27-28.) He testified that if he found himself in a situation where he had to 
choose between loyalty to the United States and his family, he “wouldn’t have a second 
thought” about putting his loyalty to the United States first. (Tr. 34.) 
 
Applicant held a Tunisian passport that was valid until 2013, but he surrendered it 
to his security officer in the National Guard in 2010 and renounced his Tunisian 
citizenship. (GX 2 at 7.) He was not sure about the validity of his effort to renounce his 
Tunisian citizenship in 2010, because of the change in Tunisian government after the 
Arab Spring in 2010. Therefore, he recently submitted a renunciation of his Tunisian 
citizenship to the Embassy of Tunisia in Washington, D.C. (AX Q; Tr. 41-42.) He testified 
that he had no hesitation about renouncing his Tunisian citizenship. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant’s instructor in the National Guard, who later became his co-worker in 
Africa, described him as a skilled translator and a dependable and disciplined soldier. He 
performed well as a translator for senior officers and key leaders of foreign military forces. 
He is regarded as honest, trustworthy, and loyal. (AX D.) The site manager in Africa 
described Applicant as dependable, enthusiastic, motivated, and talented. (AX F.) 
 
 Applicant’s site manager in Guantanamo described him as one of his most loyal 
and committed employees. He lauded Applicant’s understanding of the military mission, 
his cultural awareness, hard work, sense of responsibility, and interpersonal skills. (AX 
E.) 
 
 The president of the parent company sponsoring Applicant for a clearance regards 
him as a loyal, trustworthy, “mission first” person. (AX G.) A senior exercise manager for 
Applicant’s employer considers him invaluable. (AX H.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother, sister, and two brothers are citizens and residents of Tunisia. 
His mother has never worked outside the home. His father was a farmer before he passed 
away. (Tr. 51.) His sister was formerly employed by the Tunisian government, but she is 
 
4 
 
now employed by a private-sector bank in Tunisia. (Tr. 31.) His two brothers are self-
employed. One is a land developer and the other owns several apartments. (GX 2 at 14; 
Tr. 33.) His mother and siblings live away from the Libyan border, where most terrorist 
activity occurs. (Tr. 52, 54, 58 
 
Applicant sent his mother money totaling about $300 per month as a matter of 
cultural tradition until he learned that it raised security concerns. He no longer sends his 
mother money, but his two brothers are financially secure, and they take care of their 
mother’s needs. (GX 2 at 13; Tr. 32-33, 54.)  
 
Applicant talks to his mother every 10-14 days. (Tr. 52.) He talks to his sister every 
three or four months. (Tr. 55.) He talks to his brothers “occasionally.” (Tr. 59.) He has no 
contact with his former in-laws. He last visited his family in Tunisia in April 2016 and he 
stayed about 32 days. (Tr. 66.) His family members are not aware of his employment as 
a linguist. (Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 Applicant has no property or financial assets in Tunisia. He lives with his ex-wife 
when he is at home in the United States. He lives in a large metropolitan area and has no 
need for an automobile. He has about $19,000 in savings. (Tr. 75.) 
 
 Tunisia is a constitutional republic with a multiparty, unicameral parliamentary 
system. In early 2014, the parliament ratified a democratic constitution that respects 
individual rights. Civilian authorities maintain control over the security forces, but 
international organizations have reported instances of harsh treatment of detainees, poor 
prison conditions, and lack of judicial independence. There have been complaints of lax 
prosecution with poor transparency, and gender-based discrimination and violence.  
 
 Terrorist attacks have targeted Tunisian government and security forces and 
popular tourist sites. The U.S. Department State has warned U.S. citizens to avoid travel 
to southeastern Tunisia along the Libyan border as well as the mountainous areas in the 
country’s west. 
 
 In May 2015, the United States designated Tunisia as its 16th major non-NATO 
ally (MNNA). MNNA status reflects a close relationship between the two countries, and it 
confers tangible privileges including eligibility for training, loans of equipment for 
cooperative research and development, and foreign military financial for commercial 
leasing of defense equipment.3 Tunisia cooperates with NATO in the fight against 
terrorism, cyber defense, defense planning and management, and scientific cooperation. 
The administrative notice documents submitted by both parties reflect no evidence that 
Tunisia competes economically or militarily with the United States and no evidence that 
Tunisia targets the United States for military or economic intelligence. 
  
  
                                                          
3 Other countries enjoying MNNA status include Australia, New Zealand, Israel, Japan, and South Korea. 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
6 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
 AG ¶ 7 (a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government. There is no indication that Tunisia competes with the United 
States economically or militarily and no indication that Tunisia targets the United States 
for economic or military intelligence. There is a heightened risk, however, posed by 
terrorist elements operating in Tunisia, as evidenced by the U.S. State Department 
warnings to tourists. Thus, I conclude that the evidence is sufficient to establish the 
heightened risk in AG ¶ 7(a) and the potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 
7 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant’s mother and siblings live in a country with a developing democratic 
government that is friendly to the United States, but the unstable situation in surrounding 
countries and the continuing threat of terrorism preclude application of AG ¶ 8(a).  
 
Generally, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security procedures and 
regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative value for the purposes of 
 
8 
 
refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security concerns raised by that applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying circumstances. However, where an applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his or her compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the 
applicant made a significant contribution to the national security, such circumstances give 
credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he or she will recognize, resist, and report a 
foreign power or terrorist’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. In this case, Applicant has 
a track record of complying with security regulations and procedures under combat 
conditions in Iraq and emotionally difficult duties in Guantanamo, and he made significant 
contributions to national security in both locations. See ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 
(App. Bd. Jun. 19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008). Thus, I 
conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
 Although Applicant’s contacts with his siblings are infrequent, he has not refuted 
the presumption that his contacts are not casual. See ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(c) is not established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He came to the United 
States seeking a better life. He has been educated in the United States. He is grateful for 
the blessings of living in the United States. He voluntarily joined the Army National Guard 
and deployed to a combat zone with a military intelligence unit. He endured insults and 
abuse from detainees in Guantanamo. He stopped sending money to his mother when 
he learned that it raised security concerns. He held a security clearance from 2011 to 
 
9 
 
2015 and served with distinction in several sensitive positions. He is highly regarded by 
his co-workers and his supervisors. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign family connections. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
