 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-----------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 15-02541 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
March 29, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 27, 2012, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On November 22, 2015, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on December 10, 2015, and 
requested her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 2, 
2016, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. A complete copy 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 7, was provided to 
Applicant, who received the file on February 10, 2016.1  
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She did not submit additional 
information. The case was assigned to me on August 22, 2016. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 34 and married. She is employed by a defense contractor and seeks 
to obtain a security clearance in connection with her employment. She served on active 
duty with the Navy from 2002 to 2006. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because she is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR under this Paragraph. Those 
admissions are findings of fact. SOR subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d, and 1.f through 
1.m are consumer debts. The total amount of money Applicant owes on those debts is 
approximately $35,853. The remaining allegation is in relation to a vehicle that was 
repossessed in about 2007. (SOR 1.e.) The existence and amount of the debts is 
supported by credit reports dated December 15, 2012; and February 18, 2015. (Items 4 
and 6.) A credit report dated October 5, 2015, does not show any delinquent debts. 
(Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant states in her Answer that the bills were incurred when she was going to 
college in 2006 and 2007. She further states: 
 
I ended up losing everything and dropped out of college. Since then I have 
tried to pay all my bills on time. I believe I haven’t even been late since 
that terrible time. Sadly though I couldn’t afford to pay my current bills and 
the late ones so I never got to pay them. I believe most are off my credit 
now. That doesn’t make it right but I have tried to do better since then. 
                                            
1 Department Counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations.  Item 5 is inadmissible. It 
will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of 
Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on January 9, 2013. 
Applicant did not adopt the summary as her own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because she has engaged in conduct that shows questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
Applicant admitted the single allegation under this paragraph. 
 
 Applicant filled out her e-QIP on November 27, 2012. (Item 3.) Section 26 of the 
e-QIP concerns Applicant’s financial record. One of the subsections under that section 
is entitled, “Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts.” Applicant was asked whether, in 
the past seven years, she had defaulted on a loan, had possessions or property 
voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed, had bills or debts turned over to a collection 
agency, had a credit card suspended, whether she had been 120 days delinquent on a 
debt, or whether she was currently 120 days delinquent on a debt. Applicant responded, 
“No,” to this question. This was a false response. Applicant had delinquent debts that 
were in collection, and an automobile that had been repossessed, as set forth under 
Paragraph 1, above, which fit the question. 
 
 In her Answer Applicant stated, “The reason I wrote no is because I believed it 
was longer than 7 years already. I was mistaken on the time frame.”  
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence concerning the quality of her job 
performance. She submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant, based on documentary evidence, had twelve delinquent 
accounts that she could not resolve. There is also evidence of one automobile 
repossession on her record. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), disqualifying conditions 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ In addition, AG 
¶ 20(b) states that disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the conditions that 
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”   
 
 The evidence shows that neither of the above mitigating conditions apply to 
Applicant. Applicant maintains that her debts occurred because she overextended 
herself while attending school. She states that she is able to pay her current debts, but 
is unable to pay her substantial delinquencies, which continue to date. Applicant did not 
submit a budget or any other financial records that would support her statements. It is 
Applicant’s responsibility to set forth her financial situation in a sufficient way so that I 
can make a finding that she has “initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts,” as required by AG ¶ 20(d). I am unable to do so in this 
case. Given the state of the record, I cannot find that her current financial situation is 
stable. I do not find that “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control,” as required by AG ¶ 20(c). Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
 
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 and especially 
considered the following:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant maintains that she did not intentionally falsify her 2012 e-QIP about her 
financial situation. Rather, she states that any falsification was unintentional and the 
result of her belief that she did not have to mention the debts because they were over 
seven years old. There are two problems with this argument. First, Applicant filled out 
the questionnaire in 2012, and she went to school in 2006 and 2007. Applicant knew the 
dates she was in school because she put them on her questionnaire in Section 12 of 
Item 3. She said in her Answer that she fell behind on her debts during her time in 
school. So, if she knew when she was in school, she knew the debts had been incurred 
in the last seven years. Second, Applicant seems to argue that it is the date a debt is 
incurred that is important to the question. Rather, it is the fact that the debts were still 
owed within the last seven years that is important. Under the particular facts of this 
case, I find that her answers were intentionally false.  
 
I have reviewed the potential mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶ 17, and find 
none of them apply to the facts of this case. In particular, I have examined the span of 
time, about four years when the record closed, since the falsification. There is 
insufficient evidence that Applicant currently shows good judgment or is trustworthy and 
reliable. Paragraph 2 is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial irresponsibility and 
personal misconduct were recent, voluntary, and occurred when she was a mature 
adult. Rehabilitation was not demonstrated, nor was unlikelihood of recurrence. Overall, 
the record evidence as described above leaves me with questions and substantial 
doubts as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guidelines for Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
