 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07951 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 7, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 19, 2016, scheduling the hearing for January 24, 2017. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary 
evidence.  DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 2, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since September 2014. He has a bachelor’s degree. He 
married in 1997 and divorced in 2012. He and his ex-wife reconciled, and they 
remarried in 2013. They divorced again in 2015. He has three minor children.1 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to the costs associated with his 
marriages and divorces, and relocating to obtain his current job. He is current on his 
child support for his three children who live with their mother.2 
 
The SOR alleges a mortgage loan that was $29,096 past due, with a balance of 
$123,795. It also alleges six miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling about $10,100. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts. 
 
Applicant’s house was lost to foreclosure. He believes it was sold for less than 
what was owed on the mortgage loan. His ex-wife was co-owner of the property, but 
she was not on the mortgage loan. She filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. The 
holder of the mortgage loan has been unwilling to discuss the loan with Applicant 
because of the bankruptcy.3 
 
Applicant paid the $31 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. He made some 
payments on the $5,880 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, reducing the balance to $4,781. He 
has not paid any of the other debts alleged in the SOR. He stated that he plans to pay 
his debts, but he is waiting until he finds out if there is anything owed on the foreclosed 
mortgage loan before he addresses any of his other debts. He has not filed his federal 
income tax return for tax year 2015. He stated that he was confused because his 
divorce was finalized in 2015. He estimated that he owes about $5,000 to the IRS. He 
received financial counseling. He has also been in contact with a lawyer, but he has not 
yet retained the lawyer. He hopes the lawyer will assist him in resolving any deficiency 
owed on the mortgage loan, file his tax return, and either assist him in obtaining a debt-
consolidation loan or file Chapter 13 bankruptcy proceedings on his behalf.4 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 13, 17, 35; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 13, 17-18; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 14-15, 19; GE 1-4. 
 
4 Tr. at 14-16, 19-20, 29-35; GE 1-4. Applicant’s tax issues were not alleged in the SOR and will not be 
used for disqualification purposes. They may be considered in assessing Applicant’s overall financial 
situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay his 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to the costs associated with his 
marriages and divorces, and relocating to obtain his current job. He started his new job 
in September 2014, and his divorce was final in 2015. He paid a $31 medical debts, and 
 
5 
 
he made payments toward another debt. He has done nothing to pay his other debts. 
Additionally, he has yet to file his 2015 income tax returns, and he estimated that he 
owes about $5,000 to the IRS. 
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. The first part 
of AG ¶ 20(c) (financial counseling) is applicable; the second part (clear indications that 
the problem is being resolved or is under control) is not applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
applicable except for the $31 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered the factors that led to Applicant’s financial difficulties and the limited 
steps he has taken to rectify them. Applicant has not convinced me that he has a viable 
plan to address his finances. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
