                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-04474
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 7, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On March 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 13, 2016, Applicant  replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge (AJ). The case was assigned to
this AJ on June 13, 2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 13, 2016, and the
hearing was held as scheduled on July 19, 2016. 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and
submitted Exhibits A through G, which were also admitted without objection. DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on July 27, 2016. Based upon a review of the
1
pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record as described
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 58 years old. He is married, and he and his wife have two adopted
daughters. Applicant received a Bachelor’s degree in Mechanical Engineering in 1980,
and a Masters degree in Mechanical Engineering in 1988. He served in the United
States Navy for 15 and a half years until October 31, 1995, and he received an
Honorable Discharge. He is employed by a defense contractor as an Operations
Engineer, and he is seeking a DoD security clearance in connection with his
employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists three allegations (1.a. through 1.c.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically failure to file Federal and state income tax returns, and a delinquent debt,
under Adjudicative Guideline F. The SOR debts will be discussed below in the same
order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a.  The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his Federal tax returns for tax
years 2009 through 2013, when required; and as of the date of the SOR, he had filed
Federal tax returns for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2011, but he had not filed Federal tax
returns for tax years 2012 and 2013. Applicant admitted this allegation on his RSOR,
and he wrote that he had submitted his Federal tax return for 2012 to his tax accountant
and his 2013 Federal tax return is almost ready to be submitted to his tax accountant.
Applicant submitted Exhibit A, which shows when he filed all of his past Federal
and State A and B tax returns:
   
2008 tax returns were filed: Federal, State A and State B on December 21, 2011;
2009 tax returns were filed: Federal and State A on January 25, 2013; State B on
April 16, 2013;
2010 tax returns were filed: Federal on January 25, 2013; State A and State B on
April 16, 2013;
2011 tax returns were filed: Federal and State B on February 19, 2013; State A
on April 16, 2013;
2012 tax returns were filed: Federal, State A and State B on April 25, 2016;
2013 tax returns were filed: Federal, State A and State B on July 12, 2016;
Exhibit A does not show that tax returns were filed for tax years 2014 or 2015.
Applicant testified that he has not yet filed his Federal tax returns for tax years 2104 or
2
2015, but he expects to file his 2014 Federal tax return by August 15, 2016. He expects
to file his 2015 Federal tax return by October 15, 2016. (Tr at 27.) 
Applicant testified that he became late in filing his tax returns because he was
“just getting behind with my wife’s business records and stuff like that, and then starting
in 2008 when we adopted the children it was taking up a lot of my time trying to help
them with school and so on like that. At that time I was semi-retired. I worked for my
wife, managed her office. I did some engineering work on the side.” He also indicated
that he fell behind supplying the information to a tax preparer regarding his wife’s
business, and as he fell further behind it just got more difficult to catch up. (Tr at 29-31.) 
1.b.  The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his State A tax returns for tax
years 2009 through 2013, when required; and as of the date of the SOR, he had filed
state tax returns for tax year 2010, but he had not filed state tax returns for tax years
2009, and 2011 through 2013. Applicant denied this allegation on his RSOR, and he
wrote that he had filed his state A tax returns for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2011. He
wrote that he had not filed State A tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013.  
Applicant testified that he was required to file state tax returns for two states
since he was living and earing income in State A, and he received additional income as
part of a family trust from State B. (Tr at 34-35.) As reviewed above, Applicant did file
his State A and State B tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2013, but they were all
filed long after they were due. Applicant testified at the hearing that he had not yet filed
his State A or State B tax returns for tax years 2014 or 2015. (Tr at 41.) 
1.c. The SOR alleges that Applicant owes State A $997 for delinquent state
taxes, a penalty and interest for state tax year 2010. Applicant denied this allegation on
his RSOR, and he wrote that he had paid $997 on April 16, 2013, and he paid an
additional amount of $263.56 for penalty and interest on July 4, 2013. Applicant testified
that he has paid this debt, and Attachment 6 of Applicant’s RSOR establishes that this
debt has been paid. (Tr at 37-40.) I find that Applicant has resolved this debt. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
3
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
4
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” may raise security concerns. Because Applicant did pay
the one delinquent debt listed on the SOR, I do not find that these disqualifying
conditions apply to Applicant in this case. However, AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file Federal,
state or local income tax returns as required,” is applicable and controlling in this case
as Applicant failed to file timely Federal, State A, and State B tax returns for several
years, from 2009 through 2013. While those tax returns have now been filed, at the time
of the hearing, Applicant had not filed his Federal, State A or State B tax returns as
required for tax years 2015 and 2016. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Because Applicant failed to file his Federal and state tax returns when they
were due for 5 tax years, and because he has still not filed his Federal and state tax
returns for tax years 2014 and 2015, I do not find that any mitigating condition is
applicable in this case. As has been addressed by the Appeal Board, late tax filing is not
automatically mitigating. I considered Applicant’s failure to act responsibly for several
years. Even though he has now filed many of the tax returns, it was long after they were
due, and the returns for two years have still not been filed. Therefore, I find Guideline F
against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
access to a classified position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
   
        I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying condition is applicable and controlling, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
5
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
6
