 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06152 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gabriel Pene, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, criminal conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J, criminal 
conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DoD acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 11, 2016, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on September 8, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
2 
 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 21, 2016, and the hearing 
was convened as scheduled on October 26, 2016. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department 
Counsel’s discovery letter and exhibit list were marked as hearing exhibits (HE I and II). 
Applicant testified, called three witness, and offered exhibits (AE) A through G. 
Applicant’s exhibit index was marked as HE III. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on November 2, 2016. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Upon motion by Department Counsel, and without objection, I amended the SOR 
by changing SOR ¶ 2.a to read: “The information as set forth in subparagraphs 1.a 
through 1.e, above.”1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted the allegations (with explanations) in the 
SOR, except  SOR ¶ 1.c and 1.d. All criminal conduct allegations were cross-alleged as 
personal conduct allegations (¶ 2.a) with the same corresponding answers. The 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, transcript, and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He is thrice divorced and has two children. His fiancée 
is expecting a child. Since September 2016, he has worked for his current employer, a 
defense contractor. He has worked for other federal contractors in the past. He has a 
master’s degree. In 1998, he retired from the Air Force as a captain after 21 years of 
honorable service.2   
 
 The SOR alleged:  
 
(1) In December 1997, Applicant was arrested and charged with third degree 
assault. He later received a letter of reprimand from his Air Force commander for 
striking his wife;  
(2) In September 2003, Applicant was charged with trespassing on private 
property and harassment. He completed a conflict resolution course and the 
charges were dismissed;  
(3) In January 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony property 
damage, felony menacing (with a shotgun), harassment, and third degree 
assault; 
                                                          
1 Tr. 9-10. 
 
2 Tr. 68, 70; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
(4) In April 2007, Applicant was arrested for violation of a protective order and 
harassment; and 
(5) In July 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with third degree assault, 
property damage, and harassment. 
   
 In 1997, Applicant was married to his second wife. He was in the Air Force at that 
time. He believed his wife was overly protective of their four-year-old daughter and had 
arguments with her about this and other subjects. In December 1997, Applicant got into 
an argument with his wife, which led to him striking her. He stated he was unable to 
control himself. His daughter was present when the incident happened. He testified that 
his wife also struck him. He was charged with third degree assault, but the State 
declined to prosecute. He was given a letter of reprimand by his Air Force commander 
for striking his wife. He and this wife divorced in 2001. In 1998, he began seeing a 
therapist for the treatment of depression. He has continued cognitive behavior 
counseling since then and has been taking prescribed medication.3 
 
 In 2003, Applicant experienced some conflict with one of his neighbors. 
According to Applicant, several teenagers associated with the neighbor engaged in 
harassing behavior, including vandalism, toward Applicant. Applicant tried talking to the 
neighbors (the parents) and calling the police on occasion to stop the harassment. In 
September 2003, another disagreement arose between Applicant and the neighbor’s 
teenage children. Applicant admittedly walked into the neighbor’s house without 
permission to confront the children’s mother. A scuffle ensure and Applicant ended up 
pushing one of the teenagers. A girl alleged that Applicant struck her, but he denied 
doing so. The police were called and Applicant was cited for trespassing. He appeared 
in court and the charges were dropped on the condition he take an anger management 
course. The course consisted of taking classes over several weekends. He had no 
further disputes with this neighbor and he still lives in the same location.4 
 
 In January 2007, Applicant was married to his third wife, who lived with him at the 
time. While his wife was out of the house, Applicant was performing some computer 
maintenance on her computer and discovered some explicit photographs showing his 
wife and other men. When she returned to the house, an argument ensured over the 
photographs and Applicant admitted striking his wife. His wife alleged that during this 
time Applicant threatened her with a shotgun and that the guns were  on a bed before 
she left the house. Applicant admitted slapping his wife and throwing her and her 
computer out of the house, but denied threatening her and stated that his guns were put 
away when the argument occurred. The police responded to Applicant’s address and 
initially Applicant refused to cooperate with the police. After several hours, he exited the 
house and found that it was surrounded by a police SWAT team. He was arrested on 
felony charges of damaging property, menacing with a shotgun, harassment, and third 
                                                          
3 Tr. 53, 56, 58, 71, 75-76; GE 2-3. 
 
4 Tr. 52-55, 77-78; GE 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
degree assault. The charges were  dropped when Applicant’s wife refused to cooperate 
with the prosecution.5 
 
 After the incident in January 2007, Applicant’s wife moved into a shelter. There is 
some evidence that a judge issued a protective order in favor of Applicant’s wife 
restricting Applicant from having contact with her. Applicant was charged with violating 
the protective order when he delivered medicine to his wife at the shelter. He went there 
at his wife’s request. Someone from the shelter reported him and several months later 
he was arrested. When he appeared in court, the judge dismissed the charges because 
Applicant was unaware of the protective order when he made contact with his wife.6 
 
 In July 2012, Applicant’s girlfriend (G) was living with him. They had been dating 
for four to five years. Some months before, G moved in with Applicant when she quit her 
job. After several months in this arrangement and G not looking for a job, Applicant 
explored eviction options with the Sheriff’s office because G would not move out. He 
served her with a 90-day notice to vacate the premises. In July 2012, shortly before the 
expiration of the 90-day notice, the two exchanged heated words. This led to Applicant 
throwing water on G, and G retaliating by throwing cold coffee on Applicant. At that 
point Applicant stated, “I tried to physically remove her from my house.” G called the 
police and Applicant was arrested for assault, damage to property, and harassment. 
The responding officers documented that G had a small cut on her face, a swollen lip, 
and redness on her right cheek. G claims Applicant struck her, pulled her hair, broke her 
glasses, and drug her across the floor when she grabbed and scratched his ankles 
which stopped the dragging. Applicant had scratches on the back of his calf. Applicant 
admitted he badly handled this incident and acknowledged what he did was wrong. In 
January 2013, he pleaded guilty to harassment and the remaining charges were 
dropped. He received a deferred adjudication pending successful completion of a two-
year probation period. He was required to attend a 36-hour domestic violence course. 
The following workday after the incident occurred he reported it to his security officer. 
Applicant has had no further incidents involving law enforcement. 7 
 
 Applicant testified that he has not been in a relationship since breaking up with 
G. He stated he has not been on a date since then. He also admitted during his 
testimony that he has a tendency to be violent with his romantic partners.8 
 
 Applicant has continued counseling and presented a letter from his current 
counselor. The counselor states Applicant is diagnosed with “adjustment disorder with 
anxiety and depressed mood.” He recommends that Applicant retain his clearance. His 
current physician also provided information stating that Applicant’s major depression 
                                                          
5 Tr. 45-48, 79, 80, 82-84, 86-87, 90; GE 4, 7. 
 
6 Tr. 50, 91; GE 4, 7. 
 
7 Tr. 38-44, 94-99, 102; GE 4-5. 
 
8 Tr. 73, 105-106. 
 
 
5 
 
 
was stable and his prognosis for continued stability is good. He also provided a list of 
his current prescriptions.9 
 
 Applicant presented the testimony of three witnesses including his former 
supervisor, his brother, and his daughter. His supervisor also provided a written letter of 
support. He attests to Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability. He recommends 
retention of his clearance. Another coworker, providing a letter of support, also finds 
Applicant trustworthy and recommends retention of his clearance. Applicant included his 
job performance appraisal from 2010-2011. Both Applicant’s brother and daughter 
support him.10 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
9 Tr. 62-65; AE A, G. 
 
10 Tr. 21, 24-32, 117-118, 121,125, 132, 134; AE D-F. 
 
 
6 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant was arrested for domestic violence-type charges in 1997, 2007, and 
2012. He was cited for assaulting a teenager in 2003. He admitted striking his second 
wife in 1997, pushing a teenager in a home where he was trespassing in 2003, striking 
his third wife in 2007, and pushing his girlfriend in 2012. I find that both disqualifying 
conditions apply, except concerning SOR ¶ 1.d, because it was not established that 
Applicant was aware of the protective order.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and   
 
7 
 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s most recent offense was in 2012. He has shown a steady pattern of 
violence towards his companions since 1997. While many years may separate the 
incidents, the pattern of abuse is remarkably similar. Applicant lashes out physically 
when he is in a dispute with his partner. Even though he has been in therapy since 1997 
and went through an anger management course in 2003, his actions in 2007 and 2012 
demonstrate that he cannot control his anger or violent ways. His probation from his 
2012 arrest ended in 2015. There has not been a sufficient amount of time to determine 
whether his rehabilitative efforts have been successful, given his long history of physical 
abuse. This is especially relevant because Applicant has not been in a relationship 
since 2012. His past criminal behavior casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Under these circumstances, his last criminal act that occurred in 2012 is 
not sufficiently attenuated considering his behavior in its totality. AG ¶ 32(a) does not 
apply. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence of his rehabilitative efforts to justify 
full mitigation. AG ¶ 32(d) does not apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
The same rationale that applied to the Guideline J concerns, also applies here. 
AG ¶ 16(c) applies.  
 
8 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 Applicant’s assaultive behavior through the years was not minor. Even though he 
has participated in counseling over the years and taken anger management courses, 
those actions failed to dissuade him from committing similar acts. Only two years have 
passed since his probation ended for assaulting his girlfriend. His past  criminal history 
since 1997 casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I cannot 
conclude that similar behavior will not recur. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) do not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military and 
civilian records. I also considered the favorable testimony offered by his coworkers, his 
therapist, his physician, and his family members. Applicant engaged in criminal conduct 
of a similar nature over an extended time. He failed to provide sufficient evidence of 
 
9 
 
 
rehabilitation and a track record of responsible behaviors to mitigate the security 
concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs   1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph     1.d:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph     1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph     2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
