 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02932 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not make sufficient progress addressing his delinquent debts. He 
failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 and 2011. He has 80 
delinquent debts totaling about $49,000. His spouse was born in Panama, and she has 
illegally resided in the United States since she was two years old. Financial 
considerations and personal conduct trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2014, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 4) On 
November 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why the 
DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which 
entails access to sensitive information. (Item 1) The DOD CAF recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether such access to sensitive information 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1)  
 
On January 9, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 3) On April 25, 2016, Department Counsel 
completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On May 6, 2016, Applicant received 
the FORM, and he did not provide a response to the FORM. On March 20, 2017, the 
case was assigned to me. The case file consisted of eight exhibits. (Items 1-8) There 
were no objections to any exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact1  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except 
for SOR ¶ 1.bbbb. He said he admitted and denied SOR ¶ 1.bbbb allegation. He also 
provided extenuating and mitigating information. His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact, and additional findings follow.  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old customer service representative employed by the 
same employer since November 2012.2 In 2009, he married, and his stepchildren were 
born in 2002 and 2003. In 1996, Applicant graduated from high school, and in 1998, he 
received an associate’s of science degree.  
 
From November 2012 to present, Applicant was employed by a prescription drug 
supplier. From July to November 2012, he was unemployed. From August 2011 to July 
2012, he was employed in customer service. From August 2010 to August 2011, he was 
employed as a retention representative for a telecommunications company. From March 
2005 to August 2010, he was employed as a customer service representative for a 
telecommunications company. He has never served in the U.S. Armed Forces. There is 
no evidence of abuse of alcohol or illegal drugs. 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
 Applicant’s credit reports, Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal 
subject interview (PSI), and SOR list the following financial issues: failure to file and pay 
federal income taxes for tax years 2010 and 2011 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b); 72 delinquent 
                                            
1 Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the sources for the facts in his paragraph and the next two paragraphs 
are Applicant’s May 21, 2014 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) or security 
clearance application (SCA) and his September 2, 2014 Office of Personnel Management personal 
subject interview. (Items 4, 5) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.t, 1.x through 1.bb, 1.dd through 1.qq, 1.ss 
through 1.fff, and 1.iii through 1.aaaa); 2 delinquent telecommunications debts (SOR ¶ 
1.cc, 1.rr); 1 vehicle lease delinquent debt (SOR ¶ 1.bbbb); and 5 miscellaneous 
delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.u, 1.v, 1.w, 1.cccc, and 1.dddd). His 72 delinquent medical 
debts range from $25 (SOR ¶¶ 1.q, 1.r) to $8,053 (SOR ¶ 1.mm) and total about 
$30,000. Twenty medical debts were less than $100 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, 1.ff, 
1.jj, 1.kk, 1.pp, 1.tt, 1.zz, 1.aaa, 1.bbb, 1.eee, 1.fff, 1.kkk, 1.qqq, 1.yyy, 1.zzz, and 
1.aaaa). The eight non-medical debts total about $19,000. 
 
In his SOR response, Applicant said: 
 
I did not have the car repossessed. I voluntarily gave the car back 
because I found out that I was being scammed. . . . About being married 
to an illegal immigrant[,] I had made it known that my wife was out of 
status but pursuing deferred action for childhood arrivals, which is now 
granted effective 9/2015. I also feel that I am not living beyond my means 
because mostly all of my bills are medical. I have a lifelong disease that 
requires me to go to the hospital often. I really can’t afford the hospital, but 
without the hospital I would surely die. I have not placed all the records in 
my initial application, because I do not know all of them. (Item 3) 
 
 There is no documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent SOR accounts. He did not 
describe financial counseling or present a budget. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and sufficient detailed explanations of the causes for his 
financial problems and other mitigating information. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s spouse came to the United States from Panama when she was two 
years old. She does not have residency or citizenship documentation. She is not 
employed outside his home. Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law were born in 
Panama and live in the United States. It is unclear whether her parents are U.S. citizens 
or legal residents of the United States.  
  
Applicant did not provide documentation showing his spouse had registered her 
presence in the United States with the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). 
The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to 
submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3)    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.2, and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met 
for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
The protection of national security and sensitive records is paramount. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
  
The Appeal Board, in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted), explained the scope and rationale for the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise [sensitive] information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s [eligibility for a public trust position].  
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SOR 
response, SCA, and credit reports establish the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
   
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013) 
concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the applicability of mitigating 
conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
February 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
4 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
of a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to 
the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
No mitigating conditions fully apply; however, Applicant presented some 
important mitigating information. Three circumstances beyond his control adversely 
affected his finances: (1) Applicant was unemployed from July to November 2012; (2) 
Applicant was underemployed; and (3) he had expensive medical problems. He 
disclosed his financial problems on his SCA, during his OPM PSI, and on his SOR 
response.  
 
The negative financial considerations concerns are more substantial. He failed to 
file and pay his federal income taxes for tax years 2010 and 2011. The Appeal Board 
clarified that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has purportedly corrected [the 
applicant’s] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] is now motivated to prevent 
such problems in the future, does not preclude careful consideration of [a]pplicant’s 
[trust]worthiness in light of [applicant’s] longstanding prior behavior evidencing 
irresponsibility.” See ISCR Case No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) 
(characterizing “no harm, no foul” approach to an Applicant’s course of conduct and 
employed an “all’s well that ends well” analysis as inadequate to support approval of 
access to classified information with focus on timing of filing of tax returns after receipt 
of the SOR).   
 
Applicant has 80 SOR debts totaling about $49,000. He did not provide enough 
details about what he did to address his SOR debts over the last four years. He did not 
provide documentation relating to any of his SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as 
checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor 
proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or 
from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;5 (3) credible debt disputes 
indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts and why he held such a 
belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement 
offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other 
evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) because he did not provide documented proof to substantiate the existence, 
basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
                                            
5 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In sum, Applicant did not establish through readily available documentation that 
he was making any progress resolving his delinquent debts. He did not provide proof 
that he filed his federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 and 2011. His 
explanations do not mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a trustworthiness concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s 
time or resources; and 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. . . ; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 AG 16(c) does not apply because the information under Guideline F is sufficient  
for an adverse determination. Applicant’s spouse has violated immigration laws. He is 
providing support to her. His support facilitates her continued residence in the United 
States. He did not provide documentation showing she had registered her presence in 
the United States with the INS. AG ¶¶ 16(d)(1), 16(e), and 16(g) are established.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides three conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
including: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant did not provide documentation 
showing he had taken any action to resolve his spouse’s illegal residency in the United 
States. He continues to be vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Personal 
conduct trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old customer service representative or associate 
employed by the same employer since November 2012. In 2009, he married, and his 
stepchildren were born in 2002 and 2003. In 1996, Applicant graduated from high 
school, and in 1998, he received an associate’s of science degree. From July to 
November 2012, he was unemployed. There is no evidence of abuse of alcohol or 
illegal drugs. 
 
The negative financial information relating to his taxes and delinquent debts is 
more significant. Applicant did not file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2010 
and 2011. When a tax issue is involved, an administrative judge is required to consider 
how long an applicant waits to file their tax returns, whether the IRS generates the tax 
returns, and how long the applicant waits after a tax debt arises to begin and complete 
making payments.6 Applicant has 80 delinquent debts totaling $49,000.  
 
 
                                            
6 The recent emphasis of the Appeal Board on security and trustworthiness concerns arising from 
tax cases is instructive. See ISCR Case No. 14-05794 at 7 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (reversing grant of 
security clearance and stating, “His delay in taking action to resolve his tax deficiency for years and then 
taking action only after his security clearance was in jeopardy undercuts a determination that Applicant 
has rehabilitated himself and does not reflect the voluntary compliance of rules and regulations expected 
of someone entrusted with the nation’s secrets.”); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 
2015) (reversing grant of a security clearance, discussing lack of detailed corroboration of circumstances 
beyond applicant’s control adversely affecting finances, noting two tax liens totaling $175,000 and 
garnishment of Applicant’s wages, and emphasizing the applicant’s failure to timely file and pay taxes); 
ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014) (reversing grant of a security clearance, noting 
not all tax returns filed, and insufficient discussion of Applicant’s efforts to resolve tax liens). More 
recently, in ISCR Case No. 14-05476 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) the Appeal Board reversed a grant of a 
security clearance for a retired E-9 and cited applicant’s failure to timely file state tax returns for tax years 
2010 through 2013 and federal returns for tax years 2010 through 2012. Before his hearing, he filed his 
tax returns and paid his tax debts except for $13,000, which was in an established payment plan. The 
Appeal Board highlighted his annual income of over $200,000 and discounted his non-tax expenses, 
contributions to DOD, and spouse’s medical problems. The Appeal Board emphasized “the allegations 
regarding his failure to file tax returns in the first place stating, it is well settled that failure to file tax 
returns suggest that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-established government rules 
and systems. Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for protecting classified 
information.” Id. at 5 (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002) (internal quotation 
marks and brackets omitted). See also ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3, 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) 
(reversing grant of a security clearance, noting $150,000 owed to the federal government, and stating “A 
security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal Government for the protection of national 
secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an 
applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”).  
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations and personal conduct trustworthiness concerns are not 
mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.dddd: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge 
