 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-07213  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant defaulted on two mortgage loans and six other debts, totaling more 
than $31,000, since 2012. He filed for bankruptcy in June 2016, and reported a monthly 
deficit of income to expenses. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On July 7, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. (Item 2.) 
On April 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR on May 1, 2016, and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On June 20, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on June 20, 2016, and received by him on June 28, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he could file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. On July 11, 2016, 
Applicant filed his Response to the FORM. Department Counsel did not object to the 
admissibility of Applicant’s Response, which is marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The 
four FORM Items and AE A are admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me 
on March 6, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted each of the eight SOR allegations concerning 
two mortgage loans that were foreclosed in 2013; and six other commercial debts 
(totaling $31,621) that have also been delinquent since late 2012. His admissions and 
explanations are incorporated into these findings of fact. (Item 1.) 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and divorced, since January 2013, with three minor 
children in the custody of his ex-wife. He earned a high school diploma in 1990 and 
served on active duty in the U.S. Army from November 1992 to August 2000. He has 
been employed by a defense contractor in an overseas location, as a supply technician, 
since March 2010. He is seeking to renew his security clearance in connection with that 
employment. (Item 1; Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant previously owned two residential properties in the United States. He 
lived in the first one from June 2008 until September 2011, when he and his wife 
purchased and moved into the second one in another state. The mortgage loans 
originated at about $140,000 on the first home, and $174,500 on the second home. 
They were able to rent the first home to a tenant until she moved out around mid-2012. 
When they could not find another tenant, they unsuccessfully attempted to sell the first 
home. Applicant last made payments on these loans in October 2012. He was awarded 
sole possession of both properties in their January 2013 divorce decree, as well as 
responsibility for the associated mortgage debts. The lender foreclosed on both 
properties in 2013. Applicant’s credit report reflects no outstanding balance due on 
either loan. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 3.)  
 
 The remaining six delinquent debts involve: a $20,200 charged-off automobile 
loan toward which Applicant last made a payment in December 2012; two credit card 
accounts, totaling $10,397, toward which he last made payments in August and 
September 2012; a $408 medical debt from October 2014 that was placed for collection 
in March 2015; a $208 collection account for a miscellaneous government debt owed 
since December 2012; and a $408 unpaid cell phone bill. (Item 1; Item 3.)  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his May 2016 Answer, Applicant said that after he obtained an $800 decrease 
in his monthly child support payments he was still unable to pay his mortgages or car 
loan, and other bills started becoming delinquent as well. He tried to pay off the smaller 
ones first, as he could afford to do so. He said that he was working with his lawyer so he 
could file for bankruptcy, which he did on June 15, 2016. The Chapter 7 filing sought 
discharge of unsecured potential claims by 15 creditors totaling an estimated $31,132 
(although ten of those claims were listed as, ”Disputed,” with a claim amount of $1.00). 
The record contains no information on further progress of this bankruptcy proceeding, or 
demonstrating any other action to resolve even Applicant’s smallest debts. Applicant’s 
attorney wrote on June 27, 2016, that she anticipated a discharge in mid-September 
2016 in the event that no unforeseen problems arose in the case. (Item 2; Item 4; AE 
A.)    
 
 The only record budget information concerning Applicant is contained in his 
bankruptcy filing. Schedules I and J report gross monthly income of $8,639, net monthly 
income of $4,306, and monthly expenses of $4,310, resulting in a $4 monthly deficit. 
However, his Official Form 122A-2, Chapter 7 Means Test Calculation shows that, using 
Internal Revenue Service National and Local Standards for certain expenses, his 
monthly disposable income deficit should be about $745. (Item 4.) He said, “Over the 
past several years I have incurred debt from making poor financial decisions and not 
thinking things out thoroughly before obligating myself. I have learned greatly from this 
and have sought assistance from [his bankruptcy attorney].” (AE A.) 
 
 The record lacks sufficient evidence on which to base determinations concerning 
the quality of Applicant’s professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties 
entail, or his track record with respect to handling sensitive information and observation 
of security procedures. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character 
in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial irresponsibility dating back to 2012, and 
continuing to date. His financial history and ongoing inability to pay his voluntarily 
incurred debts raise security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and 
shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s ongoing financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial delinquencies are significant, ongoing, and reflect a pattern 
of spending beyond what his disposable income could support over the past five years. 
He recently sought to relieve himself from more than $30,000 in debt through 
bankruptcy. However, the record evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that such 
issues are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or judgment. Accordingly, mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) was not 
established. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant claimed that the lost rental income when his tenant moved out in mid-
2012 started his financial difficulties, which were exacerbated by his divorce in early 
2013. However, he did not explain why these events caused him to stop paying the 
mortgage loan on his current residence and his automobile loan in late 2012, or his two 
maxed-out credit card accounts earlier that year. He has been fully employed in his 
current job since March 2010, and did not demonstrate responsible actions under those 
circumstances. Although he has obtained legal advice and the required financial 
counseling in connection with his bankruptcy filing, the record evidence is insufficient to 
demonstrate that such actions will resolve or bring his financial problems under control 
going forward. The timing of the filing in connection with his security clearance 
processing, without other evidence, suggests minimal good faith with respect to 
resolution of his admittedly legitimate delinquent debts. Accordingly, Applicant failed to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(b) through 20(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
expressed in the SOR. Despite continuous employment, he chose to stop paying two 
mortgage loans, his car loan, and two large credit card debts in 2012. His continuing 
inability or unwillingness to pay his admittedly legitimate delinquent debts demonstrates 
an absence of rehabilitation or behavioral change. The likelihood that similar problems 
will recur remains a security issue, such that the potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress is undiminished.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
