 
1 
 
 
``                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:                                             ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08740 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E 
and financial considerations security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 15, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on August 8, 2015. He 
also provided answers to interrogatories from the Government on May 2, 2016. (Item 6) 
After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation and Applicant’s responses to the 
interrogatories, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. On October 24, 2016, DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for personal 
conduct under Guideline E and financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 2, 2016. He admitted the five tax 
debt allegations and the two allegations of failing to timely file state and federal income 
tax returns under Guideline F. He denied the two allegations of falsification of his 
security clearance application under Guideline E. He elected to have the matter decided 
on the written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on January 5, 2017. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on January 9, 2017, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant 
did not provide a response to the FORM. I was assigned the case on March 21, 2017.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the Interrogatory to authenticate the accuracy of the 
summary of the Personal Subject Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 6). He was 
further advised that the PSI and his responses to the interrogatories could be admitted 
into evidence. Applicant made some corrections to the PSI and agreed that the 
corrected PSI could be admitted into evidence. Applicant waived any objection to the 
admissibility of the PSI by his response to the interrogatories. I will consider information 
in the PSI and Applicant’s responses to the Interrogatories in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He received a bachelor’s degree in 1997. Since April 
2015, he has been employed by a defense contractor as a systems analyst. Prior to his 
employment with the defense contractor, he was self-employed as a technical writer. He 
previously worked for a company as a technical writer or reliability engineer. He married 
in May 1999 and has two young children. His security clearance application of May 12, 
2015 was his first request for a security clearance. In the application, he did not list any 
delinquent debts. He noted that he had recently received a notice from the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) that he owed taxes. He stated he was investigating the issue. 
He answered “no” to the question asking if he failed to timely file any tax returns in the 
last seven years. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated May 15, 2015; Item 6, PSI, dated May 3. 2016) 
 
The SOR alleges a state tax lien for state A entered in January 2016 for $4,452 
(SOR 1.a); a federal tax lien for $57,557 entered in December 2015 (SOR 1.b); a state 
tax lien from state B for $3,600 entered in December 2012 (SOR 1.c); a federal tax debt 
for delinquent taxes of approximately $62,082 for tax years 2007, 2012, and 2013 (SOR 
1.d); a tax debt for state A of $4,453 for tax year 2007 (SOR 1.e); a tax debt for state B 
for $14,109 for tax years 2007, 2012, 2013, and 2014 (SOR 1.f); failure to file federal 
 
3 
 
 
income tax returns for tax years 2007, 2012, 2013, and 2014 (SOR 1.g); and failure to 
file state income tax returns for tax years 2007, 2012, and 2013 (SOR 1.h). Under 
Guideline E, the SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to report tax liens when 
he responded “no” to question 26 asking if in the last seven years he had a lien placed 
against his property for failure to pay taxes or other debts. (SOR 2.a). The SOR also 
alleges that he failed to report a mortgage more than 120 days delinquent by 
responding “no” to the part of question 26 asking if in the last seven years he defaulted 
on any loans or been delinquent more than 120 days on any debt. (SOR 2.b)   
 
Applicant admits that he failed to timely file federal and state income tax returns 
for tax years 2007, 2012, and 2013. He also admitted to not timely filing his state 
income tax return for 2014. In the PSI, Applicant attributes his failure to timely file his 
federal and state tax returns for 2007 to his moving and his uncertainty as to how to file 
the returns. After completing the move, he just forgot to file his 2007 returns. He 
contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and was told that they sent him notices 
about filing his returns. Applicant denied receiving any notices concerning his taxes, and 
believes the notices were sent to the wrong address. He contacted a tax preparer to 
assist him in filing his 2012, 2013, and 2014 federal and state tax returns. He told the 
security investigator that he was waiting to hear from his tax preparer if he owed federal 
and/or state income taxes. (Item 6, PSI, at 4) 
 
In his response to interrogatories, Applicant corrected the amount listed in the 
PSI that was owed for the federal and state taxes for tax year 2007. He also noted that 
he did not realize his tax situation would change after he became an independent 
contractor. He stated that it was his intention to pay all federal and state income taxes. 
(Item 6 at 41) 
 
Applicant claims to have filed all federal and state tax returns except the tax 
returns for tax year 2015. He did not provide copies of the returns. However, the IRS 
notified him that a refund for tax year 2014 was applied to taxes due for tax year 2007. 
Even with this refund applied, he still owed a substantial tax debt for 2007. The IRS 
notified Applicant that he also owed substantial taxes for tax years 2012 and 2013. 
(Item 6 at 46-58) This information indicates that the federal tax returns were filed as 
reported by Applicant. The IRS notified Applicant in April 2016 that the collection of his 
taxes was closed because of a determination he does not have the ability to pay the 
taxes due at this time. The notice made it clear that the taxes were still owed to the IRS 
but the collection of the taxes would not be pursued. (Item 6 at 86)  
 
State A notified Applicant in January 2016 that he still owed substantial income 
taxes for tax year 2007. Applicant was also advised that a lien was placed against him 
for the state taxes. (Item 6 at 62-66). There is no record of payment of these taxes. 
However, the state did issue Applicant a notice that the taxes due for tax year 2008 had 
been abated as not due. (Item 6 at 76) 
 
State B notified Applicant that he owed state taxes for tax years 2007, 2012, 
2013, and 2014 (Item 6 at 67-73) These notices indicated that the tax returns had been 
 
4 
 
 
filed and the taxes calculated to arrive at the amount that Applicant owed State B. There 
is no indication that the taxes have been paid. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant on his May 15, 2015 e-QIP failed to report the 
taxes liens imposed by both state A and state B, and a mortgage on a rental property 
that was more than 120 days delinquent in May 2009. Applicant claimed in the 
alternative that he did not remember the debts, that they were beyond the seven-year 
limit required of the e-QIP for reporting, or that there were any taxes owed.  
 
Applicant’s response to the question in the interrogatories and the documents he 
provided show that he was aware of the taxes owed both states. In May 2015 when he 
completed the e-QIP, he was working with his tax adviser to resolve the state taxes.  
 
The documents also show that Applicant took an active part in resolving the 
mortgage on the rental property. The mortgage was in default in September 2006. (Item 
6 at 16) Applicant requested a temporary forbearance of the mortgage and participated 
in a short sale of the property in May 2009. It is clear from the documents submitted by 
Applicant in his response to the SOR that he knew in May 2015 when he completed his 
e-QIP that the mortgage payments were delinquent. (Item 6, 11-37) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
5 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision. 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about a person’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 18) The financial 
security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about an 
individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security clearance 
adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
Applicant failed to timely file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2007, 2012, 2013, and 2014. As a result, he owes federal and state income taxes to two 
states. Applicant’s failure to timely file income tax returns and the resulting delinquent 
taxes are sufficient to raise the following security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
The evidence indicates an unwillingness to satisfy debt.   
 
 
6 
 
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not case 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s taxes are unpaid and thus a 
continuous course of conduct and a current debt. Applicant did not present any reasons 
that were beyond his control preventing him from filing his income tax returns and from 
paying the taxes due. He may have moved in 2007, but after moving he just forgot to file 
his returns. He claims to was waiting for the 2007 taxes to be resolved before filing his 
2012 and 2013 tax returns. He eventually hired a tax accountant and filed the returns 
indicating that he could have filed his returns on time. He did not dispute any of the tax 
assessments or file a tax dispute. He presented no information on financial counseling 
except for the counseling he may have received from the tax accountant. He has not 
presented any information on affirmative steps he took to pay the taxes. 
 
Applicant failed to file state and federal tax returns for 2007, 2012, 2013, and 
2014. This amounts to 12 federal and state tax returns, three tax returns per year for 
four years. Filing of tax returns is both a financial and legal obligation. Applicant owes 
federal taxes, and state taxes to two states as a result of his failure to file tax returns. 
The SOR alleges both federal and two state tax debts and a lien imposed to cover the 
debts. Since these are the same debts expressed also as a lien, I find for Applicant as 
to the liens. Since filing tax returns and paying taxes is an annual requirement, the 
failure to file and pay taxes may likely recur. A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or 
her legal obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and 
reliability required of a person granted access to classified information. A person who 
has a history of not fulfilling the legal obligation to file income tax returns does not 
exhibit the confidence required for that person to be granted access to classified 
information. His failure to follow the rules concerning filing of tax returns may show that 
he is unlikely to follow the rules and regulations governing the handling of classified 
 
7 
 
 
information. Applicant's action in not timely filing his tax returns is significant and 
disqualifying. 
 
Applicant has not presented a plan to resolve and pay past-due taxes He has not 
presented information on any affirmative actions he has taken to pay the taxes he owes. 
Accordingly, he has not established that he acted with reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and an adherence to duty and obligation towards his financial obligations. With 
evidence of delinquent debt and no documentation to support responsible management 
of his finances, it is obvious that Applicant’s financial problems are not under control, 
and that Applicant is not managing his personal financial obligations reasonably and 
responsibly. His financial problems are not behind him. Applicant’s failure to act 
reasonably and responsibly towards his finances is an indication that he may not protect 
and safeguard classified information. Applicant has not presented sufficient information 
to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the process to determine eligibility for 
access to classified information or any other failure to cooperate with this process (AG ¶ 
15). Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the 
person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security clearance 
depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a person 
conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function 
properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 
Applicant failed to provide derogatory financial information on his e-QIP. As 
noted in the SOR and the credit reports, Applicant had failed to note a lien that had 
been placed against his property as well as a mortgage more than 120 days delinquent. 
The failure to report the lien and the delinquent mortgage raises a security concern 
under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate omission 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities).  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the financial part of his e-QIP. He stated 
he did not remember the state tax lien, and he believed the mortgage debt was beyond 
the seven-year reporting requirement of the e-QIP. While there is a security concern for 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written 
document or oral statement to the Government when applying for a security clearance, 
 
8 
 
 
not every omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A 
falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is knowingly and willfully 
done with intent to deceive.   
The evidence presented by Applicant shows that he knew he had an income tax 
issue with state A. He had been working with his tax advisor to resolve the state and 
federal tax problems. The evidence clearly shows that he knew that about the 
delinquent mortgage and was fully engaged in attempting to resolve the mortgage 
issues just six years previously either by modification or short sale. Because of 
Applicant’s knowledge of the mortgage deficiency, I find that he deliberately failed to 
provide adequate and truthful information on his e-QIP concerning his finances.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant knew of the delinquent 
state and federal taxes and the delinquent mortgage when he completed his e-QIP. He 
deliberately failed to provide full and accurate information concerning his finances. 
Applicant has not provided sufficient credible documentary information to show 
reasonable and responsible action to address delinquent debts and resolve financial 
problems. He repeatedly did not file his federal and state tax returns as required. He 
has tax debt to two states and the federal government, and he has not presented a plan 
to resolve the debts. Applicant has not demonstrated responsible management of his 
finances or a consistent record of actions to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial situation and his personal conduct security concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d–1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
