 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-06867 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. DOD acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on May 13, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
September 20, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on October 25, 
2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A and B, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on November 3, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, with explanations. Her admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
this employer since April 2013. She is a high school graduate. She is married and has 
three adult children (she also had a 14-year-old daughter, but in 2010 or 2011, her 
parental rights were terminated based upon child sexual abuse allegations against her 
husband. No criminal charges were ever brought).1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant failed to timely file her 2013 and 2014 federal income 
tax returns, and in September 2014, she filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which resulted in 
the discharge of her debts. The allegations are supported by admissions in her security 
clearance application and court documents showing the bankruptcy.2  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial difficulties. From 2007 to 2013, she was 
underemployed or unemployed. She also experienced some major medical problems. In 
2010, she was diagnosed with congestive heart failure, and in 2013, she had stints put 
in for her heart condition. She did not have insurance at the time and accrued 
approximately $100,000 in medical expenses, which necessitated filing for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection. Her current income from both her jobs is approximately $36,000. 
The status of the SOR-related debts is as follows:3    
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (failure to file 2013 and 2014 federal tax returns): 
 
 Applicant testified that she failed to file these years’ tax returns because her 
husband was not cooperative in supplying information when he learned that they owed 
tax liability. She finally filed her 2013 federal tax return in 2016, after the SOR was 
issued, and claimed “married filing separately” status. She provided a copy of the 2013 
tax return at the hearing. She also filed her 2014 federal tax return in 2016 using her 
same filing status. She received a letter back from the IRS in October 2016, stating that 
her 2014 return had already been filed as “married filing jointly.” The IRS rejected the 
“married filing separately” return. She does not know when the accepted return was 
filed. Applicant also stated that she owes federal tax liability of approximately $5,000 for 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 18, 19; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 1-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 28, 43-44; Ans. 
 
 
3 
 
tax years 2009 and 2013-2015.4 She did not provide documentation showing the 
establishment of a payment plan. Applicant’s husband controls the finances in their 
household and is unwilling to pay the tax amount owed.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (2014 Chapter 7 bankruptcy): 
 
 Applicant and her husband sought bankruptcy relief because of the debts she 
accumulated, mostly because of her medical debts. They completed the mandatory 
financial counseling course. The total debt discharged through this bankruptcy was 
approximately $120,000 in December 2014.6  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
                                                          
4 The non-payment of federal tax debt was not alleged in the SOR. I will only use this evidence as 
it might relate to Applicant’s credibility, the applicability of mitigating conditions, and in assessing the 
whole-person factors. 
 
5 Tr. at 25, 27-28, 31, 35-36, 39, 42-44; AE A-B. 
 
6 Tr. at 28, 44; GE 2-3. 
 
4 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
  
 Applicant had numerous delinquent debts that caused her to file for bankruptcy 
protection in 2014. She also failed to file her 2013 and 2014 federal income tax returns. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
5 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Federal tax debt remains outstanding with no clear 
plan to pay it. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant was unemployed for several years and had severe medical issues 
requiring hospitalization. These are conditions beyond her control. She resolved this 
debt by filing for bankruptcy protection and having the debts discharged. It is arguable 
whether using the bankruptcy process to avoid paying one’s debts is responsible action 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 There is evidence of financial counselling. Given the unpaid status of her federal 
tax debt debts, there are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are 
under control. Although she had her debts discharged through bankruptcy and filed her 
taxes after the issuance of the SOR, evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve her 
debts is lacking. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
6 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense assessment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant became indebted. However, I 
also considered that she has taken limited action to resolve her tax debt. She has not 
established a meaningful track record of financial responsibility, which causes me to 
question her ability to resolve her debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information. Eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
 
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
