 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05670 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 22, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on April 21, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on April 25, 2016. Applicant did not object to the Government’s 
evidence. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 5 are admitted 
into evidence. Other than his Answer to the SOR, identified also as Item 1, Applicant 
failed to submit any additional documentation. The case was assigned to me on March 
10, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He obtained his high-school diploma in 1995, and 
attended community college but did not earn a degree. He has never been married and 
does not have any children.  
 
 Applicant was unemployed from May 2011 to December 2011. He was also 
unemployed from October 2013 to April 2014, when a prior employer laid him off due to 
a lack of work. During both periods of unemployment, Applicant supported himself 
through unemployment benefits and part-time work as a waiter. He began his current 
job with a federal contractor in April 2014.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2002 through 2013 as required, and four consumer debts totaling 
about $820. Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 
86) in June 2014 and was interviewed by an authorized DOD investigator in July 2014. 
In his SF 86, Applicant disclosed his failure to file his federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2007 through 2013. He disclosed during his interview that his 
failure to file his federal and state income tax returns dated back to 2002. He stated that 
on unrecalled dates between 2002 through 2013, he twice filed a federal income tax 
return and received refunds. He has not provided corroborating evidence of actions he 
may have taken to file any of his federal income tax returns from 2002 through 2013. He 
indicated an intent to immediately resolve his unfiled tax returns, and planned to find an 
accountant to assist him.2  
 
Credit reports from June 2014 and January 2016 verify the four debts alleged in 
the SOR as ¶¶ 1.c to 1.f.3 Applicant knew that he had fallen behind on SOR debt ¶ 1.c 
and received notice of SOR debts ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e, but forgot about them. When he 
pulled a copy of his credit report in May 2014, he learned that these debts were still 
delinquent. He indicated an intent to immediately resolve them.4  
 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3.  
 
2 Items 2, 3. 
 
3 While both credit reports list SOR debt ¶ 1.c. as having a zero balance, they also show that the debt 
was transferred or sold to another lender, and the January 2016 credit report reflects that the debt was 
charged off for $519. Items 4, 5. 
 
4 Items 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his period of unemployment from 
October 2013 to April 2014, and a move that resulted in him not receiving mail 
concerning his debts.5 His failure to timely file his relevant federal and state income tax 
returns began in 2002, when he was laid off by a previous employer. He did not have 
the income to pay the taxes he knew he would owe if he filed for that year. He then 
repeatedly failed to file his tax returns because he feared the consequences of his 
actions. There is no evidence that Applicant has sought the assistance of a credit 
counselor.6  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
5 Applicant does not provide the date of this move; his SF 86 reflects that he moved to his current address 
in June 2013. Items 2, 3. 
 
6 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
4 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2002 
through 2013 as required, and he has four delinquent debts. There is sufficient evidence 
to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has yet to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2002 through 2013. He also has four unresolved debts. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. His failure to timely file his 
relevant tax returns and address his delinquent debts casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Circumstances beyond his control contributed to Applicant’s financial problems. 
For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide evidence that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not filed his relevant federal and 
state income tax returns, despite his indication that he immediately planned to resolve 
them. He has not provided evidence of actions he may have taken to resolve his debts. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant has not sought financial counseling. Applicant’s financial problems are 
not under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant has not provided evidence of 
any efforts he may have taken to repay or otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does 
not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since 2014. Circumstances beyond 
his control contributed to his financial problems. He failed to file his federal and state 
income tax returns from 2002 through 2013 as required, and he has financial 
delinquencies that remain unresolved. His finances remain a security concern. He failed 
to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
 
