                                                                     
                              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-02311
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant drove under the influence of alcohol in 2009. His sentence included an
alcohol treatment program, during and after which he continued consuming alcohol
despite his diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence and Cannabis Abuse. He was discharged
Under Other Than Honorable Conditions from the Navy in 1998 for marijuana use, after
less than three months of service. He falsified his 2012 security clearance application
and failed to file required Federal and state income tax returns for 2011. Resulting
security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on November 14, 2012.  On November 14, 2015, the Department of Defense1
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
Item 3.1
1
to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption),
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline F (Financial
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  The action was taken under2
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted his written responses to the SOR on December 18, 2015,
and February 9, 2016, and requested that his case be decided by an administrative
judge on the written record without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the3
Government’s written case on March 16, 2016. A complete copy of the File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file4
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of
his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on March 22, 2016. He submitted no additional evidence, made no objection to
consideration of any contents of the FORM, and did not request additional time to
respond. I received the case assignment on December 13, 2016.
On page 2 of the FORM, Department Counsel purported to unilaterally amend
the SOR, pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.13, by adding an entirely new Guideline E
allegation concerning Applicant’s false denial of illegal drug use during the preceding
seven years on his 2012 e-QIP. The cited paragraph of the Directive contains no
authority for Department Counsel to modify the SOR, but instead sets forth the
requirement for mutual document discovery in advance of a hearing when an applicant
requests one. The Directive permits an administrative judge to amend the SOR during a
hearing, to conform to the evidence,  but contains no provision permitting a department5
counsel to add new allegations to an SOR in connection with submitting a FORM after
 Item 1.2
 Item 2. 3
4  Department Counsel submitted four Items in support of the SOR allegations.  Item 4 is inadmissible. It will
not be considered or cited as evidence against Applicant’s interests in this case. It is the summary of an
unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on
January 16, 2013. Applicant did not adopt it as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate.  Under
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible against Applicant’s interests in the
absence of an authenticating witness. See Executive Order 10865 § 5. In light of Applicant’s admissions, Item
4 is also cumulative. Applicant is not legally trained and might not have understood Department Counsel’s
FORM footnote, which described the potential admissibility of Item 4. I therefor reviewed it for any potentially
mitigating information that Applicant might have thought would be considered. No mitigating information  was
found in Item 4 that was not available from other sources in the record, and which was accordingly considered.
 Directive ¶ E3.1.17.5
2
an applicant requests a decision without a hearing. Department Counsel’s attempt to
add this new Guideline E allegation is void, and Applicant’s false answer concerning his
previous drug use on his 2012 e-QIP will not be considered as substantial evidence to
establish any disqualifying condition in this case. The extensive FORM discussion of
this additional falsification, which was not alleged in the SOR, was also improper and
was not considered for any purpose adverse to Applicant’s interests.   
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 35 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since March
2012, and seeks a security clearance in connection with that employment. He is married
and has two children, ages 10 and 7. He earned a high school GED in May 1998. He
served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from August to October 1998, when he was
administratively discharged Under Other Than Honorable Conditions (OTH) after testing
positive for marijuana use.  6
In his response to the SOR, Applicant failed to formally admit or deny any of the
SOR allegations. However, he provided explanatory responses to each paragraph of
the SOR that acknowledged the truth of the allegations under each guideline, except
that he denied having any intent to falsify facts on his e-QIP. Applicant’s admissions are
incorporated into the following findings of fact.
Applicant was arrested for Driving Under the Influence (DUI) of alcohol in August
2009. He was convicted of misdemeanor DUI, fined, and required to undergo an alcohol
treatment program. (Item 3.) In January 2010, he entered a 26-week outpatient
substance abuse treatment program with initial diagnoses of: Alcohol Dependence;
Cannabis Abuse; and Depressive Disorder, Not Otherwise Specified. His original
treatment plan was extended twice due to positive drug screens, which he attributed to
THC metabolites remaining in his system from his pre-program use, and his positive
test for alcohol in May 2010. He claimed that this was caused either by drinking an
unknown beverage offered to him by a friend during a cook out or from taking cold
medication. He was discharged upon completion of this program in October 2010, with
a fair prognosis. Despite his diagnosis of Alcohol Dependence, he continues to
consume alcohol. (Item 2; Item 3.)
Applicant admitted that he used marijuana between 1996 and the time of his
OTH discharge from the Navy after testing positive for drug abuse in October 1998. He
also tested positive for marijuana use on the first two drug screens of his outpatient
treatment program in January and February 2010. (Item 2; Item 3.)   
Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2011,
as required. As of the close of the record, these returns remain unfiled. (Item 2; Item 3.)
 Item 2; AE A.6
3
In his response to Section 24 on his 2012 e-QIP, Applicant answered, “No,” and
failed to disclose that he had been ordered, advised, or asked to seek counseling or
treatment as a result of his use of alcohol. This answer was false, since he had
undergone the 2010 court-ordered alcohol treatment program described above after his
2009 DUI conviction. He did, however, include “ASAP” (Alcohol Safety Action Program)
as part of his sentence when he disclosed this conviction in Section 22 of the e-QIP
concerning his Police Record. He denied intending to falsify facts, and said that he was
in a large group when completing his e-QIP, the office was getting ready to close, and
he was rushed when completing the form. (Item 2; Item 3.)
The record lacks mitigating evidence addressing the quality of Applicant’s
professional performance or his track record with respect to handling sensitive
information and observation of security procedures. No character witnesses provided
statements describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable
to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his
case decided without a hearing.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
4
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The DCs established by the evidence in this case are:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program; and
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program.
Applicant was arrested for, and convicted of, DUI in 2009. He was diagnosed as
Alcohol Dependent in January 2010 by the staff of his court-ordered alcohol treatment
program. He tested positive for alcohol use in May 2010 while still undergoing
treatment, and admitted that he continued to consume alcohol after completion of the
program. This evidence establishes security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(e), and
22(f). 
5
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security
concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant committed DUI in 2009, and was subsequently diagnosed as Alcohol
Dependent. He continued to drink alcohol after completing his court-ordered outpatient
treatment program. These choices support a conclusion that alcohol-related incidents
are likely to recur, and cast doubt on his current judgment. Mitigation was not
established under AG ¶ 23(a).
Applicant eventually completed outpatient treatment after his DUI offense, but
received only a “fair” prognosis. He has resumed and continued alcohol consumption
since completing the program. Accordingly, he also failed to established mitigation
under the terms of AG ¶¶ 23 (b), (c), or (d).
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
6
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The DCs raised by the evidence in this case are:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); and
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use.
Applicant admittedly abused marijuana between 1996 and 2010, when he most
recently tested positive for illegal marijuana use while undergoing substance abuse
treatment after his 2009 DUI conviction. These facts raise security concerns under AG
¶¶ 25(a) and (b), and shift the burden to Applicant to establish mitigation of those
concerns.
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate drug-related security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended;
and
7
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
Applicant’s last admitted use of marijuana was in 2010, and the Government
presented no evidence that he has abused drugs since then. Mitigation, under AG ¶¶
26(a) and (b), was established due to that apparent period of abstinence from drug
abuse.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The DCs established by the evidence in this case are:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.
Applicant was convicted of DUI in 2009, and admitted illegal drug abuse from
1996 through early 2010. These criminal offenses establish security concerns under AG
¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
8
The most recent SOR-alleged criminal offense occurred in early 2010, more than
seven years ago. This passage of time provides mitigation of criminal conduct security
concerns under AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32 (d).
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.
The record evidence established security concerns under one DC, as set forth in
AG ¶ 19: 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.
Applicant admitted that he failed to file required Federal and state income tax
returns for tax year 2011. He attributed this failure to various causes, none of which
justify his continued failure to file the returns to date. His ongoing unwillingness to meet
these income tax obligations raises security concerns under AG ¶ 19(g), and shifts the
burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
9
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s admitted failure to file required Federal and state income tax returns
spans the past six years, and is ongoing. He did not dispute his obligation to file the
returns in question. Accordingly, the record does not establish mitigation for his financial
irresponsibility under any of the foregoing provisions.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that raise security concerns and may be
disqualifying with relation to the allegations in this case:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s
personal, professional, or community standing.
10
Applicant answered, “No,” when asked if he had ever been ordered, advised, or
asked to seek counseling or treatment as a result of his use of alcohol on his 2012 e-
QIP, despite having completed almost 10 months of court-ordered alcohol treatment just
two years before certifying the truth of that answer. He provided insufficient explanation
for this falsification to support a conclusion that it was an innocent mistake. I find that
this was a deliberate falsification.
Applicant also engaged in alcohol-related misconduct and drug abuse between
1996 and 2010. These incidents are not individually sufficient for a current adverse
determination under Guidelines G or H, but support a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations. They also involved conduct which, if known, would affect his personal,
professional, and community standing, making him vulnerable to exploitation,
manipulation, and duress.
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security
concerns. Four MCs have potential applicability under the facts in this case:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
Applicant did not disclose his participation in court-ordered alcohol treatment
before being confronted about it. When combined with other events of concern, which
include his failure to file required income tax returns, his DUI conviction, and his drug
abuse, his unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations has not been minor or
infrequent. This pattern of misconduct reflects adversely on his current reliability,
trustworthiness, and judgment. He did not demonstrate effective counseling,
rehabilitation, or other steps to reduce vulnerability to manipulation or duress. Applicant
failed to meet his burden to establish significant mitigation under these conditions.
11
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
adult, who is responsible for his voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the security
concerns expressed in the SOR. His past drug abuse, his DUI conviction, his attempt to
conceal his alcohol treatment history from the DoD, and his ongoing failure to file
required Federal and state income tax returns, combine to demonstrate a pattern of
voluntary misconduct reflecting untrustworthiness, unreliability, and bad judgment.  
Applicant offered insufficient evidence of counseling, rehabilitation, better
judgment, or responsible conduct in other areas of his life to offset resulting security
concerns. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress remains largely
undiminished. Applicant has not demonstrated a basis from which to reasonably
conclude that he would not violate laws, rules, or regulations in the future. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to
mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption, financial
considerations, and personal conduct.
12
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 5, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
13
