 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01926 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted mostly from circumstances beyond his 
control. He recently paid or resolved most of his delinquent debts and his credit report 
shows no new delinquent debt. He established he is in control of his financial situation. 
Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information 
is granted.   
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 4, 2014. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on November 5, 2015, issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 4, 2015 (Answer), and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on May 4, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 13, 2016. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. Government exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and Applicant’s exhibits (AE) 1 
through 12, were admitted into evidence without objection. AE 9 through 12 were 
received post-hearing. On June 21, 2016, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he admitted all of the SOR allegations. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information, and disputed two of his delinquent accounts. 
Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated into 
my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 33 years old. He graduated from high school and enlisted in the U.S. 
Navy in 2002. He served on active duty until March 2008, when he was separated 
following non-judicial punishment for assault and fraternization. He received a general 
discharge (under honorable conditions). Applicant married in 2007 and separated the 
following year. He lives with a cohabitant and has four children. He provides court-ordered 
child support for two of the children. 
 
Applicant explained that after his March 2008 discharge, he was unemployed for 
a period and forced to take a job in another state. He explained that he had a wife, his 
first child was recently born, he had two car payments, and rent to pay, and he had no 
job. He took the first job offer that came in. On his way to his new job, he was involved in 
a car accident that prevented him from working until early 2009. Applicant was hired by 
his current employer, a federal contractor, in 2009. In addition to his regular job, Applicant 
took a part-time job during most of 2011 to increase his earnings and pay his debts, but 
had to quit his part-time job because of conflicting work schedules.  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2014. In response to Section 26 
(Financial Record) of the SCA, Applicant did not disclose any debts; however, he stated 
that he was in the process of seeking a credit counseling service to help him pay his 
previous debts. At his hearing, Applicant explained that after his discharge, he was unable 
to find employment, he lived off his small savings, and his debts accumulated. Then his 
car accident and recovery period prevented him from working until early 2009. Additional 
debts accumulated because of the medical treatment he received and his living expenses. 
 
Applicant’s security investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed 
the 10 SOR debts, totaling about $19,000. Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is 
documented in his credit reports, his SOR response, and his testimony. At least half of 
the SOR debts are medical debts resulting from his 2008 car accident and convalescing 
period. The remaining debts are credit card delinquent debts that he acquired to pay for 
his living expenses. The status of his SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c through 1.f allege delinquent debts for medical services 
Applicant received from different providers following his 2008 car accident. At the time, 
he was unemployed and had no medical insurance. Applicant claimed he contacted the 
 
3 
                                         
 
collecting agency several times and attempted to establish a payment plan. (Tr. 27) He 
averred the collector refused to establish a payment plan because Applicant lives in a 
“closed border state” where the collector is not authorized to do business. Applicant 
claimed the collector intercepted and garnished his tax returns several times. 
 
Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing that he paid SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
through 1.e on June 10, 2016. He disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f because he did 
not recognize the creditor and had no information about him, and the debt was removed 
from his credit report. (Tr. 28, AE 1) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b allege Applicant’s delinquent credit card account. Between 2009 and 
2011, Applicant used a credit counseling service (accountant) to help him pay his debts, 
including SOR ¶ 1.b. (Tr. 42) He developed a conflict with the counseling service 
accountant and stopped using their services. Applicant presented no evidence of any 
payments made, or of any additional efforts to resolve this debt until June 2016. A week 
before his hearing, Applicant settled the debt and entered into a payment agreement 
scheduled to start after the hearing date. (Tr. 27) 
 
Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing that he paid the accounts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g through 1.i in June 2016, after they were charged off. (SOR ¶ 1.g, 
see AE 7 and 8; SOR ¶ 1.h, see AE-3; SOR ¶ 1.i, see AE 6) 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.j, Applicant testified that the creditor garnished his pay until 
the debt was paid. (Tr. 28)  
 
 Applicant believes he has been making improvements resolving his financial 
problems. He testified he had other debts not alleged in the SOR that he has resolved in 
the process of becoming financially stable. He noted that many of his delinquent debts 
were paid or have been resolved. He needs his clearance and current job to continue 
paying his debts and supporting his four children. Taking care of his children seems to be 
his priority. 
 
 Applicant explained that in 2010, he received notice that he was almost $20,000 
in arrears on his child support. Since then, his first priority has been paying his child 
support and to bring his arrearages current. At his hearing, Applicant testified he believes 
he is current on his child support obligations. AE 8 shows Applicant has been making 
child support payments since January 2011, and that occasionally he pays additional child 
support. He appears to have reduced his support arrearage to around $11,587. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems. He 
acknowledged he made a bad mistake when he engaged in criminal misconduct while in 
the Navy. He believes that his 2008 accident was a circumstance beyond his control that 
caused most of his delinquent obligations, including his child support arrearage. He 
testified that his financial situation is now stable and that he is motivated to resolve his 
financial problems. He obtained financial counseling twice, in 2009 and 2013, from two 
different companies. Currently, he is keeping his own budget and managing his expenses.  
 
4 
                                         
 
 Applicant does not consider himself a security risk. He served on active duty and 
continues to serve U.S. interests while working for a Government contractor. He believes 
his financial situation is stable. Applicant understands that he is required to maintain his 
financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
 
5 
                                         
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in his credit reports, his 
SOR response, his testimony, and the record evidence. AG ¶ 19 provides two 
disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in 
this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
 
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
6 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant presented some important positive financial information. His separation 
from the service was followed by a period of unemployment and a car accident that 
caused an extended period of unemployment, and increased medical and credit debt. 
Most of the SOR debts relate to the car accident and his following period of 
unemployment. Because of his unemployment, he lacked sufficient income to make 
payments and keep some debts current. Additionally, he separated from his first wife in 
2008. I find that Applicant’s financial problems were caused or exacerbated by his car 
accident and the following period of unemployment, which were circumstances beyond 
his control.  
 
Applicant acknowledged his delinquent debts, and he has been making recent 
payments to some creditors. I have credited Applicant with mitigating all the accounts 
alleged in the SOR except for SOR ¶ 1.a ($9,345 medical services debt). He participated 
in financial counseling twice, and he is currently in control of his own finances. 
Additionally, the credit reports show that he has not acquired any new delinquent debt.  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s past financial problems do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant should 
have been more diligent addressing his delinquent debts, but I find his efforts sufficient to 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. He has been paying his child 
support obligation, paid his car note early, and has paid other accounts not alleged in the 
SOR. I find there are clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved and is 
under control. Applicant understands that he has to maintain financial responsibility to be 
eligible for a clearance and retain his job.  
 
 
 
7 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 33 years old. He served in the Navy for five years, and has worked for 
a federal contractor since 2009. Several circumstances beyond his control adversely 
affected his finances. He should have been more diligent in taking action to resolve his 
financial problems. Notwithstanding, he has resolved most of the SOR financial concerns, 
and he is in control of his financial situation. Under the totality of the circumstance of this 
case, Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to establish his financial responsibility. Financial 
considerations concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
