 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05361 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 16, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has a history of 
financial indebtedness demonstrated by her numerous delinquencies. However, in 
2013, she enrolled in a credit counseling service and slowly began repaying her debts 
through that service. She has resolved 11 of her 14 debts listed on the Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), and intends to continue to make payments until the remaining three 
accounts are fully resolved. Given her good-faith efforts over the past four years to 
resolve her debts, she can be trusted to continue her efforts to resolve the remaining 
three accounts. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 11, 2016, the Department of Defense issued an SOR to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 30, 2016 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 1, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on November 2, 2016, scheduling the hearing for November 28, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. The record was 
left open for receipt of additional documents. On December 22, 2016, Applicant 
presented AE G through AE I. On March 6, 2017, she presented AE J. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE G through AE J and they were admitted. The record 
then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 6, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her employer since 2004. She has one minor child and is pregnant with her second 
child. (GE 1; Tr. 16.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 14 debts in the 
total amount of $24,591. Her debts are identified in the credit reports entered into 
evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial delinquencies to irresponsible spending. (Tr. 
29.) She had extended her credit to the point where she could only afford to make the 
minimum payments on her debts. She reached out to a credit counseling service in 
2013 to help her begin to resolve her delinquencies. She has been working with that 
company, and its successor, since that time. She pays the credit counseling service 
$500 per month. They negotiate with her creditors and resolve each debt, one at a time. 
They helped Applicant create a budget. She intends to continue to resolve her 
remaining accounts through the credit counseling service. (Tr. 33-40.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a charged-off credit card account in the approximate 
amount of $8,500, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant presented a receipt dated August 
12, 2014, which shows she resolved this debt in full. It is resolved. (AE F; Tr. 19-22.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$2,023, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. She paid this debt through the credit counseling 
agency she hired to help her manage her debt. It is resolved. (AE D; Tr. 22-28.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$5,476, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The credit counseling agency she hired is attempting 
to negotiate a settlement on this account. It is “in-progress” according to the credit-
counseling agency’s account status. This debt is being resolved. (AE B; AE D; Tr. 28.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$1,229, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant testified this was the same debt as that 
 
3 
 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. She paid this debt through the credit counseling agency she 
hired to help her manage her debt. It is resolved. (AE D; Tr. 29.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$140, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant presented a letter dated December 2, 2016, 
from the collection agent reflecting that this obligation has been paid in full. It is 
resolved. (AE I; Tr. 29-31.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$1,632, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. The credit counseling agency she hired is actively 
attempting to negotiate a settlement on this account. This debt is being resolved. (AE B; 
AE D; Tr. 17, 33.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$1,076, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant presented a letter dated December 2, 2016, 
from the collection agent reflecting that this obligation has been paid in full. It is 
resolved. (AE I; Tr. 31.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$475, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant reflected that this debt was settled with the 
collection agent through her credit counseling service for $316. It was resolved May 24, 
2013. Her credit report reflects a zero balance. This debt is resolved. (GE 4; AE B; Tr. 
17.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$168, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. Applicant reflected that this debt was settled with a 
collection agent through her credit counseling service for $85.02. It was resolved on 
June 1, 2013. (AE B; Tr. 17.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $811, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. Applicant credibly testified that this debt would be added to her 
debt management plan, as she had previously inadvertently overlooked it. (GE 3; Tr. 17, 
33.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$164, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant presented a letter dated August 31, 2016, 
which reflects this debt was “paid or settled in full.” It is resolved. (AE A; Tr. 17.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$218, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l. She presented a statement from the collection agent on 
this account that shows this debt was paid in full. It is resolved. (AE C; AE J; Tr. 17.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$615, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. Applicant testified this was the same debt as that 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Record credit reports are consistent with this explanation. It is 
resolved as discussed above. (AE D; Tr. 17, 29.) 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the approximate amount of 
$2,064, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. Applicant presented a letter from this creditor dated 
December 2, 2016, which reflects that this debt has been satisfied. It is resolved. (AE H; 
Tr. 17.) 
 
Applicant reports to her facility’s security manager, who wrote a letter of support 
on Applicant’s behalf. The security manager indicated that Applicant is trustworthy and 
devoted to her job and family. She is “a highly responsible and dedicated individual.” 
(AE G.) 
 
Applicant testified that she is able to meet her regular living expenses, make the 
agreed payments on her debt management plan, and still has $300 left at the end of the 
month. (Tr. 36.) She indicated she has matured and plans to resolve all of her 
delinquent debt. (Tr. 16-17, 34-36.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness demonstrated by her 14 SOR-
listed accounts, which became delinquent due to her irresponsible overspending. The 
evidence raises both of the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following provide mitigation: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant incurred the 14 delinquent accounts when she was young and 
immature. She now realizes the importance of good credit and has been working with a 
credit counseling service to repay her delinquencies. Since 2013, she has resolved 11 
of her 14 delinquencies. She has three that she is still working to resolve. Applicant’s 
financial problems occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur, and do not 
cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Further, through 
the credit counseling service, she has created a budget that she is able to maintain. 
There are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved. While 
not every debt is fully resolved, Applicant has demonstrated a track record of consistent 
payments through the credit counseling service and credibly testified that she intends to 
resolve her remaining delinquencies. Applicant has mitigated the Government’s 
concerns. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
respected by her supervisor and performs well at work. She has worked hard to resolve 
her delinquencies over the past four years, and most of this progress occurred before 
issuance of the SOR in August 2016. She has demonstrated reasonable and 
 
7 
 
responsible actions with respect to her debt. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns. I conclude the whole-person concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
