 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00871 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 28, 2014. On 
February 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they 
replaced the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 7, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
 
 2
on June 15, 2016. On June 17, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. The FORM 
consisted of ten items, including a summary of two personal subject interviews (PSI) 
conducted in July and August 2014 (Item 9). He received the FORM on July 6, 2016. He 
timely responded, and his response was included in the record with no objection from 
Department counsel.1 The case was assigned to me on February 24, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c but denied all the other allegations. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old senior staff instructor employed by a defense contractor 
since October 2002. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from July 1979 to July 
2002 and retired as a chief petty officer. He held a security clearance while on active duty 
and retained it when he was employed by a defense contractor. 
 
 Applicant married four times. He and his third wife had two children, now ages 23 
and 21. His fourth wife passed away in July 2015 after suffering a stroke two days before 
he submitted his SCA. Until his wife’s stroke, she handled all the family finances. (Item 9 
at 6.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in May 2014, he answered “No” to questions 
whether, in the past seven years, he had a judgment entered against him; defaulted on 
any type of loan; had an account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for 
failure to pay as agreed; or had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency. 
However, he disclosed that he had been sued by a former landlord for damage to a rental 
home and was making payments on the debt. His credit bureau report (CBR) from June 
2014 (Item 7) reflected five of the six debts alleged in the SOR. The medical debt referred 
for collection in November 2012 was reflected in his CBR from December 2014 (Item 8). 
The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: vacation membership service referred for collection of $4,830 in 
July 2009. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted this debt and stated that his 
                                                          
1 Item 9 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant 
that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, 
deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not authenticated. 
Applicant submitted a detailed response to the FORM but did not comment on the accuracy or 
completeness of the PSI summary, nor did he object to it. I conclude that he waived any objections to the 
PSI summary. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take 
timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 4) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to other documents in the record. 
 
 3
wife bought the service but they never used it. He was unaware of the debt until he was 
confronted with his CBR during the July 2014 PSI. (Item 9 at 4.) In April 2016, Applicant 
settled this debt for $2,415. (Response to FORM, Enclosures 1 and 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c: medical bills referred for collection of $189 in March 2012 
and $150 in November 2012. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that the 
collection agency determined that the bills were posted to his account erroneously. He 
provided documentary evidence showing that the bills were deleted from his credit file. 
(Item 3 at 7.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: judgment for $16,178 filed in June 2013. In Applicant’s answer to 
the SOR, he stated that he vacated an apartment before the end of a lease and the 
apartment was vandalized while it was vacant. Applicant began making monthly $397 
payments on the judgment in April 2013, and he made a final lump sum payment of 
$15,641 in September 2015, using funds from his wife’s life insurance after she passed 
away in July 2015. (Response to FORM, Enclosures 3 and 4.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: judgment for $315 filed in March 2012. This debt was for a medical 
bill and was reflected in the June 2014 CBR. (Item 7 at 3.) The collection agency told 
Applicant it had no record of this debt. The judgment is not reflected in the December 
2014 CBR or the June 2016 CBR. (Items 5 and 6.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: credit-card account charged off for $14,592 in November 2012. 
Applicant’s family used this credit card for hotel and living expenses after his home was 
flooded while he was assigned overseas. When they exceeded his credit limit, the interest 
rate increased from 6% to 25%. Applicant paid a portion of the debt and the creditor 
forgave the remainder, which was mostly interest and penalties. (Item 9 at 4; Answer at 
15.) The debt was not reflected in the June 2016 CBR. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was unaware of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e when he 
submitted his SCA. His wife suffered a stroke two days before he submitted it, and he 
was with her in the hospital when he completed it without reviewing his CBR. He disclosed 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d in his SCA. In his answer to the SOR and response to the FORM, 
he denied intentionally falsifying his SCA.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
 
 4
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
  
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his CBRs establish two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under 
this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 6
 AG ¶ 20(a) is partially established. Applicant’s debts were recent and frequent, but 
they were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur, because he 
entrusted the family finances to his wife, who is now deceased. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. The illness and death of Applicant’s wife was a condition 
beyond his control, but all the debts alleged in the SOR were delinquent well before her 
illness. However, the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.f were incurred under conditions 
largely beyond his control. SOR ¶ 1.a was incurred by Applicant’s wife without his 
knowledge. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d occurred because the apartment was vandalized after 
Applicant moved out, even though it was still leased to him at the time. The debt in SOR 
¶ 1.f was incurred because Applicant’s home was flooded while he was out of the country. 
He acted responsibly by contacting the creditors as soon as he learned about the debts 
and resolving them. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. Although Applicant submitted no evidence of financial 
counseling, his financial issues are under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant paid or settled all the debts in the SOR, except 
those that he successfully disputed. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established. Applicant successfully disputed the medical debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission . . . of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . .” When a falsification 
allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has the burden of proving it. 
An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the 
time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An 
applicant’s level of education and experience are relevant to determining whether a 
failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate. 
ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant disclosed in his SCA that he had been sued by his landlord for the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.d. He submitted his SCA under emotionally difficult circumstances and did not 
 
 7
review his credit record before he submitted it. He admitted that he was less diligent than 
he should have been when he submitted it. I am satisfied that he did not deliberately omit 
the information about his delinquent debts. No disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline are established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of service to the national defense, both in uniform and 
as an instructor employed by a defense contractor. He has held a security clearance since 
he first enlisted in the Navy. Because he requested a determination on the record without 
a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on 
demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). Nevertheless, 
he has submitted sufficient evidence in his answer to the SOR and response to the FORM 
to mitigate the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts and his omissions from 
his SCA. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts and his omissions from 
his SCA. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
  
 
 8
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
