 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05189 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jennifer K. Wysocki, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 24, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On March 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance 
should be granted, continued, or denied. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On June 27, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On August 8, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 12, 2016, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On August 15, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for  
September 13, 2016. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
3, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, did not call 
any witnesses, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were received 
into evidence without objection. On September 20, 2017, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). 
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I held the record open until October 28, 2016, to 
afford Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. Post-hearing, I granted 
Applicant two additional extensions to submit evidence with due dates of December 30, 
2016, and January 30, 2017. The record closed on January 30, 2017. Post-hearing, 
Applicant offered AE I through N, which were received into evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the 
record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old driver and laborer employed by a municipality. He 
seeks a position as a commercial driver with a defense contractor and as such requires 
a secret security clearance as a condition of employment. (GE 1, GE 2; Tr. 14-15) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1999. He attended college from 
January 2000 to May 2005, and is one course away from being awarded a bachelor of 
science degree in political science. (GE 1, GE 2; Tr. 13-18) Applicant has never married 
and has no dependents. He did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 18-19) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR contains 12 allegations of delinquent debt totaling $95,629, 
ranging from a $413 medical collection account to a $22,746 charged off student loan 
account. These allegations are documented in Applicant’s November 2014 SF-86, his 
March 2015 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), 
and his December 2014 credit report. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.l; GE 1 – 3) 
 
Applicant traces his financial difficulties to his inability to secure a post-college 
job with an upwardly mobile income. He claims that because he did not have a college 
degree he was precluded from securing a good paying job. He started out doing 
seasonal work, but that did not provide him with a steady and sustainable income. At 
the encouragement of a friend, he started working as a commercial driver in 2008, but 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
that career path has not allowed him to support himself and pay off his student loans. 
(AE H; Tr. 19-23, 31) 
 
Apart from one medical collection account for $413, all of the remaining SOR 
debts are for private and federally backed student loans. Since leaving college in 2005, 
Applicant has been unable to pay off his student loans because of his “hard financial 
situation” and the “volatile nature of [his] employment.” Additionally, he was involved in 
an automobile accident in 2015 and his then employer immediately laid him off. 
Applicant also had a history of varicose veins in both of his legs that prevented him from 
being able to stand for long periods, limiting his employment options. Fortunately, he 
was able medically address his varicose vein problem in 2016. (AE A – D; Tr. 23-30) 
 
Applicant’s mother submitted a letter dated September 12, 2016, in which she 
said Applicant’s federal student loan would be paid in full in October 2016. (AE E) 
Applicant testified that he had not received support from his parents throughout his 
college career and after he left college they were “unsupportive financially.” The plan 
was for Applicant’s parents to pay off his student loans and Applicant in turn would 
repay his parents. Applicant’s parents co-signed on his student loans and are equally 
encumbered. (AE I; Tr. 30-31, 36-39) Applicant submitted an article that discussed the 
high student loan default rate. (AE H) 
 
As of his hearing, Applicant had worked for his current employer for “over a year” 
and was earning “about $42,000 a year.” (Tr. 32) Applicant has not reached out to either 
of his student loan lenders since being employed in his current position. His plan was to 
make a one-time payment with help from his parents. Applicant added that his federal 
income tax refunds are being recouped by the IRS to repay his federally backed student 
loans. (Tr. 32-43)   
 
During Applicant’s March 2015 OPM PSI, the investigator discussed in detail 
delinquent debts on his credit report putting him on notice that his finances raised a 
security concern. The Government’s concerns were again brought to Applicant’s 
attention 12 months later when they sent him his March 2016 SOR. At his hearing, 
Applicant did not produce evidence of any good-faith efforts to pay or resolve any of his 
SOR debts. (Tr. 43-45) 
  
As noted, I left the record open and granted Applicant two extensions providing 
him with almost five months post-hearing to submit evidence. During that timeframe, he 
was able to pay off his $413 medical collection account. He was, however, unable to 
provide evidence of any payment towards or resolution of his student loans. In his post-
hearing documents, Applicant reviewed how he got into financial difficulty and stated, 
among other things, that he is gainfully employed, is a good citizen, and will pay off his 
student loans as soon as he is able. (AE I – N) Applicant did not submit evidence of 
financial counseling or submit a budget. 
 
 
  
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the 
SOR. The facts established raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG 
¶ 18 as follows: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets 
as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, OPM 
PSI, SOR response, and hearing record. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
                                            
1The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Apart from partial application of AG ¶ 20(d) to SOR ¶ 1.l, none of the mitigating 
conditions are fully applicable. Applicant did not provide enough details about what he 
did to address his SOR debts. Except as indicated, he did not provide sufficient 
documentation relating to any of his SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as 
checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor 
proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or 
from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;2 (3) credible debt disputes 
indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts and why he held such a 
belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement 
offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other 
evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(e) because he did not provide documented proof to substantiate the existence, 
basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving the vast majority of his SOR debts in the 11 years since attending 
college. There is insufficient assurance that his financial problems are being resolved, 
are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed 
to establish that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
In summary, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the 
Government’s information. In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before 
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has been 
employed in varying capacities for the majority of his adult life. More recently he has 
been employed full-time for over one year in his current position, and he is presumed to 
be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his 
financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for access 
to classified information. Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these 
adjudications. Accordingly, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
 
 
                                            
 
2“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.k:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
