                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------   )      ISCR Case No. 15-00602
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes,Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and file exhibits, I conclude that applicant
did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied. 
History of Case
On August 17, 2015, The Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865 (Exec. Or.), Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 23, 2015, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on February 17, 2016, and he submitted additional information within
the 30 days permitted. Applicant’s post-FORM submission was admitted without
objection as Item 7. The case was assigned to me on November 2, 2016.  Based upon
a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy
protection in August 1998 (discharged in December 1998), (b) accumulated 14
delinquent debts, exceeding $15,000, and (c) was verbally counseled on three
occasions by his employer for failing to pay his corporate credit card as required. 
Allegedly, the listed delinquent debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted his bankruptcy filing and
discharge and all of the listed debts with explanations. He claimed he filed for Chapter 7
bankruptcy in 1998 after fracturing three vertebrae in his back that prevented him from
working for close to two years. He claimed he incurred medical debts and
unemployment associated with a routine colonoscopy in 2012 that was complicated by
a perforated colon that required repairs. Applicant claimed that the surgeon declined to
cover the resulting medical bills that his surgeon declined to cover. While accepting
responsibility for his delinquent debts, he attributed his late payments on his employer’s
corporate credit card to a combination of late per diem reimbursement from his
employer and his struggling finances.   
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 62-year-old roofing and waterproofing technician for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted to by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in May 1980 and divorced in February 1994. (GEs 2-3) He has
one adult child from this marriage. He remarried in June 1996, divorced in June 2000,
and has one step-child from this marriage. (GEs 2-3) He remarried again in January
2001 and divorced in January 2011. (GEs 2-3) He has not pursued any advanced
education credits within the past ten years and has never served in the military. (GE 2) 
Applicant has worked for his current employer since March 2014 as a contract
roofing and waterproofing technician. (GEs 2-3) Previously, he was self-employed as a
roof and building consultant between March 2013 and March 2014. (GEs 2 and 3) 
2
Between February 2008 and March 2013, Applicant worked as a roof consultant
for a defense contractor. Before that (between November 2007 and February 2008), he
was self employed as a roof and building consultant. (GEs 2 and 3)
Finances
Applicant’s finances deteriorated in 1996 and 1997 following his divorce from his
first spouse. Records confirm that he petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in
August 1998 and received his discharge in December 1998. (Items 1-3) 
In 2012, Applicant underwent a routine colonoscopy. (Items 1 and 7) Because of
surgical complications, he suffered collateral injury and could not work for over a year.
(Item 7) He incurred major medical bills in connection with his colonoscopy that his
insurance carrier did not cover. (Items 3 and 7). Disputes with his treating physician
over who should bear the financial burden of the medical bills were unsuccessful, and
Applicant fell behind in his medical payments.
Applicant incurred a number of delinquent debts between 2012 and 2013. (Items
3-6)  Applicant’s listed debts are comprised of the following: SOR debt ¶ 1.b ($6,698); 
SOR debt ¶ 1.c ($3,398); SOR debt ¶ 1.d ($2,398); SOR debt ¶ 1.e ($615); SOR debt ¶
1.f ($370); SOR debt ¶ 1.g ($340); SOR debt ¶ 1.h ($50); SOR debt ¶ 1.i ($314); SOR
debt ¶ 1.j ($416); SOR debt ¶ 1.k ($200); SOR debt ¶ 1.l ($281); and SOR debt ¶ 1.m
($347).  
Additionally, records confirm that Applicant was verbally counseled by his
previous employer on three occasions between 2008 and 2013 for failing to timely pay
his corporate credit card account as required. (Item 3) Applicant attributed one of his 
late payments to his employer’s late reimbursements of his travel expenses and his 
remaining late payments to his ongoing struggles with his finances. (Item 3) Applicant
paid off the balance of his travel bill in two installments: one in March 2013 and another
in November 2013. (Item 3)
To date, Applicant has not addressed most of his listed medical and consumer
debts that he can substantiate, and they remain outstanding. (Items 3 and 5-7) He
attributed his delinquent debts to recurrent unemployment between 2013 and 2014.
(Items 1, 3, and 7) Since returning to full-time employment in March 2014, he has made
few documented efforts to address his delinquent debts. Only his SOR ¶ 1.k debt has
been satisfied. (Items 3-7) 
Endorsements
                                
Applicant is well regarded by Air Force (AF) engineers who have worked closely
with him on joint roofing projects. (Item 7) One AF engineer familiar with Applicant’s
roofing design and production skills credited him with superb  technical skills that he put
to excellent use in his quality designs for medical facilities. (Item 7)
3
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
4
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a roofing and waterproofing technician for a defense contractor
who accumulated a number of delinquent debts during recurrent periods of
unemployment while recovering from colonoscopy complications. His accumulation of
delinquent debts between 2013 and 2014 and his failure to address these debts after
returning to full-time employment in March 2014 warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the debts covered in the SOR negate the
need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). 
Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his latest credit reports and
provide ample corroboration of his debts.
5
Judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s incurred delinquencies and
his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in addressing most of his listed debts
once the unemployment conditions that contributed to the delinquencies had passed
or eased, and his finances had improved. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd.
Sep. 24, 2004). Not only are most of his listed debt delinquencies ongoing, but he has
failed to address all but one of them (i.e., the debt covered by SOR ¶ 1.k).  Mitigation
credit is not available to Applicant based on the evidence developed in this record.       
                                           
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay off or otherwise resolve
his debts. Available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibly.” Because Applicant has not taken
more responsible steps in resolving his delinquent debts covered by ¶¶ 1.b-1.m, the
second  prong of MC ¶ 20(b) is not available to him. Nor are his explanations
sufficient to warrant application of any of the other mitigating conditions covered by
Guideline F. 
By contrast, Applicant’s furnished explanations concerning his verbal
counseling on the three occasions he was late in paying his corporate credit card are
credible and sufficient to conclude he mitigated the late payment allegations
contained in SOR ¶ 1.n. Applicant provided probative evidence of his satisfying the
amounts owing on his corporate credit card in two installments in March 2013 and
November 2013, respectively, and is no longer indebted to his former employer.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts and failure to
address them once he returned to full-time employment.  Resolution of his delinquent
accounts is a critical prerequisite to his regaining control of his  finances.
While medical complications and related unemployment played a major role in
his accumulation of delinquent debts, Applicant failed to provide sufficient explanatory
information about his inability to address his debts after he returned to full-time
employment in March 2014. Applicant’s favorable endorsement from the AF engineer
who worked closely with him speaks well of his demonstrated technical skills, work
ethic, and dependability. The endorsement is not enough, however, to overcome
judgment concerns associated with his failure to make more documented progress in
addressing his delinquent debts after he returned to full-time employment in 2014.
6
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, his lack of sufficient proof of corrective actions taken
to address his old debts after returning to full-time employment, it is still too soon to
make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to repay his debts and
restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with the minimum requirements for
holding a security clearance. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j, 1.l and 1.m. Applicant is
entitled to favorable conclusions with respect to the allegations covered by SOR ¶¶
1.k and 1.n.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j and  
      1.l-1.m.                                                Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.k and 1.n:                         For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
