 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06681 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct and financial considerations security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on May 27, 2016, and requested a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2016. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 21, 2016, 
setting the hearing for October 27, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. The Government’s discovery letter and exhibit list were marked as 
hearing exhibits (HE I and II). Applicant testified and offered exhibit (AE) A - D, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AE E - F, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 3, 
2016.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR allegations ¶ 1.a and ¶1.c. There 
being no objection, I granted the motion. My formal findings will reflect that those 
allegations were withdrawn.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 2.a. He denied SOR ¶¶ 2.b - 2.m. I 
incorporate these admissions into my findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings, 
transcript, and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and has worked for his current employer since 2014. He 
has a high school diploma and some technical schooling. He is single, never married, 
and has no children. He has worked for his current contractor-employer since January 
2015. He is an electrician who works on construction sites for U.S. agencies in foreign 
countries.2  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the 
influence (DUI), hit and run, leaving the scene of an accident, and other related 
charges. It also alleges Applicant has 13 delinquent debts in the total amount of 
$17,344. All the debts were listed in a credit report from February 2015.3  
 
Personal Conduct Facts. In January 2013, Applicant was at a restaurant celebrating a 
friend’s birthday. He had dinner and drinks. The weather was bad when he decided to 
drive home. On the way home he hit another car, slid, and damaged some property. He 
left the scene because he couldn’t see the other car and believed it left. He was stopped 
by police a few blocks away. He was arrested for DUI. A blood-alcohol test showed he 
was over the legal limit. He pleaded guilty to DUI and the remaining charges were 
dismissed. He complied with all his sentencing requirements and his probation ended in 
April 2014. He has had no further law enforcement involvement since that arrest. He 
realizes he used poor judgment when he drove after drinking and expressed remorse 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12-13. 
 
2 Tr. at 5, 24; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 2-3. 
 
 
3 
 
for his action. He learned from the experience and although he still drinks socially, he no 
longer drives when he drinks. I found Applicant’s testimony credible.4  
 
Financial Consideration Facts. Applicant had full-time employment upon graduating 
from high school. Because he was young and inexperienced, he began using credit 
cards without realizing the ramifications of such use. After approximately five and a half 
years, he was laid-off from his job and remained unemployed for approximately the next 
two years. It was during this time that he became delinquent on many of his debts. In 
2015, he hired a credit counseling service (CCS) to assist him with his debts. Other than 
disputing several debts, CCS provided little help. CCS told him that if a debt was 
charged-off, he was no longer responsible for it. Before he was interviewed by a 
defense investigator in June 2015, he had addressed some of his debts, but after the 
interview he understood the significance of his financial problems and began addressing 
the remaining debts. The status of the debts is as discussed below.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (charged-off account $5,319). This is a charged-off amount for a vehicle 
repossession. He was unable to make payments after he was unemployed. He was told 
by CCS he was no longer responsible for the debt once it was charged-off. At hearing, 
he became aware that for security purposes, payment of the debt was still an issue. He 
presented documentation that he paid this debt in full later in the day after his hearing. 
This debt is resolved.6  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (credit card $2,177). Applicant documented that he paid this credit card 
debt in August 2015. This debt is resolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (credit card $526). Applicant documented that he paid this credit card debt 
in March 2015. This debt is resolved.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d (repossession collection account $2,516). This repossession occurred 
when Applicant was unemployed and could no longer make the payments. Applicant 
documented that he paid this repossession debt in January 2016. This debt is 
resolved.9 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 26, 29-33; GE 2, 4; Answer. 
 
5 Tr. at 26, 36-37. 
 
6 Tr. at 38-40; AE F.  
 
7 Answer (See attached credit bureau report (CBR)); AE B. 
 
8 Answer (See attached CBR). 
 
9 Tr. at 41; AE F. 
 
 
4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (credit card $827). Applicant documented that he paid this credit card debt 
in December 2015. This debt is resolved.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f (credit card $706). Applicant documented that he paid this credit card debt 
in April 2015. This debt is resolved.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g (credit card $625). Applicant documented that he paid this credit card debt 
in January 2016. This debt is resolved.12 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h (credit card $556). Applicant documented that he paid this credit card debt 
in April 2015. This debt is resolved.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i (telecommunications debt $524). Applicant documented that he paid this 
debt in June 2015. This debt is resolved.14 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j (insurance collection debt $497). Applicant testified he paid this debt. His 
testimony is credible. The most recent CBR from May 2016 does not show this debt. 
This debt is resolved.15 
SOR ¶ 1.k (telecommunication debt $451). Applicant documented that he paid this 
credit card debt in December 2015. This debt is resolved.16 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m (insurance collection debts $119, $101). Applicant testified he 
paid these debts. His testimony is credible. The most recent CBR from May 2016 does 
not show these debts. These debts are resolved.17 
 
Current Finances. Applicant’s most recent CBR shows he is in good standing. His 
annual income is approximately $50,000. He has approximately $50,000 in his savings 
account. He received some financial counseling from CCS.18 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 Answer (See attached CBR). 
 
11 Answer (See attached CBR); AE A. 
 
12 Answer (See attached CBR). 
 
13 Answer (See attached CBR). 
 
14 Answer (See attached CBR). 
 
15 Tr. at 43; Answer (See attached CBR). 
 
16 Answer (See attached CBR). 
 
17 Tr. at 43; Answer (See attached CBR). 
 
18 Tr. at 43-44; Answer (See attached CBR). 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
Applicant’s 2013 DUI arrest and conviction meets the conditions in AG ¶ 16(c).  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant’s DUI occurred four years ago and he has not repeated that act. AG ¶ 
17(c) applies. He is much more responsible concerning his drinking as demonstrated by 
his decision never to drive after he has been drinking. He showed remorse and 
acknowledged responsibility for his actions. I find it is unlikely that future similar 
 
7 
 
behavior will recur. His recent behavior no longer casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Under these circumstances, this act is sufficiently 
attenuated after considering his behavior in its totality. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had 13 debts that he failed to pay over an extended period of time. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c). 
   
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
8 
 
Applicant has made significant efforts to resolve his debts. All the debts but one 
were paid before the issuance of his SOR. Based upon his actions to resolve his debts, 
it is reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
applies.  
 
The circumstances that led to Applicant’s financial problems, his job loss and 
resulting two years of unemployment, were conditions beyond his control. He acted 
responsibly by resolving his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant received financial counselling. He made good-faith efforts to pay his 
debts with the resources he had at the time. He promptly paid the last large remaining 
debt the same day as his hearing, after he realized he was given bad advice about not 
having to pay the debt. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) fully apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
I considered the personal circumstances that contributed to his financial 
problems. I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to 
his debts. He took responsible actions to resolve them. I find it unlikely that Applicant 
will be in a similar future situation. I also considered Applicant’s acknowledgement of 
responsibility, his remorse, and his rehabilitation efforts after his DUI conviction.  
 
 
9 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the personal conduct and financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c:   Withdrawn 
Subparagraph   1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.m:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
