 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07678 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate  
criminal conduct security concerns under Guideline J.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On May 9, 2016, DOD issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for criminal 
conduct under Guideline J. These actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 2, 2016. He admitted both allegations of 
criminal conduct. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 27, 2016, and I 
was assigned the case on October 19, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on January 18, 2017, for a hearing on 
February 7, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered three 
exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as Government 
exhibits (GX) 1 through 3. Applicant testified and offered three exhibits that I marked 
and admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through C. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 16, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. Applicant’s admissions are included in my findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 30-year-old high school graduate with approximately two years of college 
credits. Since January 2010, he has been employed by a defense contractor as a 
logistics supervisor. He was granted eligibility for access to classified information in 
2011 after submitting the September 19, 2011 e-QIP. He married in 2010, but has been 
separated from his wife since August 2014 pending a divorce. He has two children with 
his wife, and he has primary custody of a child from a previous relationship. He never 
served in the military. (Tr. 15-18; GX 1, e-QIP, dated September 19, 2011)  
 
The SOR alleges Applicant was arrested and charged with the felony offense of 
possession of marijuana with intent to distribute in March 2008. He pled guilty to 
misdemeanor possession of marijuana with intent to distribute and served 20 days in jail 
(SOR 1.a). The SOR also alleges that Applicant was charged with domestic assault and 
battery on a family member in August 2014. He received a two year deferred 
disposition, and the court issued a protective order which was in place until September 
2016. (SOR 1.b) Applicant admitted both offenses with a detailed explanation. 
 
Applicant pled guilty to misdemeanor offense of possession of marijuana with 
intent to distribute because of the amount of marijuana and the way it was packaged. 
He had not sold and did not intent to sell the marijuana. He served 20 days in jail and 
placed on probation for three years. The offense was adjudicated in 2011 for security 
clearance implications and Applicant was granted a security clearance. There is no 
record of any other criminal incidents involving Applicant between that offense and the 
domestic assault offense in August 2014. (Tr. 17-22) 
 
The local police were called to Applicant’s house in 2011 to settle a 
disagreement between Applicant and his wife involving childcare and custody issues. 
The police settled the dispute without taking any official action. In August 2014, 
Applicant and his wife were in the process of a bitter divorce. They argued over who 
would have custody of their children for a weekend. During the argument, Applicant’s 
wife slipped and fell suffering some bruising. As Applicant tried to move past her, she 
put her hand out and he knocked it aside. Applicant’s wife called the police, and 
Applicant was charged with domestic assault as required by the protocol of the local 
 
3 
 
 
police department. Applicant received a deferred adjudication and probation that 
expired in October 2016. (Tr.22-26) 
 
Applicant was required to take and complete a parenting class as part of the 
deferred adjudication and probation. Applicant complied with the order and completed 
the classes. Applicant has complied with all requirements imposed in 2014. (Tr. 26-38) 
 
There is minimal contact between Applicant and his wife. However, Applicant and 
his wife agreed to child custody, visitation rights, and child support. (AX A, Agreed 
Custody and Visitation Order, dated December 2016; AX B, Child Support Order, dated 
January 31, 2017; AX C, Co-Parenting Form, dated January 6, 2017)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
4 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30). Applicant’s arrest and conviction 
in 2008 for possession of marijuana with intent to distribute and his domestic assault 
conviction in 2014 raises security concerns and questions about Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, trustworthiness, and his ability and willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. The following Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 31 are 
of concern: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Once a concern is raised regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance. 
After the Government presents evidence raising criminal conduct security concerns, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. Applicant presented 
evidence that he is rehabilitated and his past criminal conduct is no longer a security 
concern.  
 
I considered the following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 32: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶32 (a) and (d) applies. The conviction for misdemeanor 
possession with intent to distribute marijuana occurred almost ten years ago. There 
 
5 
 
 
have been no other drug-related incidents. The incident was previously adjudication and 
Applicant was granted a security clearance. The domestic assault offense occurred over 
two years ago. It was an unfortunate minor incident with no physical injury involving a 
husband and wife quarrelling over child custody. There is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation. Applicant competed all court-ordered directions, including a court-ordered 
protective order for his wife without incident. He completed a co-parenting course and 
the period of his probation and deferred adjudication has expired. Applicant and his wife 
have reached an agreement on child custody and support. 
 
While his past conduct was criminal, it does not affect his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. There is no "bright line" rule for determining when 
conduct is recent or sufficient time has passed since the incidents, to establish 
rehabilitation. A determination whether past conduct affects an individual's present 
reliability and trustworthiness must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the 
evidence. If the evidence shows a significant period of time has passed without 
evidence of a criminal issue, there must be an evaluation whether that period of time 
demonstrates changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to indicate a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.  
 
Applicant has not been involved with illegal drugs in almost ten years. There 
have been reported instances of illegal drug use. Applicant realizes how his conduct 
affects his family relationships and his employment with a defense contractor. He has 
matured and realizes how his conduct can affect his future. Applicant’s involvement with 
illegal drugs in unlikely to recur, and does not now cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
It has been over two years since the domestic assault conviction. Applicant 
demonstrated at the hearing a sincere remorsefulness for his conduct and a firm desire 
to mature and conduct himself appropriately. He completed all court-imposed 
requirements. His experiences have been his best teacher. He showed his maturity be 
reaching agreements on child support and custody.   
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant was 
young and immature when he possessed marijuana. He completed all court-ordered 
conditions after his domestic assault conviction. Applicant presented adequate 
information to establish that sufficient time has passed after the incidents to show he 
has been rehabilitated. Applicant’s history shows that he is reliable and trustworthy and 
has the ability to protect classified information. The record evidence leaves me without 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
