 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04049 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 25, 2016, and he elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 20, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on May 10, 2016. He was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit information to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on February 16, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-11.1 FORM Item 
11 is an unauthenticated summary of a July 22, 2013 interview with a government 
investigator. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that he could object 
to FORM Item 11 and it would not be admitted, or that he could make corrections, 
additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. Applicant was 
informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any objections could be 
constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered by me. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. Notwithstanding Department Counsel’s advisement, because 
Applicant did not attend or complete high school and did not respond to the FORM, I 
cannot find his waiver to be knowing and informed.2 Pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.20, 
FORM Item 11 is not admitted into evidence because the summary of interview is 
unauthenticated. FORM Items 5-10 are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits 
(GE) 5-10, without objection.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts; however, Department Counsel withdrew 
the allegations in subparagraphs SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.h. Applicant admitted the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.d., and 1.j., and he denied the remaining allegations. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He did not attend high school, though he did attain a 
trade certification in 2008. He worked in the service industry from 1984 to April 2012. He 
has worked in a clerical position since April 2012, including for a DOD contractor since 
August 2012. He married in 2000 and divorced in 2007. He has two sons, ages 18 and 
21, who live with him and whom he financially supports.3 
 
 Applicant’s three credit reports establish the ten remaining delinquent debts: 
 
SOR ¶ Creditor Balance Date of 
Delinquency 
Evidence 
1.a. Vehicle repossession $4,218  GE 9 
1.b. Credit card $2,884 6/2011 GE 6; GE 9 
                                                          
1 FORM Items 1-4 consist of the SOR, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and administrative 
correspondence, which are pleadings and are entered into the administrative record. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
3 GE 5. 
 
3 
 
1.d. Utility $1,211 6/2014 GE 6; GE 9 
1.e. Car loan $319 10/2009 GE 6; GE 9, GE 10 
1.f. Medical $47 3/2009 GE 9; GE 10 
1.g. Judgment $2,619 8/2011 GE 6; GE 7; GE 9; GE 10 
1.i. Credit Card $1,953 5/2008 GE 10 
1.j. Credit Card $175 4/2008 GE 10 
1.k. Utility $154 1/2013 GE 10 
1.l. Insurance $110 10/2012 GE 10 
 
Applicant claims the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.f., and 1.i. were paid; however, he 
provided no documentation to substantiate these claims. The judgment alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.h. – withdrawn by Department Counsel – was satisfied in February 2015. Applicant 
denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.g. without explanation, and he denied the debts 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.k. and 1.l., claiming that the debts were not his. He provided no 
documentation or further information to support his claims. He referenced some 
contacts with creditors to arrange lower payments, but he provided no documentation of 
contacts or payments on any of these alleged debts.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
4 Response to SOR; GE 5; GE 8. 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s ten delinquent debts total approximately $13,690, and the debts 
became delinquent between 2008 and 2014. Accordingly, the evidence is sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce 
 
5 
 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.5 Conditions that could 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the  basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
There is no documentary evidence showing any payments on the ten alleged 
accounts, and these debts remain unresolved. There is no evidence that Applicant’s 
financial situation has improved. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond his control and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.6 Following his divorce, Applicant has raised and 
financially supported his two sons. Because these circumstances hindered his ability to 
address his delinquent debts, they constitute circumstances beyond his control in the 
context of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances.7 Applicant satisfied the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h., but there is no 
                                                          
5 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
 
6 
 
documentation of any other payments or debt-resolution efforts. There is no evidence of 
a reasonable plan to address the remaining debts and actions in furtherance of that 
plan. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
There is no record evidence of credit counseling or of a monthly budget from 
which to conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are 
under control. Rather, the absence of evidence of payments or other steps to resolve 
the alleged delinquent debts undercuts such a conclusion. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(c) does 
not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”8 
Applicant did satisfy the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h.; however, there is no 
documentation of any other payments or debt-resolution efforts. As discussed above, 
there is insufficient evidence of good-faith payments or other steps taken to resolve the 
alleged delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
To the extent Applicant disputes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.g, 1.k, and 1.i., he 
has not demonstrated a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of these debts. 
These debts were all included on his credit reports, and Applicant has provided no 
documentation to substantiate his disputes. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s debts have remained delinquent for several years. There is no 
evidence of a reasonable plan or affirmative steps by Applicant to address, resolve, or 
repay these debts. Furthermore, he has not demonstrated that he can maintain his 
current monthly financial obligations. Absent evidence of debt repayment and financial 
responsibility, I find that financial considerations concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control – his divorce and raising his two sons 
– contributed to his financial delinquencies. Nonetheless, he bears the burden to 
demonstrate that he acted financially responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
did resolve one judgment, but there is no evidence of good-faith efforts to repay or 
resolve the remaining debts or evidence that he meets his current financial obligations. 
As a result, the totality of the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.d.-1.g.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.i.-1.l.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
