 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03924 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant possessed and used marijuana on about 20 to 25 occasions from 
March 2013 to February 2014 while holding a security clearance. More time without 
illegal drug use is necessary to fully mitigate drug involvement security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 4, 
2014. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) on November 23, 2015, issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline H (drug 
involvement).1 Applicant answered the SOR on December 8, 2015, and requested a 
hearing.  
 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On January 29, 2016, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed. 
The case was assigned to me on August 26, 2016. On August 29, 2016, DOD issued a 
hearing notice, setting the hearing for September 23, 2016. Applicant’s hearing was 
held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4); 
Applicant offered one exhibit (AE 1); there were no objections; and all documents were 
admitted into evidence, except Government Exhibit (GE) 4, which was attached to the 
record. On October 3, 2016, I received the transcript.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. His SOR and 
hearing admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of 
fact:   
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old systems engineer who has been employed by two 
defense contractors from 2003 to 2014 and from 2014 to present. He has held a 
security clearance from 2004 to present. (Tr. 8, 23; GE 2) There is no evidence of 
security violations. He received a bachelor’s degree in electrical and computer 
engineering in 2003 and completed a master’s degree in systems engineering in 2011-
2012. Applicant has never been married; however, he has lived with his life partner for 
four years, and they have a three-month-old child.  
 
 In Section 23 of Applicant’s September 2014 SCA, he disclosed that he used 
marijuana from March 2013 to February 2014 about twice a month for a total of 20 to 25 
times. He claimed he did not use marijuana or any other illegal drugs prior to March 
2013. He used marijuana recreationally, primarily at home. He used marijuana several 
times for other than a sleep aid because he was curious or to relax after work. He told a 
Government investigator that he used marijuana to help him sleep.  
 
Applicant obtained marijuana using a medical marijuana prescription in a state 
where his marijuana possession and use was authorized under state law. He did not 
retain a copy of his marijuana prescription or of his visit to the doctor’s office where he 
received the prescription. He did not provide any marijuana to anyone. He did not use 
marijuana with his partner. She does not use marijuana. He used a bong to inhale 
marijuana, and he did not bring it with him when he moved to a different state in 2014.  
 
 In February 2014, Applicant ended his marijuana use because he was moving on 
with his life; he did not need it anymore; and his marijuana possession and use was 
illegal under state law in the state where he moved in 2014. Also, his marijuana 
prescription was expiring, and he did not want to renew it. He does not intend to use 
marijuana in the future. He did not receive any counseling or treatment for drug abuse. 
Applicant is willing to take follow-up drug tests to show he is not using illegal drugs.  
 
 Applicant was aware that possession and use of marijuana was illegal under 
federal law before he began using it. (Tr. 24, 28) His DOD contractor employer from 
2003 to 2014 had a drug-free workplace policy. Over his 11 years working for the DOD 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
contractor, he was drug tested three or four times. He did not test positive for use of 
illegal drugs. He knew marijuana use would adversely affect his security clearance. He 
started using marijuana out of curiosity and to help him sleep.  
 
Applicant’s two performance evaluations from February 2014 to January 2016 
laud his contributions to mission accomplishment. His supervisor indicated Applicant 
frequently exceeds expectations, he learns quickly, shows initiative, and works well with 
others. (AE A)   
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse;”2; 25(c) “illegal drug 
possession;” and 25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance;” 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case. Applicant 
possessed and used marijuana on about 20 to 25 occasions from March 2013 to 
February 2014 while holding a security clearance.3 AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) apply. 
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
                                            
2 AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
3 AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substances. See Drug Enforcement Administration 
listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 
U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). On October 25, 2014, the Director of 
National Intelligence wrote that marijuana use continues to violate federal law, even in those jurisdictions 
where it has been decriminalized. (GE 3, Letter ES 2014-00674, Oct. 25, 2014)  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.”4 
                                            
4 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated: 
  
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant stopped using marijuana in February 2014. He resolved not to use 
marijuana in the future. He recognized the adverse impact of drug abuse in connection 
with access to classified information, and he expressed remorse about using marijuana 
while employed by a defense contractor. He also understands that possession of 
marijuana violates federal law. AG ¶ 26(a) partially applies to his possession and use of 
illegal drugs;5 however, more time without illegal drug use is necessary to fully apply AG 
¶ 26(a).    
 
AG ¶ 26(b) provided some mitigating evidence. He stated his intention not to 
abuse any illegal drugs in the future, and he does not associate with marijuana users.  
His period of abstinence is March 2014 to September 2016 (the date of his hearing), 
which in this instance is insufficient.   
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable. Applicant did not abuse drugs after 
being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. He did not complete a drug 
counseling or treatment program.      
 
In sum, Applicant possessed and used marijuana on about 20 to 25 occasions 
from March 2013 to February 2014 while holding a security clearance. Each time he 
possessed marijuana he violated federal criminal law. He violated security rules and his 
employer’s policy against illegal drug use. He understands the adverse consequences 
from marijuana use;6 however, he has not shown or demonstrated a sufficient track 
record of abstention from illegal drug use to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to his 
access to classified information. His marijuana use while holding a security clearance 
with full knowledge that marijuana use was prohibited weighs against approval of access 
to classified information because they show an unwillingness to comply with the law and 
regulations, and a lack of reform and rehabilitation. Drug involvement security concerns 
are not mitigated at this time.  
                                                                                                                                            
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, affirmed the 
administrative judge’s decision to revoke an applicant’s security clearance after considering the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating:  
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
5 In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
6 Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-
person analysis, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old systems engineer. He holds a bachelor’s degree and a 
master’s degree in systems engineering. He has worked for two defense contractors 
from 2003 to present, and has held a security clearance since 2004 to present. There is 
no evidence of security violations. Applicant’s performance evaluations laud his 
contributions to mission accomplishment, and his supervisor indicated he frequently 
exceeds expectations.  
 
The evidence against continuation of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial. 
Applicant possessed and used marijuana on about 20 to 25 occasions from March 2013 
to February 2014 while holding a security clearance. He violated federal criminal law; he 
violated security rules; and he violated his employer’s policy against illegal drug use. His 
marijuana possession and use while holding a security clearance weights against 
approval of access to classified information. His illegal drug possession and use raises 
issues about his reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. He has not demonstrated a sufficient track record of abstention from 
illegal drug use to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to his access to classified 
information. I conclude Applicant did not fully mitigate drug involvement security 
concerns. 
 
Unmitigated drug involvement concerns lead me to conclude that continuation of 
a security clearance for Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not 
be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of 
reform necessary for award of a security clearance in the future. With more time without 
abuse of illegal drugs, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his 
security clearance worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
