 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05586 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Denmark. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1998. 
His wife and mother-in-law are Russian citizens, now residing in the United States. His 
wife recently obtained dual U.S. citizenship, and her mother just retired from a career 
working for the Russian government. He renewed his Danish passport in 2008, and 
initially declined to surrender or destroy it but changed his mind after the record closed. 
Applicant failed to mitigate resulting security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 18, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 12, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference, and 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.  
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on March 16, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on July 18, 2016, and issued a Notice of 
Hearing on July 29, 2016, scheduling the hearing for August 16, 2016. The hearing 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered one exhibit (GE 1) into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered four exhibits (AE A through D). All exhibits were admitted 
without objection. The Government also requested administrative notice of facts about 
Russia, to which Applicant had no objection. The request was marked Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I, and administrative notice was taken of the facts stated therein. I granted 
Applicant’s request to leave the record open until August 30, 2016, for submission of 
additional evidence. Applicant submitted AE E while the record remained open, and AE 
F after the record had closed. Both exhibits are also admitted into evidence. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 24, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all of the facts alleged in the SOR, but formally 
denied each “complaint” because he thought they did not support valid security 
concerns. During his testimony, he also admitted the accuracy of all facts alleged in the 
SOR. (Tr. 34-42.) His admissions are incorporated in the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant was born in Denmark in January 1969. He attended a northern 
California high school as an exchange student from 1984 to 1985, then returned to the 
U.S. on a student visa to attend college in August 1988. He married his first wife in 
1990, and qualified for a permanent resident visa before they divorced in 1994. He 
remarried in 1996, and had two children with his second wife before they divorced in 
2007. He married again in 2011, and has another child who was born in late 2015. He 
testified that he has a master’s degree in business. He has no military service and has 
never held a security clearance. (GE 1; Tr 6-7, 43-46.)   
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 1998. He continues to be a 
dual citizen of Denmark and the United States. He last renewed his Danish passport in 
July 2008. His employment with various companies throughout his career involved 
substantial international travel, and he reported that he used his Danish passport on 
nine trips to seven different countries1 between August 2009 and August 2012. (GE 1; 
AE D; Tr. 36-42.) He testified: 
 
I will tell you I use it on occasion for travel, mostly to countries in the world 
that aren’t favorable to Americans, and that is mostly out of my self-
preservation and security. . . . I travel frequently and I travel to places that 
are not always friendly to the United States. . . . It does expire in 2018. I 
have no interest or desire to renew it unless I see a need. . . . I don’t travel 
as much as I used to. (Tr. 37.) 
 
                                            
1 Four of the countries are NATO allies. Two more have close ties and good relations with the U.S.  
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant initially testified during the hearing that he would not be willing to 
surrender his Danish passport to his employer’s custody or for destruction. (Tr. 42.) 
After an explanation concerning the basis for security concerns that may arise from 
possession and use of a foreign passport, he changed his mind and indicated that he 
would like to have time after the hearing to surrender his Danish passport to his 
employer’s facility security officer (FSO). (Tr. 60-68.)  
 
While the record remained open after the hearing, however, he changed his mind 
again. On August 17, 2016, he wrote: 
 
Turns out [employer] cannot hold my passport, they can only destroy it. 
The value (at present) of being able to travel through unfavorable nations 
with my Danish passport exceeds my need for a security clearance. I 
respectfully withdraw my request for a clearance, but would like to retain 
the opportunity to apply at a future date if needed. I acknowledge that a 
reapplication with [sic] come with a need to relinquish my Danish passport. 
(AE E.) 
 
 During early September 2016, Applicant wrote to Department Counsel, saying 
that he had a “newfound need for the security clearance” and “will surrender my 
passport etc. if we can resurrect the application.” Department Counsel informed him 
that, since his hearing had already been conducted, ¶ 4.4 of the Directive required 
continued adjudication of his eligibility for a clearance. Applicant also remained 
sponsored for a clearance by his employer. Applicant’s FSO certified, on September 9, 
2016, that she permanently destroyed his Danish passport at his request and with his 
concurrence, after she informed him that such action would not in any way guarantee 
the favorable adjudication of his DoD clearance. (AE F.)  
 
 Applicant sponsored his current wife for legal residence in the United States in 
February 2011. They married in July 2011, less than a month after she turned 21 years 
old. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in August 2015. She retains dual citizenship 
with Russia, and has active passports from both countries. She was born and raised in 
Moscow, Russia, where her mother worked on the staff of the Russian Federation 
Council.2 Her parents, who are both Russian citizens, divorced when she was young 
and she has had no contact with her father since then. Applicant’s mother-in-law 
obtained a permanent resident visa to enter the U.S. between July and November 2016. 
She intended to retire with a pension from her Russian parliament position in January 
2017, then move to the U.S. as a permanent resident to be near her daughter and 
grandchild. (GE 1; AE A; AE B; AE C; Tr. 28-30, 36, 62, 70.) 
 
Applicant’s wife co-owns an apartment in Moscow with her mother and 
grandmother. Applicant estimated the value of this apartment to be $70,000. Applicant 
also reported that he holds approximately $20,000 in a Danish bank account, in that 
country’s equivalent of a 401(k) retirement plan, to which he contributed before moving 
                                            
2 This is the upper house of the Russian parliament. 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
to the United States. He maintains that account to avoid the penalties that would 
accompany early withdrawal or transfer of the funds before he is eligible to retire. 
Applicant expressed that his job in the U.S. pays quite well, so neither of these foreign 
assets is significant enough to form the basis for exploitation or leverage against his 
loyalty and allegiance to the United States. (Answer; GE 1; Tr. 38-39.) 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts concerning Russia that are set forth on 
pages 3 through 7 of HE I. Highlights include Russia’s status as one of the two leading 
state intelligence threats to U.S. interests based upon capabilities, intent, and broad 
operational scopes. Russia’s increasingly aggressive economic, military, and 
technological espionage against U.S. interests include expanded recruitment and 
exploitation of Russian immigrants and recently naturalized dual-citizens for such 
purposes. Russia also has significant human rights problems, including use of coercion 
and excessive force against its own citizens in pursuit of perceived state interests.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 sets forth the security concern involving foreign preference: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
Applicant was born in Denmark in 1969. He came to the United States in 1988 
and became a U.S. citizen in 1998. Based on his Danish citizenship, he has maintained 
a Danish passport since becoming a U.S. citizen, renewing it most recently in July 2008. 
He used the Danish passport at least nine times during the next five years for travel to 
and from seven different countries, most of which are U.S. allies. The evidence raises 
the above disqualifying conditions and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concern.  
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 11 provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
  Applicant decided to surrender his Danish passport for destruction by his FSO in 
September 2016, but there is no bar to his application for another one. This action 
occurred after the record had closed, and after Applicant had repeatedly expressed that 
he did not want to surrender the passport to his security authority or otherwise invalidate 
it. Considering his recent and frequent use of the Danish passport for travel to 
numerous countries that are friendly to the United States, his last-minute decision to 
surrender the passport establishes only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 11(e).  
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heighted risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant has ongoing and close relationships with his wife and her mother. They 
are lifelong Russian citizens and, until moving recently to live with him, residents of 
Moscow with minimal ties to the United States. These relationships create both a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation or manipulation, and a potential conflict of interest 
for him. As a recently retired career employee of the Russian parliament, whose sole 
means of support is now collecting a pension, Applicant’s mother-in-law has a close and 
ongoing connection to the Russian government. These relationships raise a security 
concern about his obligation or desire to assist those family members by providing 
sensitive or classified information, if faced with pressure or coercion from an outside 
source. There is substantial evidence to establish security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 
7(b), and 7(d) based on these relationships. No such concerns arise with respect to 
Applicant’s father-in-law, with whom he, his wife, and his mother-in-law have no present 
relationship.  
 
Applicant’s only foreign financial interests are a relatively small bank account in 
Denmark holding funds that he cannot withdraw without a significant penalty, and his 
wife’s partial ownership interest in her family’s apartment in Moscow. Neither of these 
interests is substantial enough to reasonably support security concerns under AG ¶ 7(e) 
over heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
The three with potential application in mitigating the above security concerns in this 
case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not provide mitigation under the facts in this case. Applicant’s 
wife and mother-in-law are citizens of Russia. His wife recently obtained dual citizenship 
in the United States and her mother obtained a permanent resident visa to move to the 
U.S. after her 2017 retirement from working for the Russian parliament. Both women 
retain close and lifelong connections to Russia, which is a top-tier practitioner of 
espionage against U.S. interests. 
  
AG ¶ 8(b) has some application. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he 
“can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1988 and became a citizen in 1998. His 
wife is a recently naturalized U.S. citizen. His three children are U.S. citizens. Most of 
his economic ties are in the United States. However, those connections to the United 
States do not sufficiently mitigate concerns arising from his ties of affection for his wife 
and mother-in-law. The evidence does not clearly establish that if Applicant were placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States, that he would 
choose the United States, particularly when viewed in conjunction with his reluctance to 
surrender his foreign passport.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) applies only to mitigate potential security concerns about Applicant’s 
father-in-law, whom he has never met. Applicant sponsored his wife’s entry into the 
United States and married her shortly thereafter. They have a newborn child together. 
His mother-in-law has been approved for permanent resident status to join the family 
after her retirement from employment by the Russian government. These contacts with 
his wife and mother-in-law are neither casual nor infrequent.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence weighs in 
Applicant’s favor. He is an intelligent and articulate person, who has chosen to live and 
work in the United States since 1988. His immediate family and has most of his financial 
interests are in the United States. His wife and three children are U.S. citizens.  
 
There are no allegations of any misconduct by Applicant. He did, however, 
express his desire to maintain and exercise the privileges of his foreign citizenship on 
numerous occasions after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen. He was very reluctant to 
surrender his Danish passport, and gave no reasonable explanation for doing so other 
than some unspecified “newfound need for a security clearance” after the record had 
closed. His mother-in-law’s career working at high levels of the Russian parliament 
ended very recently, and she receives an ongoing pension from that government. 
Applicant’s affinity for, and close connections with, his Russian wife and mother-in-law 
are continuing. He provided insufficient evidence that the resulting potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress is diminished. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline C and Guideline B. Overall, the 
record evidence generates significant doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for 
a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:       Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.c through 2.e:       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
David M. White 
Administrative Judge 
