                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-08004
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 28, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing,
(e-QIP) on April 21, 2015.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On February 4, 2016, the
Department of Defense (DoD) pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The SOR set forth the reasons why DoD adjudicators could not make the
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on February 17, 2016, and elected to
have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on or about
March 31, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on April 11, 2016.  Applicant was
instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of
receipt.  Applicant submitted a reply to the FORM dated April 26, 2016.  This case was
assigned to the undersigned on December 13, 2016.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 57 years old and is divorced with two adult children.  She has a
bachelor’s degree.  She holds the position of Program Management Support for a
defense contractor.  She is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this
employment.   
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at risk
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated May
12, 2015; and January 12, 2016, reflect that Applicant was at one time indebted to each
of the creditors set forth in the SOR, in an amount totaling approximately $17,316.
(Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)  Applicant has been working for her current employer
since April 2015.  Applicant has held a security clearance from mid-2003 until March
2015 when it was suspended due to her financial problems.  She is currently working to
resolve each of the delinquent debts.      
Applicant has a history of excessive financial indebtedness.  Among her debts
are delinquent car repair bills, medical bills, household repairs, and other miscellaneous
debts.  Applicant explained that a series of unexpected, unfortunate life circumstances
occurred that primarily caused her financial demise.  
In 2002, after 21 years of marriage, Applicant and her husband divorced. 
Applicant needed to go back to work, and had two children in school she needed to help
support.  Other unexpected life events happened, a car accident, multiple car repairs,
medical bills, household repairs, and a death in the family that caused her to lean on
credit cards to temporarily resolve the issues.  Applicant explained that she has not
lived lavishly.  She has purchased a less expensive house, and she does not go on
vacations.  (Applicant’s Response to FORM, Exhibit 9.)  When her car would no longer
function, she purchased a used one.  (Applicant’s Response to FORM, Exhibit 2.)  She
does not participate in a retirement plan because she has elected to use her current
available funds to pay her debts.  Her children have recently left for college.  She is
helping them with college expenses, and she can no longer claim them as tax
deductions.  This has required her to pay additional taxes up to approximately $2,500
per year.  (Applicant’s Response to FORM, Exhibit 1.)  Due to these payments, several
2
of her creditors were put aside so that funds would be available to pay the Government. 
Applicant states that she has made payments toward these debts over the years.  She
began to fall behind in 2012, after filing her Federal income tax return.  Since August
2013, she has paid off six creditors.  She is currently working to get automatic payments
set up to start on March 15, 2016, that will continue on the 15  of each consecutiveth
month to begin repayment of the debs listed in the SOR.  Applicant’s financial
spreadsheet shows that all of her debts will be paid off by the end of 2017.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit 7.)
      
1.a.  A delinquent medical bill was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of amount of $105.  Applicant paid the debt on February 16, 2016.  She has
attached the receipt to verify payment.  (Applicant’s Response to FORM, Exhibit 8.)  
1.b., and 1.f.  Two delinquent credit card bills owed to the same bank were charged off
in the amounts of $3,197, and $3,251. On February 12, 2016, Applicant entered into a
monthly payment agreement to cover both debts that requires she make a payment of
$650 that day, and then for six months following she makes a payment of $200 each
month.  At the end of the period, an evaluation will be made to determine if she can pay
more toward the debt, or if the scheduled $200 monthly payments should continue. 
Applicant claims that the collection agency handling the matter states that the debt set
forth in 1.f. is now only $2,951.  (Applicant’s Response to FORM, Exhibits 5, 7 and 8.)   
1.c.  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $6,571.  Applicant states that the debt was originally held by Home Depot
where she purchased two air conditioning units at a previous residence.  The debt
remains owing.   (Applicant’s Response to FORM, Exhibits 5, p.16 and 7.)
1.d.  A delinquent credit card debt was placed for collection in the approximate amount
of $3,085.  Applicant states that this was used for multiple car repairs made between
2002 and 2016.  On February 16, 2016, a payment agreement of $155 per month for 18
months was set up on line with the collection agency.  Applicant submitted a letter
verifying the agreement.  (Applicant’s Response to FORM, Exhibits 5, p. 17 and 7.)   
1.e.  A delinquent debt owed to Sears was placed for collection in the approximate
amount of $1,107.  Applicant explained that this was used to purchase various
necessities for her family and household maintenance.  She planned to begin payments
no later than May 16, 2016, after paying her income tax that she owes.  (Applicant’s
Response to FORM, Exhibit 5, p. 14 and 7.) 
Applicant has set up a financial budget that she is following.  She states that as
each debt gets paid off, she will increase the amounts going to each of the other
accounts.  Her children will soon be financially stable enough to take on some of their
student loan burden, which will free up additional funds that she will use to pay toward
her debts.  (Applicant’s Response to FORM, Exhibit 6.)  
3
A letter of reference from Applicant’s long-time friend indicates that Applicant is
considered to be a person of good moral character.  She is not a person with chronic
financial issues due to irresponsibility.  Applicant has had many financial challenges
over the last ten years, but she has worked diligently and gone without niceties in order
to pay off her debts.  She is considered to be honest and trustworthy and is highly
recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Response to FORM, Exhibit 4.)   
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should
consider the following general factors:
4
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The administrative
judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
5
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in excessive financial indebtedness that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has had excessive financial indebtedness (Guideline F) and the totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant. 
Because of the scope and nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with her security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence,
Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that
is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline F of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that Applicant was faced with some difficult life situations,
which caused her excessive financial indebtedness.  First a divorce, then, the
adjustment to working and supporting herself and her children.  The many unexpected
expenses, such as car repairs, a car accident, medical bills, household maintenance
costs, and a death in the family caused more debt.  Applicant has spent the past two
and a half years trying to re-establish her financial credit by paying her debts, and her
taxes, helping her children with their college expenses, and living frugally and within a
budget.  Applicant’s excessive indebtedness was not due to negligence.  The conduct
fell within a particular period of time, and has not been continued.  And, finally, Applicant
has shown a very definitive plan to resolve the debts, and is working toward that goal.  
Applicant states that her finances are now stable.  She is currently following a
financial budget, and understands that going forward she must always pay her debts in
a timely manner, and live within her means, thus, demonstrating that she is financially
responsible.
Applicant has submitted substantial documentary evidence to support the fact
that she has is currently paying her debts.  The receipts, payment plans, and credit
records are compelling documentary evidence that shows that she has acted
reasonably and responsibly.  She has shown good-faith by working toward repaying her
financial obligations, and resolving her financial indebtedness.  There is sufficient
evidence of financial rehabilitation.  Considering all of the evidence, Applicant has
introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to
overcome the Government's case. 
   
6
In regard to Guideline F, Financial Considerations, Disqualifying Conditions
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting
financial obligations, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control, and 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts, are also applicable.  Accordingly, I find for Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Applicant has the respect of her friends
and professional colleagues.  Although she was confronted with some difficult life
challenges in the past, she confronted them with  dignity and courageousness.  At all
times, she continued to display reasonableness and responsibility.  She continues to
make a good-faith effort to resolve her debts.  She has clearly demonstrated honesty
and trustworthiness.  
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole supports a whole-person assessment of good
judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a willingness to comply with rules and
regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may properly
safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must determined that the applicant is and has
been sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in her everyday life to adequately protect the 
Government’s national interest. Overall, based upon the seriousness of the conduct
outlined here, this Applicant has demonstrated that she is sufficiently trustworthy, and 
does meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I
find for Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
     
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has overcome the Government's case
opposing her request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a
finding for Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: For Applicant.
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
8
