KEYWORD:  Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings are supported by substantial evidence.  Applicant failed
to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence.  In Foreign Influence
cases, the nature of the government involved, its intelligence-gathering history, and its human
rights record provide context for the Judge’s ultimate decision.  There is a rational connection
between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose interests are adverse to those of the U.S.
and the risk that the applicant might fail to protect classified information.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASE NO:  15-00528.a1
DATE:  03/13/2017
DATE:  March 13, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-00528
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 8, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). Applicant requested a hearing.  On
November 30, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings contained
errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  She received a bachelor’s degree in China and
is pursuing a master’s in the U.S.  Her husband came to the U.S. in the early 1990s.  About a decade
later he visited China, where he met Applicant.  In the mid-2000s, Applicant came to the U.S. as
well.  She and her husband have two children, both of whom were born in this country.  Applicant
has retirement accounts in the U.S. and has no financial or property interests in China.
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of China.  Retired, they own two
condominiums there.  Applicant speaks with them two to four times a month.  Applicant’s parents
are generally aware of the kind of work she does.  Applicant has no siblings and has maintained no
contact with friends from college.
Applicant traveled to China in 2009, 2010, 2012, 2014, and 2016.  Her parents visited her
three times from 2009 to 2013.  When Applicant acquired U.S. citizenship, the Chinese government
revoked her Chinese passport because China does not recognize dual citizenship.  Applicant enjoys
an excellent reputation for her duty performance.  A witness, a relative who holds security clearance,
states that Applicant has stronger ties to the U.S. than to China.  Applicant’s performance appraisal
evidences important contributions to her employer’s mission, and, in 2015, she received a job
promotion.
China is one of the most aggressive collectors of U.S. economic and technological
information.  China’s attempts to acquire U.S. information are expected to constitute a growing
threat to this country’s economic security.  Among other things, China uses its computer network
capability to acquire intelligence that could benefit its defense capability.  It is able to acquire useful
information under the aegis of civilian research and development.  The Chinese government has
conducted large scale cyber espionage against the U.S., compromising U.S. computer networks of
the DoD, Defense contractors, and private entities.  China’s most effective means of acquiring
intelligence and technology are cyber espionage, collection by Chinese students, scholars, and
scientists (whether witting or unwitting), joint ventures, and foreign cooperation.
The U.S. State Department has reported human rights abuses in China.  Among other things,
visitors to China may be subject to surveillance.  Hotel rooms, cars, telephones, internet usage, etc.,
may be monitored. 
  
2
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s relationship with her Chinese parents is sufficiently
close that she could be subject to foreign influence or subjected to a possible conflict of interest. 
In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge cited to her regular and frequent contact
with her parents, both electronically and through travel.  Though acknowledging that there is no
evidence that the Chinese government has actually tried to exert pressure on Applicant or her
parents, he stated that her family could become targets of intelligence agents.  He noted evidence
of Applicant’s strong ties within the U.S.  However, he concluded that Applicant’s close relationship
with her parents and their awareness of the general nature of Applicant’s work, render her vulnerable
to coercion.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that the weight of the record evidence
militated against granting Applicant access to classified information, citing to her closeness to her
parents and her frequent visits and regular communications with them.  Though not questioning
Applicant’s patriotism, he concluded that she could be placed in a position of having to choose
between her ties in the U.S. and those in China.  
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge overstated the frequency of her travel to China.  However,
his findings about Applicant’s travels to that country and her parents’ visits in the U.S. are consistent
with her testimony at the hearing, statements in her security clearance application, and her Answer
to the SOR.  Tr. at 51-52, 57-58; SCA at 29-43; SOR Answer, dated October 6, 2015.  We conclude
that the challenged finding is based upon substantial record evidence.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-
01285 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 22, 2016).   Applicant argues that the Judge failed to consider significant
evidence of her loyalties and relationships in the U.S.  She states that he did not weigh her family
connections in this country, denying that she could be subjected to a conflict of interest.  She argues
that her communications with her parents are casual and that her visits to China are solely of a
personal, rather than official, nature, lessening the likelihood that she could be subjected to foreign
coercion.
In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign government involved and the
intelligence gathering history of that government are among the important considerations that
provide context for the other record evidence and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate
conclusions in the case.  The country’s human rights record is another important consideration.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App.
Bd. Aug. 4, 2006).  There is a rational connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country
whose interests are adverse to the United States and the risk that the applicant might fail to protect
and safeguard classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-07436 at 3, n. 4 (App. Bd. Oct.
19, 2011).
We note record evidence and the Judge’s findings of the following:  Applicant’s parents
reside in China; Applicant communicates with them frequently; Applicant has visited them or they
3
her on a regular basis; Applicant’s parents are aware of the location and general nature of her work; 
China practices espionage against the U.S.; and China has used its cyber-espionage capability to
compromise DoD and contractor computer systems.  This evidence supports the Judge’s conclusion
that Applicant’s parents could become a means through which Applicant could come to the attention
of Chinese intelligence personnel and be subjected to coercion or pressure.  The Judge discussed
Applicant’s ties within the U.S. and gave partial applicability to Mitigating Condition 8(b).1  The
Judge’s pertinent analysis explaining why the ties in the U.S. do not fully mitigate the risks posed
by the presence of Applicant’s parents in China is sustainable.  Applicant’s arguments, viewed as
a whole, are not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in
the record.    See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-02040 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 2017).  Neither are they
sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-08842 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.      
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(b): “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest
in favor of the U.S. interest.”    
4
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
