1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08344 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on May 20, 
2015. On May 2, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 26, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. On September 12, 2016, Department Counsel amended the 
SOR to allege an allegation under Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on September 15, 2016. I was assigned the case on October 28, 
2016. On November 10, 2016, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing 
for December 7, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the beginning of the 
hearing, Applicant acknowledged the Amendment to the SOR and admitted the 
allegation. The Government offered three exhibits which were admitted as Government 
(Gov) Exhibits 1 - 3. Gov 3 is the summary of Applicant’s background investigation 
interview summarized by the investigator who interviewed her. It is unsworn. Applicant 
2 
 
did not object to Gov 3.  Applicant testified, offered no exhibits, and called no witnesses. 
The transcript was received on December 15, 2016. The record was held open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents. She timely submitted a six-page document, 
which was admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and one-page document which was 
admitted as AE B. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the SOR allegations. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old software engineer for a DOD contractor who seeks to 
maintain her security clearance. She has worked for her current employer since 
December 2014. She was previously employed by another DOD contractor from 
January 2009 to July 2014. She applied for a security clearance with this company in 
July 2011 and received a secret clearance. She has a bachelor’s degree and has some 
graduate school credit. She is married and has a daughter who was eight months old at 
the time of the hearing. (Tr. 18-22, 28, 39; Gov 1; Gov 2) (Note: The facts in this 
decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, or locations in 
order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more 
specific information.)  
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement 
 
On her security clearance application, dated May 20, 2015, Applicant listed 
marijuana use from approximately January 2002, to February 2015 in response to 
Section 23, Illegal Use of Drugs or Controlled Substances, “In the last 7 years, have you 
illegally used any drugs or controlled substances?” Applicant noted in the comments 
section: 
 
The first time I smoked was in high school over 10 years ago. I smoked 
maybe once a month for a year in high school (junior year – 2002) Most 
recently, it was a casual night with my younger sister. It wasn’t used 
maliciously, we were watching tv and knitting at my house.  
 
Applicant also mentioned: 
 
I do not intend to smoke marijuana in the future because it’s not worth the 
anxiety of losing my security clearance, job and ruining my future. It’s very 
unhealthy and causes cancer.  
 
(Gov 1, Section 23 at 41)   
   
In an unsworn summary of Applicant’s background investigation interview, 
conducted on August 25, 2015, Applicant confirmed she first started using marijuana in 
2002 as a teenager. She smoked marijuana approximately once a month between 2002 
to 2005. Her marijuana use decreased from two to three times a year between 2005 to 
2010. From 2010 to February 2015, her marijuana use decreased to once a year. She 
3 
 
indicated that she has no intention of using marijuana in the future. She states it is 
unhealthy. Her main reason for stopping marijuana use is her security clearance. She 
used it so infrequently, it is not worth jeopardizing her job and her future. (Gov 3 at 3) 
 
From 2011 to 2014, Applicant held a security clearance while working for her 
previous employer. She did not understand that she should not use marijuana while 
holding a security clearance because she rarely used marijuana. She estimates that she 
used marijuana on two to three occasions during the 2011 to 2014 timeframe while she 
held a security clearance. She did not realize that illegal drug use was prohibited while 
holding a security clearance until she completed the May 2015 security clearance 
application. She never used marijuana at work and did not show up for work under the 
influence of marijuana. (Gov 3 at 3) 
 
Applicant used marijuana with friends or her former boyfriend in social settings at 
parties or at home. She never purchased it. It was provided to her. She never sold it. 
She never used any other illegal drugs. (Gov 3 at 3) 
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits that “I did smoke pot once and only 
once while I held a security clearance.”  She understands that her actions were illegal, 
but says that her trustworthiness as an American is unwavering and true. Applicant 
takes pride in her country, work, and self.  She comes from a family who has served in 
the military. Both of her parents were Army veterans. She is proud of the work she 
does. She gives her “all to serve her country and to protect those who protect us. She 
says she is not the same person. She is a new mom with new responsibilities and would 
never jeopardize her job, family, or livelihood again. (Response to SOR) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that she began using marijuana in 2002 
while she was in high school. She estimates that she used marijuana on average of 
once a month between 2002 to 2005. In 2003, she lived with a boyfriend who frequently 
used marijuana. She would smoke marijuana with him at home. They broke up in 2004-
2005, and she stopped using marijuana. Between 2005 to 2010, Applicant’s use 
decreased to once or twice a year. Her college work had become more demanding and 
her friends, to include her now husband, did not use marijuana. The few times she used 
occurred at a family party at her sister’s house. Her aunt had some marijuana. One time 
she used with some college friends. (Tr. 23-25) 
 
Applicant began working for her previous employer in January 2009.  She recalls 
she was required to take a drug test and that she made sure that she abstained from 
marijuana because she did not want a positive drug test. During the hiring process, her 
previous employer advised her that they perform random drug testing. She later testified 
that she used marijuana on average of at least once a year between 2010 to February 
2015. Applicant knew marijuana was illegal, but changes in the law relaxed the 
penalties for possession of marijuana, so Applicant did not think using marijuana was a 
serious offense. (Tr. 28-35)  
 
Applicant did not become aware that using marijuana while holding a security 
clearance was considered serious until just before completing her May 2015 security 
clearance application with her current employer. She recalls using marijuana just once 
4 
 
after being granted a security clearance in 2011. She believes someone was passing a 
marijuana cigarette around and she took a puff.  After having her memory refreshed, 
she recalls using marijuana with her younger sister in February 2015 while knitting. This 
was the last time she used marijuana. Her sister no longer uses marijuana. Her mother 
uses marijuana and struggles with addiction issues. Applicant does not have much 
contact with her mother aside from phone calls. She believes her aunt uses marijuana. 
Her aunt moved to another state so she does not have much contact with her. She has 
a 21-year-old nephew who is battling drug addiction. (Tr. 37-40; 45-48) 
 
Applicant testified her last use of marijuana occurred several months before she 
submitted her security clearance application in May 2015. It also occurred before she 
received extensive security training with her current employer. Her current employer is 
more organized. They provided better training on their policies and standards. She 
claims her first employer was more “lax” about security training. (Tr. 40-41)  
 
Applicant no longer intends to use marijuana. She says she has become a 
different person after giving birth to her daughter. She watches her nephew and her 
mother’s addiction problems and it is not a life that she wants to live. She has no desire 
for it. None of her current friends use illegal drugs. (Tr. 43) After the hearing, Applicant 
submitted a statement indicating her intent to abstain from all illegal drug use. She 
acknowledged that any future illegal drug use will result in the loss of her security 
clearance. (AE B) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The personal conduct concern cross-alleged Applicant’s illegal drug use, which is 
alleged under Guideline H.  The concern is more appropriately addressed under 
Guideline H. Alleging it under Guideline E is redundant. SOR ¶ 2.a is found for 
Applicant. 
 
 The amendment to the SOR, alleged: 
 
You falsified material facts on an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Process(sic), executed by you on July 25, 2011, in 
response to “Section 23. Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity.” You 
falsely answered that your drug use stopped in November 2007 when, in 
fact, your drug use continued after that date.  
 
In her security clearance application, dated July 25, 2011, Applicant listed marijuana 
use from approximately August 2007 to approximately November 2007. She explained 
in the comments section of the security clearance application: 
 
I used marijuana in college with some close friends. Frequency of use was 
close to nothing. Times used would be under 10 times in the past 7 years.   
 
(Gov 2, Section 23 at 32)  
 
5 
 
While Applicant’s direct answer to section 23 is incorrect, she tends to indicate 
marijuana use subsequent to that time in the comments section of the same section. 
There is nothing in the record evidence such as her background investigation interview 
related to the 2011 background investigation to conclude Applicant intended to minimize 
her illegal marijuana use.   
 
Applicant’s performance evaluation for the period from January 1, 2015, and 
December 31, 2015, was favorable. (AE A)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
6 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:  
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (E.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) any drug abuse;  
 
AG & 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG & 25(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 2002 to February 2015.  
She illegally used marijuana after being granted a security clearance in 2011. AG& 
25(a), AG & 25(c), and AG & 25(g) apply.   
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
7 
 
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to the Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
  
AG & 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
   
 AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply because of Applicant’s long history of marijuana use. 
She continued to use marijuana after being granted a security clearance in 2011. Her 
most recent use occurred in February 2015. While she did not use marijuana on a 
regular basis, her use after being granted a security clearance is sufficient to raise 
concerns about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. While Applicant 
claims she did not appreciate that she should not use marijuana while possessing a 
security clearance until she was trained by her current employer in the Spring 2015, she 
should have known.  When she was hired by her first company, she was required to 
take a drug test. She was also told that she might be subject to random urinalysis 
testing.  She was asked about illegal drug use on her security clearance application. 
The fact that she did not understand illegal drug use would be a concern when she was 
initially granted a security clearance raises a concern that Applicant would be unable to 
appreciate and understand the procedures for protecting classified information.  
 
 Applicant is given credit for providing a signed statement of intent to refrain from 
marijuana use. However, I give this document little weight considering Applicant’s illegal 
use of marijuana after being granted a security clearance. AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
8 
 
 The following disqualifying condition potentially applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately omitted subsequent marijuana use 
after November 2007 in response to section 23 on her July 2011 security clearance 
application.  She listed marijuana use from August 2007 to November 2007. While 
Applicant’s direct response to section 23 is incorrect, she indicates marijuana use 
subsequent to November 2007 in the explanation portion of section 23. She states that 
she used marijuana in college with some close friends and the frequency of use was 
under 10 times in the past 7 years. I find SOR ¶ 2.b for Applicant because she indicated 
more recent use in the explanation section of the question. I cannot conclude that she 
deliberately falsified her answer to section 23.  
 
I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶ 2.a because the conduct was more 
appropriately addressed under Guideline H. The personal conduct concern is found for 
Applicant.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s professional 
qualifications. I considered her honesty with regard to her illegal marijuana use on her 
May 2015 security clearance application. I considered that her last use of marijuana 
occurred in February 2015, after being granted a security clearance. Applicant has not 
used marijuana in over two years.  The concern in this case is more about Applicant’s 
9 
 
judgment. Her inability to recognize that illegally using marijuana would be a concern 
when she was first granted a security clearance and her decision to illegally use 
marijuana after being granted a security clearance indicates poor judgment and a 
disregard for laws, rules, and regulations. Concerns raised by Applicant’s illegal 
marijuana use are not mitigated. Personal conduct concerns are mitigated because 
Applicant did not intentionally falsify her response regarding illegal drug use on her July 
2011 security clearance application and the use itself was appropriately addressed 
under Drug Involvement. 
 
At some point in the future, Applicant may demonstrate the requisite judgment 
required to be entrusted with a security clearance. She has not done so at this time. 
Clearance is denied.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:   For Applicant  
        
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
