 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-04413 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems and delinquent debts, dating back to 
at least 2007 when he filed a bankruptcy, and continuing into the present. He failed to 
mitigate the financial security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On November 25, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 
86) for re-investigation. On May 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On August 19, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On November 18, 2016, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On November 16, 2016, DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the hearing for December 8, 2016. At said hearing, 
Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted into 
evidence without objections. Applicant testified. He offered no exhibits. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 19, 2016.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw 
the allegation contained in SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant did not object. Said motion was 
granted. (Tr. 8.)  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 1.b, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 
1.w. He denied all other SOR allegations, on the basis that he was unfamiliar with the 
debts or creditors. (Answer; GE 8.) His admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old and divorced since 2014. He and his former wife have 
two children, ages 22 and 14. His younger child lives with him. In 1991, he graduated 
from high school, and later completed a trade school. He began working for his current 
employer in 1997. He said his performance evaluations have been good. His supervisor 
is aware of the financial issues underlying this investigation. (Tr. 18-20.)  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. In September 2007, he filed 
Chapter 13 Bankruptcy. It was dismissed in August 2011 because Applicant had 
defaulted on his payments, twice, once in November 2008 and again in July 2011. At 
the time of the dismissal, Applicant had paid $28,292 into the payment plan.1 He 
testified that he was uncertain why the case was dismissed because he had been 
making regular payments through automatic deductions from his paycheck. He 
attributed some of his current delinquent debts to his previous marriage, divorce, and 
medical bills for himself and former wife. He has tried contacting some creditors, but 
had difficulty obtaining information about the debts because he did not want to disclose 
his Social Security number. (Tr. 21-23, 27-28.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from March 2014, March 2015, and April 
2016, the SOR alleged 20 delinquent debts, totaling about $28,800, and the 2007 
bankruptcy. It also alleged that Applicant received a reprimand from his employer for 
misusing a corporate credit card. The debts were reported as delinquent between 2009 
and 2015. (GE 2, 3, 4.) Applicant has not paid or resolved any of the alleged debts. (Tr. 
22.) 
                                                 
1 The total amount included in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy is not listed in the bankruptcy exhibits.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 
In April 2013, Applicant received a written reprimand from his employer because 
he used a corporate credit card to pay his cell phone bill. Applicant explained that he 
used his phone for work purposes while traveling for his employer, and he thought the 
employer should pay the bill. In addition to receiving a reprimand, he was suspended for 
three days without pay, and he was required to pay the $1,103 delinquent balance owed 
on the credit card. This is the only time Applicant received a reprimand related to the 
misuse of the corporate credit card. (Tr. 24-25, 36-37.)   
 
 Applicant earns around $70,000 annually. (Tr. 26.) He said he owes about 
$10,000 in unpaid federal taxes. He has been on a payment plan for the past five years. 
He pays $100 each month. He did not present a budget, and has not participated in 
financial or credit counseling. He does not have a clear understanding of his financial 
situation. (Tr. 39-41.)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
 
 
4 
 
 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust. 
 
 Beginning in mid-2007 when he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy, Applicant has 
accumulated delinquent debts that he has been unable or unwilling to resolve over the 
years. In 2013, he wrongly charged a personal debt to his corporate card. The evidence 
raises the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debt problems date back to before 2007 when he filed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Since then he has accumulated additional delinquent debts, 
which remain unaddressed. His reliability and trustworthiness in managing his financial 
obligations cast doubt on his judgment and make it likely his financial problems will 
recur in the future. AG ¶ 20(a) does not provide mitigation.  
 
 Some of Applicant’s financial problems are attributable to his previous marriage, 
divorce, and medical issues. Those may have been circumstances beyond his control. 
However, he provided no evidence that he acted responsibly in managing debts while 
 
 
6 
 
 
they were accumulating or paying them. AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal application. Applicant 
did not offer evidence that he received credit or budgetary counseling, and there are no 
indications that his finances are under control. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) was not 
established. He did not provide evidence that he resolved any of the SOR-alleged 
debts, which would demonstrate a good-faith effort to manage those financial 
obligations. However, he paid over $28,000 into a bankruptcy plan, before it was 
dismissed, which was a good-faith effort to resolve the debts within the bankruptcy, and 
mitigated SOR ¶ 1.f. Applicant’s employer suspended him for three days for misusing a 
corporate credit card and required him to pay its outstanding balance. The evidence 
does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). He denied several allegations, but did 
not provide evidence that he successfully disputed any of those allegations. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, 45-year-
old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has successfully worked for 19 
years. He has held a security clearance for many years. While those are positive 
factors, his history of financial problems outweighs those facts. He has not provided 
evidence that he has resolved any of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He does 
not work with a written budget nor has he sought financial counseling or assistance. He 
has not established a track record of financial reliability and responsibility. The likelihood 
that similar problems will continue is significant. Applicant did not meet his burden of 
persuasion to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
         Subparagraph 1.f:            For Applicant  
   
         Subparagraph 1.g:            Withdrawn 
   
Subparagraphs 1.h through 1.w:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
    
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
