                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-030721
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 8, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On November 24, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) 
On March 7, 2016, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered seven documentary exhibits. (Items 1-7.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on April 13, 2016. Applicant  submitted
The case number was incorrectly listed on the SOR as 15-03702.1
1
additional evidence, which has been identified and entered into evidence without
objection as Exhibit A. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on
December 1, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 57 years old. She has been married since 1981, and she has two
children. She graduated high school in 1977. Applicant was employed by a previous
employer from 1990 to 2008, when she retired. She was then unemployed from
approximately August  2008 until April 2009. Applicant has been employed as a Service
Analyst since October 2013, by her present employer, a DoD Contractor, and she seeks
a DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense sector. (Item
3.)
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 11 allegations (1.a. through 1.k.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts for Federal Government tax liens, failure to file Federal and
State taxes and overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. The delinquent debts in
the SOR total approximately $769,000. Credit Reports (CR) dated January 14, 2014;
March 16, 2015; and October 9, 2015, establish the debts listed in the SOR. (Items 5, 6,
and 7.) The allegations will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on
the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to the Federal Government for a tax lien entered against
Applicant in 2014 is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount of $32,092.
(Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote nothing
further. (Item 2.) No evidence was introduced to establish that this debt has been
resolved, reduced or is in deferred status.
1.b. This overdue debt to the Federal Government for a tax lien entered against
Applicant in 2010 is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount of $92,708.
(Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote nothing
further. (Item 2.) No independent evidence was introduced to establish that this debt has
been resolved or reduced.
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount
of $273. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote
nothing further. (Item 2.) No independent evidence was introduced to establish that this
debt has been resolved or reduced.
2
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent medical account in the
amount of $331. (Item 1.)  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but she
wrote nothing further. (Item 2.) No independent evidence was introduced to establish that
this debt has been resolved or reduced.
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount
of $278. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote
nothing further. (Item 2.)  No independent evidence was introduced to establish that this
debt has been resolved or reduced.
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount
of $5,418. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote
nothing further. (Item 2.)  No independent evidence was introduced to establish that this
debt has been resolved or reduced.
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount
of $522. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote
nothing further. (Item 2.)  No independent evidence was introduced to establish that this
debt has been resolved or reduced.
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a mortgage account that went to
foreclosure. Applicant remains indebted for any deficiency balance. (Item 1.) Applicant
admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote nothing further. (Item 2.)  The
credit reports show the amount owed on this loan for a second mortgage is $114,964.
(Item 5.) No independent evidence was introduced to establish that this debt has been
resolved or reduced.
1.i. it is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to pay her Federal and State
income taxes as required, for at least tax year 2010. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this
SOR allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote nothing further. (Item 2.)  No independent
evidence was introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.
1.j. This overdue debt to the Federal Government is cited in the SOR for a
delinquent account in the amount of $113,000. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted this SOR
allegation in her RSOR, but she wrote nothing further. (Item 2.) 
In her Post-FORM submission, Applicant wrote that her Federal tax debt to the
Federal Government was as a result of a Ponzi scheme, and the IRS had suspended
collection of the delinquent tax debt pending the outcome of the case of the United
States v [the alleged perpetrator of the Ponzi scheme]. She also wrote that she was a
victim and witness in the case, which was filed in 2013. Finally, she asserted, “The
Applicant and [her] accountant are confident that the delinquency will be eliminated once
[her] case has been processed through the Internal Revenue Service System resulting in
a $0 balance to the Internal Revenue Service.” (Item A.) While this case is pending, no
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.
3
1.k. This overdue debt to State A is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in
the amount of $517,488. (Item 1.)  Applicant wrote deny/partial this SOR allegation in her
RSOR, but she wrote nothing further. (Item 2.) 
Regarding her State A tax debt, Applicant wrote that State A lists no taxes due as
of April 1, 2016, and Applicant has requested an official statement from State A
Department of Taxation confirming that information. (Item A.) No statement evidence
was introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
4
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
While Applicant has submitted some evidence to suggest that her debt to the IRS
may be settled in a lawsuit, that matter has yet to be resolved in the court. However,
even if the debt listed as 1.j., is resolved, it is not clear if that also resolves the two liens
to the IRS, listed as 1.a., and 1.b., above.  Also, as the record reflects, there are several
additional debts listed on the SOR, for which no evidence has been introduced to
establish that they have been resolved or reduced. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case, as the evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” While part of
Applicant’s financial difficulties may have occurred because of a period of
unemployment, I do not find that evidence has been introduced to establish that
Applicant has acted responsibly to resolve or reduce her non IRS delinquent debts.
Therefore, I do not find that this mitigating condition is applicable. 
5
AG ¶ 20(d) is also not applicable, as there has been no evidence introduced that
other than her Federal debts Applicant has “initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve [her] debts,” and even her Federal debts, have not been
satisfied. Finally, I cannot conclude that evidence has been introduced which will
establish that Applicant will be able to pay off her past debts or keep up to date on her
current debts and expenses, especially if any new or unexpected debts are incurred.
Therefore, I find that Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Consideration concerns,
which are found against Applicant. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and no mitigating conditions are applicable, I
find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.k.: Against  Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
7
