 
 
 
 
1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 15-05811 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulties between 2009 and 2014. He mitigated 
the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial considerations. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 23, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86.) 
On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 13, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On October 18, 2016, DOHA 
assigned the case to me. On October 19, 2016, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
setting the case for November 16, 2016. The case proceeded as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 10 into evidence. All 
exhibits were admitted. The record closed at the conclusion of the hearing. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 28, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant admitted all four SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old and married for 11 years. He has a stepson with special 
needs. He earned a bachelor’s and master’s degree in accounting. After finishing his 
master’s degree in 2001, he started a position with a national accounting firm. He 
subsequently took a position with a non-profit organization where he remained until 
2005, when he began a position with a federal agency. He remained there until 2013, at 
which time he returned to his home state and began working for a state university. He 
worked there a year and started working at a bank while teaching part-time. Since 2015, 
he has been working for a federal contractor and teaching. Applicant’s wife works for a 
federal agency. (Tr. 18-21.) 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to an investment property he owned 
and his mother-in-law’s illness. In 2005, he purchased a four-flat apartment building in 
another state that he intended to rent. At some point, the four tenants stopped timely 
paying their rent. He began using his salary to pay the mortgage on the apartment 
building and his credit cards for other expenses, including a mortgage on a personal 
residence he owned at the time. In 2009, he placed the apartment building on the 
market. In mid-2010, his mother-in-law became seriously ill. His wife used their credit 
cards to travel to and from her mother’s residence and to help her mother financially. In 
December 2010, Applicant sold the apartment building. His mother-in-law died in 
September 2011. (Tr. 25-30.)   
 
 After his mother-in-law died, Applicant started resolving her estate and debts. In 
doing so, he became aware of the importance of organizing and managing one’s 
finances, and he started assessing his financial situation. He established a budget, 
started calling creditors, and negotiated payment plans when able. In 2011, he told his 
wife that if he consistently worked his financial plan, he would be financially stable within 
five or six years.  He has followed that budget since 2011. (Tr. 28, 32, 34.) 
  
 In November 2013, Applicant started working with a debt consolidation company 
to resolve three SOR-listed debts, and began making monthly payments of $998 to the 
consolidation company. He subsequently resolved one debt through payments to the 
debt consolidation company. (AE 6.) After consistently making payments to the 
 
 
 
 
3 
consolidation company for two years, he became eligible to work with a subsidiary of 
the consolidation company, which acts as a loan company. The subsidiary company 
agreed to pay off Applicant’s two remaining creditors, and established a loan repayment 
schedule to the subsidiary for Applicant. The subsidiary company paid about $23,000 to 
two creditors to resolve Applicant’s formerly delinquent debts in full. Applicant is now 
making monthly payments of $715 to the subsidiary company for the loans in SOR ¶ 1.a 
and SOR ¶ 1.d, as noted below. (Tr. 42-47.) 
 
 Based on Applicant’s admissions and credit bureau reports (CBR) from April 
2015 and May 2016, the SOR alleged four delinquent debts, totaling about $78,000. 
(GE 2, GE 3.) The debts arose between 2009 and 2014. A summary of the status of 
each debt is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: The $38,763 debt is a charged-off credit card account that 
Applicant used to pay expenses when his tenants did not pay rent on time, 
and his wife used for visits to her mother. He was making monthly 
payments of $125 on the account between 2011 and 2013, and then 
stopped because he was only paying interest. The debt ballooned up to 
$48,000 and the creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant. The 
judgment was settled for $27,000, and Applicant began making monthly 
payments of $800 in June 2015. In September 2016, the debt 
consolidation subsidiary loan company made a final payment of $15,000 
to the creditor, and the judgment was satisfied. Applicant is repaying the 
subsidiary company for its loan. It is being resolved. (Tr. 38-42; AE 1.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: The $15,007 debt was owed to a credit card company. 
Applicant settled this debt for $11,000. He made monthly payments on the 
debt from November 2013 until April 2015, at which time it was paid in full. 
He does not owe any money on this debt. It is resolved. (Tr. 50; AE 3.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: The $16,124 debt was owed to a company for a home equity 
loan. Applicant started making monthly payments of $100 in December 
2011. He made his last payment to the creditor in January 2016. It is 
resolved. (Tr. 51-54: AE 4.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: The $8,109 debt was owed to a credit card company. The 
subsidiary company settled the debt for $3,484 and paid it for Applicant in 
October 2016. Applicant is repaying the subsidiary company for its loan. It 
is being resolved. (Tr. 56; AE 5.) 
 
All creditors for the above debts have been paid. Applicant owes the subsidiary 
company about $23,000 for having resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d, 
and he makes monthly payments of $715 to repay the loan. He said it would be paid off 
in May 2019. He has essentially resolved $55,000 of the $78,000 alleged in the SOR, 
and has an established and workable plan to resolve the remaining amount. (Tr. 60.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 Applicant’s net income is $5,777 per month. After paying certain expenses, he 
has $1,384 remaining. Applicant’s wife has a separate budget. Her net monthly income 
is $1,950. After she pays certain expenses, she has about $150 remaining. Applicant 
has about $19,000 in savings, and $70,000 in his 401(k). He has no loans, other than 
the one owed to the subsidiary company. (Tr. 35-38; AE 7, AE 8.) He has one credit 
card on which he makes monthly payments. (Tr. 56.) Applicant explained that he 
developed a system for managing and paying bills that he consistently follows. As a 
result, he was able to start his savings account. He is confident about his financial 
management practices and is secure knowing that his finances are stable and 
organized. (Tr. 57-59.) 
 
 Two years ago, Applicant contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to 
establish a payment plan for outstanding taxes. Currently, the balance is $5,000. He 
has made monthly payments of $150 to the IRS for the past two years. The payment is 
automatically deducted from his salary. He has also had his tax refunds applied to the 
debt. He thinks this matter will be resolved after he files his 2016 taxes and has the 
refund applied to the balance. He did not know the tax years involved. (Tr. 32-34.)  
 
 Applicant submitted a letter from his project supervisor. The supervisor has 
worked with him since April 2015 and said that Applicant “has been a solid and 
trustworthy employee during his time with my team.” (AE 9.) A friend and former 
colleague wrote that he has known Applicant for more than ten years. He said, 
Applicant “has always been a man of his word.” (AE 9.)  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
 
 
 
5 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
As documented by CBRs and his admissions, Applicant’s financial problems 
arose between 2009 and 2014. He was unable or unwilling to manage those issues until 
sometime in 2011 when he began to slowly address them. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
 
 
6 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets out four conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
Applicant demonstrated that his indebtedness is unlikely to recur given his 
current income, and adherence to a detailed budget. He established mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant attributed his financial issues to problems with tenants and his 
mother-in-law’s long illness. Those were circumstances beyond his control. He 
presented evidence that in late 2011 he began to organize his finances and address his 
obligations. In late 2013, he hired a debt consolidation company to assist in the 
resolution of his four large debts. There is sufficient evidence to establish mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant provided evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(c). Although 
he has not participated in credit or financial counseling, he has a detailed budget and 
worked with a debt consolidation company for three years. There are clear indications 
that his financial issues are under control, and all matters alleged in the SOR are 
resolved. He repaid two SOR-alleged debts. He is resolving the other two delinquent 
debts. His actions in addressing those financial obligations demonstrated a good-faith 
effort to resolve debts and established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
 
 
 
7 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible 42-year-old man, 
who has successfully worked for a defense contractor for the past two years. After his 
mother-in-law’s death in late 2011, Applicant started seriously evaluating his financial 
situation. He subsequently organized a budget, contacted creditors, and began payment 
plans where appropriate.  
 
In late 2013, Applicant hired a debt consolidation company to resolve three larger 
debts. One of those debts was paid and resolved through the debt consolidation 
company. He is resolving the other two debts through payments to the subsidiary 
company. He repaid the fourth formerly delinquent debt through his own efforts. He 
owes approximately $23,000 to the subsidiary company and $5,000 to the IRS for 
unpaid Federal taxes. He has been making monthly payments on both debts for several 
years.  
 
Given the serious and determined attitude, Applicant has about responsibly 
managing his finances, as exhibited by his organized and detailed presentation, I have 
no reason to believe he will renege on his financial or legal obligations. He understands 
that further delinquencies could jeopardize his employment. His financial situation is 
stable and no longer poses a security concern. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:              For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                         
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
