 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-05978 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On March 2, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct).1 In a March 18, 2016, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted 14 of the 16 
allegations raised under Guideline F and the two allegations raised under Guideline E. 
He also requested a determination based on the written record. On April 25, 2016, the 
Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with nine attachments (“Items”). 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM within the time allotted. I was assigned the case 
on March 23, 2017. Based on my review of the case file, I find Applicant failed to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old welder since 2015. Applicant has a high school diploma. 
He is single, has no children, and has lived at the same address for most of his life. Since 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
2004, Applicant has had one period of unemployment, from January 2015 through 
February 2015. It occurred after he left his previous employer because he found its work 
standards poor.  
 
At issue are 16 delinquent debts, amounting to approximately $28,600. They are 
reflected in the SOR at allegations 1.a through 1.p. Applicant admitted responsibility for 
all the cited debts except those noted at 1.b and 1.c, for account balances of $87 and 
$116, respectively. Applicant cannot identify these debts. (SOR Response) As for each 
of the other cited delinquent accounts, Applicant wrote: “I admit. Was working with a 
company to help me with my debt. Had to stop for lack of money coming in.” (SOR 
Response) No other information about the cited accounts or his finances was offered. 
 
On March 2, 2015, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). In 
response to Section 22 – Police Record, Applicant wrote “no” in response the an inquiry 
as to whether he had been charged, convicted, or sentenced of a crime in any court in 
the preceding seven years. In fact, he had been arrested in about February 2015 and 
charged with driving under the influence. In admitting the allegation at 2.a, which states 
he materially falsified facts on the SCA in making his denial, Applicant wrote: “I was going 
to court to try to get all charges dropped. The driving under the influence was dropped to 
a reckless driving and one year probation and a fine.” 
 
In response to Section 26 – Financial Record, Applicant wrote “no” in response to 
a question asking whether he had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency or had 
an account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed 
in the preceding seven years. He also denied having any current obligations that were 
over 120 days delinquent. These denials were made despite the delinquent debts noted 
at SOR allegations 1.a through 1.p. Applicant admitted the related allegation at 2.b which 
alleged he had falsified material facts in denying his delinquent debts. Applicant wrote: 
“Was working with a company to help me with my debt. Had to stop for lack of money 
coming in. Working with [contact information redacted].” No other information about this 
answer or the SCA, overall, was offered in response to the SOR or FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
 
 
 
 
3 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this guideline 
is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
considerable outstanding delinquent debts. This is sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
          Applicant admitted responsibility for all the cited debts except those noted at 1.b 
and 1.c, for account balances of $87 and $116, respectively. Applicant cannot identify 
those debts. He referenced an effort to address his debts through a debt consolidation or 
repayment entity, but provided no documentary evidence reflecting an implemented plan. 
There is no documentary evidence showing he has received financial counseling. Or that 
he has formally disputed any delinquent debts with either the creditor or a credit reporting 
bureau. Consequently, none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
 
 
 
 
5 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant admitted deliberately falsifying facts in two sections of his March 2015 
SCA concerning his police record and finances. Consequently, AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
Because Applicant only admitted these falsifications without   
 
  The guideline also provides several possible mitigating conditions, AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations.  
 
 With regard to a falsification involving a past arrest, Applicant only wrote that he 
had been in the process of contesting the matter, and noted that it was ultimately dropped 
in favor of a reckless driving charge. No documentary evidence supporting these 
assertions was provided. The same is true of his failure to support his assertion he 
falsified his SCA answer concerning his debts because he had retained assistance to 
 
 
 
 
6 
help him with his debt. Lacking documentation regarding these assertions, none of the 
available mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c) sets forth the need to 
utilize a whole-person evaluation. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated 
my comments under the guidelines, as well as available facts regarding Applicant’s 
person, in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant provided scant information regarding his financial issues and his 
admitted falsification of a 2015 SCA. The little information provided is not substantiated 
with documentary evidence. Without more, a determination cannot be found in his favor 
under either guideline Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.p:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
