 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-03418  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was convicted of multiple crimes involving domestic violence, 
disorderly conduct, and violating a no contact order between December 2008 and July 
2014. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On October 3, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On November 6, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 14, 2015, and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On March 14, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items,1 
was mailed to Applicant on March 14, 2016, and received by him on March 24, 2016. 
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. He did not file any objection to the Government’s FORM, submit additional 
evidence for consideration, or request additional time to respond. DOHA assigned the 
case to me on December 13, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all four allegations concerning his 
criminal conduct. His admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since 2014. He 
has no military service, and this is his first application for a security clearance. He was 
married from 1986 to 1989, and has no children. He has been living with his current 
cohabitant since July 2010. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with felony Domestic Assault on December 
13, 2008. Later that day he was released on bail and issued a no contact order. The 
following day he was arrested again for violating the no contact order. That charge was 
dismissed on December 22, 2008. However, he violated the no contact order again, 
leading to an additional misdemeanor charge. In March 2009, he was convicted of the 
misdemeanor crimes of Simple Assault/Domestic and Violation of No Contact Order. He 
was sentenced to one year in jail (suspended) and placed on probation for one year. 
(Item 2; Item 3; Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 In July 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with disorderly conduct. On 
August 19, 2014, he pled Nolo Contendere and was convicted of this offense. He was 
sentenced to six months in jail (suspended) and placed on probation for six months. He 
remained on probation at the time he submitted his SF-86 in October 2014. (Item 2; 
Item 3; Item 7.)   
 
 Applicant offered no supplemental evidence concerning the circumstances 
surrounding his offenses or whether he satisfactorily completed any counseling or 
rehabilitation programs. He offered no statement expressing remorse for his crimes, 
character references from people who know him, or evidence concerning the quality of 
                                                 
1 The FORM says that nine Items were included. However, the March 4, 2009 document that is listed in 
Section II as Item 7 was omitted. Item 8 is part of an OPM Report of Investigation that is not admissible, 
per Directive E3.1.20, since Applicant did not adopt it and Department Counsel provided no 
authenticating evidence. Item 8 contains no mitigating information that is not duplicated elsewhere in the 
record, so its exclusion is not detrimental to Applicant.  
 
 
3 
 
 
his work performance. I was unable to observe his character or credibility in person 
because chose not to have a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets forth the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
  
The evidence established the above disqualifying conditions. Between 2008 and 
2014, Applicant committed several misdemeanor offenses involving domestic violence, 
violating a court order, and disorderly conduct. He was convicted, sentenced to a total 
of 18 months in jail (suspended) and placed on probation for 18 months.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of criminal conduct that occurred in 2008, 2009, and 
2014, shortly before he applied for a security clearance. His offenses reflect his inability 
or unwillingness to conform his behavior to accepted rules and regulations. The 
offenses were not shown to have occurred under unusual circumstances and are 
relatively recent. Applicant offered no explanation for his conduct that would establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a). Applicant expressed no remorse for his criminal conduct. 
He offered no evidence of successful rehabilitation or counseling to support a 
conclusion that recurrence is unlikely. Accordingly, mitigation under AG ¶ 32(d) was not 
established. 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
expressed in the SOR. His criminal conduct included domestic violence and violation of 
a court’s protective order, raising serious concerns about his character and judgment. In 
the absence of mitigating evidence, the likelihood that such behavior could recur 
continues to be a security issue, and the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress is 
undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
