 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-04684 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged under 
Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code in May 2012. Applicant’s student loans totaling 
$49,431 were placed for collection, and she failed to establish her student loan debt is 
either current or otherwise mitigated. Financial considerations security concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.      
  
Statement of the Case 
  
On November 11, 2014, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 3) On 
December 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 
1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
On January 15, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and waived her right to a 
hearing. (Item 2) On April 22, 2016, Department Counsel completed the File of Relevant 
Material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on an unspecified date, and on June 
17, 2016, Applicant responded to the FORM. (FORM response) On March 6, 2017, the 
case was assigned to me. The case file consisted of seven exhibits. (Items 1-7) 
Applicant did not object to any of the Government exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact1  
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she admitted that she owed $49,431 in student 
loans (SOR ¶ 1.a), and her debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Code in May 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b). She said she believed her student loans were 
discharged through her May 2012 bankruptcy. (Item 3) She also provided extenuating 
and mitigating information. Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional 
factual findings follow.  
 
Applicant is 42 years old, and she has been employed as a procurement 
specialist for a government contractor since 2008.2 (Item 3) In 2011, she received a 
master’s certificate in government contracting. (Item 3) In 2014, she received Senior 
Professional in Supply Management (SPSM) certification. (Item 3) Applicant has never 
married, and she has one child who was born in 2003. (Item 3) She has resided with a 
cohabitant since 1998. (Item 3) She has not served in the U.S. Armed Forces. (Item 3) 
There is no evidence that she violated security rules, committed any crimes, abused 
alcohol, or used illegal drugs. There is no evidence of employer performance 
evaluations.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, SCA, 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), and SOR 
response. The status of the SOR allegations is as follows. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges student loans placed for collection in the approximate amount 
of $49,431. In her November 11, 2014 SCA, Applicant said that she fell behind on her 
student loans “many years ago” due to her inability to make the required payment. (Item 
3) She continued, “I am working to bring the student loan out of default status and am 
told that after 9 consecutive payments, the status will be updated . . . I am making 
                                            
1 Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.  
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s November 
11, 2014 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA). (Item 3) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
monthly payments and am researching options for refinancing to lower the student loan 
rate. I have setup online banking to automatically send the payments on my behalf.” 
(Item 3) 
 
In her January 15, 2016 SOR response, Applicant said: 
 
I admit. To date, I am unsure of the exact status of my student loan. I do 
not receive balance statements or any communication whatsoever from 
the [creditor]. At the discharge of my bankruptcy, I began making monthly 
payments without notification to prevent any type of garnishment action. 
Shortly after, I reached out by phone and was told to submit my discharge 
documentation and the [creditor] would be in contact if anything further is 
required of me. I have not received any further communication nor 
reached out again by phone. It is still not clear to me whether or not this 
account was discharged along with the bankruptcy. I am not certain 
whether the past due status you are referring to as represented in my 
credit file is past or prior reporting but intend to take further action to gain 
current perspective and satisfy any requirements associated with this 
account. 
 
In her June 17, 2016 FORM response, Applicant repeated her comments in her 
SOR response and added: 
 
I have not received any correspondence on this loan since submitting the 
discharge documents and have every reason to believe it has been 
discharged. I have since reached out for assistance with confirming the 
exact status of my loan and am seeking loan rehabilitation assistance . . . . 
Upon confirmation that my loan is in fact active and has not been 
discharged, I fully intend to utilize the resources offered by [a debt 
management company] to resolve and ultimately recover this debt. 
  
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant’s nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged 
under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code in May 2012. Applicant’s monthly income is 
$5,261. (Item 7, Schedule I) Her unsecured nonpriority debts total $69,560, and this 
total includes student loans of $49,431. (Item 7, Schedule F) Her bankruptcy shows a 
$513 monthly garnishment; however, she did not indicate the $24,000 judgment 
obtained by county government in 2011 in her list of debts. (Item 7, Schedule I; OPM 
PSI; FORM response) Her budget shows monthly rent of $1,500, monthly food payment 
of $695, and a monthly remainder of $7 among other expenses. (Schedule J, Item 7) 
The “EXPLANATION OF BANKRUPTCY DISCHARGE in a Chapter 7 Case” reads 
Debts that are Not Discharged . . . d. Debts for most student loans.” ((emphasis in 
original) Item 7) She received financial counseling as part of the bankruptcy process. 
 
In 2002, Applicant’s father passed away. (FORM response; OPM PSI) Applicant 
and several family members were the beneficiaries on her father’s will. (OPM PSI) The 
property received fines exceeding $24,000 because of the condition of the property. 
(FORM response) Applicant did not live on the property. In 2011, Applicant’s salary was 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
garnished to pay the fine. She said in May 2011, her aunt paid the fines on the property, 
and the lien was released. (FORM response) The lien does not appear on her credit 
report or bankruptcy and is not a security issue.     
 
 Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is no documentary 
evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise 
resolved her student loans. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating 
documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for her financial problems and 
other mitigating information. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days from the 
receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth 
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not 
file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to 
an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in 
this FORM. (FORM at 3)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets 
as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in her credit reports, OPM PSI, and SOR response. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
February 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
4 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant described the problem with her inheritance resulting in a $24,000 fine 
and garnishment of her pay. These circumstances beyond her control adversely 
affected her finances. Applicant’s choice in 2012 to utilize bankruptcy to discharge her 
nonpriority unsecured debts is reasonable. The discharge of her debts was approved by 
the bankruptcy judge and is presumptively warranted and lawful. She is credited with 
mitigating SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
Applicant contends that her student loans were discharged in her 2012 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. Applicant resides in a state under the jurisdiction of the Fourth Circuit Court 
of Appeals. A bankruptcy court can discharge student loans only if repayment of those 
loans would constitute an undue hardship on a debtor and the debtor’s dependents. 
Title 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(8). To determine whether the debtor’s repayment of a student 
loan would constitute an undue hardship, the bankruptcy court in Applicant’s case would 
have applied the three-part test annunciated in Brunner v. New York State Higher Educ. 
Services, 831 F.2d 395 (2d Cir. 1987) and adopted by the Fourth Circuit. See Educ. 
Credit Mgmt. Corp. v. Mosko (In re Mosko), 515 F.3d 319 (4th Cir. 2008).  The Brunner 
test requires the debtor to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that (1) he or 
she cannot maintain, based on current income and expenses, a minimal standard of 
living for themselves and their dependents if forced to repay the loans; (2) additional 
circumstances exist indicating that this state of affairs is likely to persist for a significant 
portion of the repayment period of the student loan; and (3) he or she has made good-
faith efforts to repay the student loans. Applicant fails to meet all three tests. She has 
income exceeding $60,000 a year. After the county lien was paid, $511 was available 
monthly to pay her student loans, according to her budget. She did not establish her 
inability to further reduce her expenses indicated in her budget. She has been employed 
since 2008, and she provided no evidence of any payments to the student loan creditor. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The role of her cohabitant in paying household expenses is undefined. There is no 
evidence Applicant filed a formal complaint with the bankruptcy court, called a 
Complaint to Determine Dischargeability, which should be used to request discharge of 
government guaranteed student loans. See e.g., Lokey v. U.S. Dep't of Educ. (In re 
Lokey), 98 Fed. Appx. 938, 939 (4th Cir. 2004) (unpub.). 
 
Applicant did not provide enough details about what she did to address her 
student loan debt over the last four years. She did not provide documentation showing: 
(1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or 
a letter from the creditor proving that she paid or made any payments to the creditor; (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact;5 (3) 
credible debt disputes indicating she did not believe she was responsible for the debt 
and why she held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment 
plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to 
resolve her student loan debt; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant 
failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because she did not provide documented 
proof to substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt dispute. 
   
There is insufficient evidence about why Applicant was unable to make greater 
progress resolving her student loan debt. There is insufficient assurance that her 
financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. 
Under all the circumstances, she failed to establish that financial considerations security 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
                                            
5 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 42 years old, and she has been employed as procurement specialist 
for a government contractor since 2008. In 2011, she received a master’s certificate in 
government contracting. In 2014, she received SPSM certification. She has one child 
who was born in 2003. She has resided with a cohabitant since 1998. There is no 
evidence that she violated security rules, committed any crimes, abused alcohol, or 
used illegal drugs. There is no evidence of employer performance evaluations.  
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by a county government obtaining a 
$24,000 judgment and garnishing Applicant’s pay. Applicant’s aunt paid this debt. She 
is crediting with mitigating SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
Applicant did not provide documented resolution of her student loan debt. She 
provided insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary evidence of payments 
and an established payment plan addressing her delinquent student loan. Her actions 
show lack of financial responsibility and judgment, and raise unmitigated questions 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts, financial history, or 
documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of her past-due debt, and a track record of behavior consistent with her 
obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that financial consideration security concerns are not mitigated, and 
it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time.  
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
