                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-00660     
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The SOR was dated September 5, 2015. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 11, 2016. A notice of
hearing, dated November 16, 2016, was issued, scheduling the hearing for February
14, 2017. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-5 were admitted into the record. Applicant
submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX A-E). I held the record open until February 28, 2017.
Applicant did not submit any additional documents. He testified, but did not present
1
witnesses. The transcript was received on February 23, 2017. Based on a review of the
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted eight factual allegations in the SOR
and denied or disputed the remaining factual allegations under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) and provided detailed explanations for each allegation.
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. In 2011, he
separated from his marriage, and his divorce was final in 2016. (AX E) As a result of
that marriage, he has three children. He served in the U.S. Army on active duty from
1987 until 1992. Applicant served in the National Guard for 22 years. (GX 1) He retired
from the National Guard in 2010.  He has worked for his current employer for five years.
(Tr. 30) He has held a security clearance since the late 1980s. He completed his most
recent security clearance application in 2014. (GX 1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts, including judgments, collection accounts,
a federal tax lien, medical accounts and other charged-off accounts, which total
approximately $94,000. (GX 2-4 ) Applicant admitted to about $4,300 in debt. The  SOR
also alleges that Applicant did not timely file his federal income tax returns for the years
2008 through 2012. (GX 2,3)
Applicant explained that  his financial difficulties began when he was deployed
and his wife was in charge of the financial affairs for the house. (Tr. 22) He admitted
that he was not handling any financial issues. He believed that his issues with his wife
began in the early 2000's. (Tr. 27) Applicant later learned that his wife was not paying
debts that she had incurred. In addition, she had filed federal tax returns, but omitted
Applicant from the returns. (Tr. 23) In other instances, she did not file the federal tax
returns. He acknowledges that he did not know about this situation. He admits that he
failed to pay close attention to his financial situation. (Tr. 23) He stated that he failed to
take responsibility for his actions, and did not keep track of tax issues or delinquent
debts. Applicant also had two short periods of unemployment in 2011 and 2014. (Tr.
34) He tried budgeting, but she did not follow the budget. He came home and would
find the water turned off because his wife had not paid the bill. He would leave cash for
the household bills, but his wife did not pay them. (Tr.28) They did not obtain any
financial counseling.
As to SOR allegation 1.a, a 2012 judgment filed in the amount of $10,320,
Applicant disputes that he owes this money. It was the result of a dispute with a
landlord. He believes the case was dismissed, but had no proof.  Applicant was living in
the house after his wife left, and she did not pay the rent, although he was giving her
the money. It is not clear why Applicant did not just pay the landlord himself because he
2
stated that he did not drive. He does not intend to pay any money on this judgment. (Tr.
45)
As to SOR allegations 1.b, 1.d., 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h, Applicant admits the debts
and his failure to pay. He has no documentation of any that he might have paid. He
intends to pay what he owes. (Tr. 50)
As to the SOR allegation in 1.i (collection account for $1,038), he believes it has
been paid. He did not provide any documentation to confirm his assertion. As to SOR
allegation 1.j for a repossessed vehicle ($5,680), Applicant denies the debt and claims
it was not repossessed. (Tr. 52) He does not remember when he purchased the vehicle.
He stated that he made no payments toward the balance after the car was removed.
(Tr. 54) As to SOR allegation 1.k ($2,574), Applicant does not think that he owes this
account. He thought it was a credit card, but he believed he settled it. (Tr. 55) He did
not have any documentation or evidence of the settlement. At one point, he stated that
he would dispute it. (Tr. 56) Applicant denied the SOR allegation 1.l ($821). He believes
he cancelled the cable service and never received a bill. (Answer to SOR) As to SOR
allegation 1.m, Applicant admits it but he has no idea what the account is. (Answer to
SOR) As to the SOR allegation in 1.n ($3,049), Applicant denies and disputes this
account. He knows it was a gym membership, but he told the company to cancel his
membership because he could not afford it. (Tr. 58) He states that he never received a
bill. 
As to the allegation in the SOR 1.o, not filing federal tax returns for tax years
2008 to 2012, Applicant restated that this issue arose because his wife was handling
the filing of the tax returns. When he learned about the situation, he hired an attorney in
2015 to research the issue. Applicant claims that at this time, all returns have been
filed. He worked with a lawyer and filed “married filing separate.” (Tr.38) He provided a
spreadsheet that did not reflect the status of the other tax-year filings. Applicant
provided an account transcript from the IRS, which shows that a tax return was filed for
tax year 2006 in 2009. (AX B) He did not have other documentation as proof that the
tax filings were completed for the other years in question. He noted that the tax
information was confusing to him, but he would check with the attorney who helped him.
Applicant did not submit any post-hearing documentation to support his claim that the
other years were indeed filed. Applicant noted that he had to borrow money from his
family to hire the attorney. (Tr. 40)
 However, in 2006, Applicant learned that he owed $68,000 to the IRS when he
sold property (his home). The sale of the property was added to his income as a capital
gain. He was taxed accordingly, as required. (SOR 1.c) A tax lien was filed in 2010, in
the amount of $69,475. Applicant denies that he owes the IRS this money. In fact, he
believes that they owe him $26,000. (Answer to SOR) He went on to say that the IRS
will not give him any money back due to the fact that it has been two years since the
overpayment. It is unclear how he arrived at that amount. (Tr. 41) (AX C) The lien has
since been released.
3
 Applicant does not use credit cards. He pays cash for all his bills. He has 
checking and savings accounts. He has no retirement account. He has about $600 in
savings. He has two daughters who live with him. He provides for them financially. (Tr.
59) He thinks that his net monthly salary is $3,400. (Tr. 62) He stated that he earns
about $65,000 annually. (Tr. 67) He noted that he  does not follow a budget.
Applicant submitted a current credit bureau report and claims that he has three
items on the report that reflect any delinquent debt. He has not followed up on any of
the other SOR accounts and does not intend to pay the accounts that he disputed. He
states that he is now a changed person and handles his finances himself.
 Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance1
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
4
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
5
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of
trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
The Government produced sufficient evidence to show that Applicant accrued
delinquent debts and failed to timely file federal income tax returns for certain years. He
also has a federal tax lien and delinquent debts. The Government produced credible
evidence to establish the debts and tax lien. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to
raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c) and 19(g).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
6
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Applicant’s current financial difficulties began in the early 2000's. His wife did not
handle the financial affairs of the home or file the federal income tax returns properly, or
sometimes at all. Applicant did not know about this issue when he was deployed.
However, he learned about the situation upon his return from deployment, but did not
take immediate action. He sought an attorney in 2015 or 2016 to rectify the filing of the
tax returns. He did not produce evidence that they have all been filed. He did not seem
to know about his financial business even after his wife left. He will not pay certain
accounts or the $10,320 judgment. Applicant did produce evidence that the federal tax
lien ($69,475) has been released. Despite the fact that this was the largest account in
the SOR, he has not shown sufficient mitigation in this case. He did not contact creditors
to obtain the latest status on the other debts. He did not submit documentation after the
hearing to supplement the record. He receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b) due to the
circumstances beyond his control, but he did not act responsibly. He did not obtain
counseling.  He receives partial credit under AG 20(d) as the tax lien is resolved. The
other mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence in
this case to meet his burden. He has not mitigated the financial security concerns.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
7
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is 49 years old and has served in the U.S. military. He has held a
security clearance for many years.  He has three children. His ex-wife did not control the
financial matters for the household when Applicant was deployed. He learned about this
and was not proactive. He later learned about the tax-filing issues, and in 2015 or 2016,
he obtained an attorney to research the issues. Applicant did not present  evidence that
all the filings were filed and completed. He was vague about other accounts, and they
have not been paid. He does receive credit for his satisfaction of the 2010 federal tax
lien ($69,475). Still, he does not seem to have a handle on his financial issues and has
not resolved past delinquencies. He never sought financial counseling. He still does not
follow a budget.
 
 Applicant has not established that he has taken sufficient actions to reasonably
and responsibly resolve his tax filings. He was provided additional time to support the
record but he did not submit any documents.  Applicant has not shown that he can
responsibly manage his financial obligations in a more timely manner. He intends to pay
some debts, but a promise to pay in the future is not sufficient. He was not proactive with
the other delinquent debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and
doubts as to his judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, and eligibility for his security
clearance. I conclude that Applicant has not presented sufficient evidence of mitigation
of his financial considerations security concern.
. Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1d-1.o: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
9
