 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 Redacted )   ISCR Case No. 15-04578 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was placed on accelerated rehabilitation in 2012 for his involvement in a 
felony burglary. In January 2015, he was arrested for a probation violation for failing to 
complete all of his community service. He has yet to demonstrate that he possesses the 
sound judgment required for security clearance eligibility. Clearance is denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On December 12, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing a security 
concern under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and explaining why it was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him security clearance eligibility. 
The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access 
to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegation on December 28, 2015, and he 
requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
administrative judge. On April 22, 2016, the case was assigned to a DOHA Administrative 
Judge to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The case was transferred to 
me on May 23, 2016. On May 31, 2016, I scheduled a hearing for July 13, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) and 
one Applicant exhibit (AE A) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on July 21, 2016. 
 
I held the record open until August 15, 2016, for Applicant to submit additional 
documents. Applicant submitted a character reference (AE B) on August 8, 2016, which 
was admitted without objection. On August 22, 2016, I received four more character 
references (AEs C-F). Department Counsel filed no comment by the September 19, 2016 
deadline. 
 
There was a delay in issuing a decision in this case due to my workload. On 
reviewing Applicant’s case file in February 2017, I noted the lack of any confirmation from 
the Government that it had received Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. I faxed a copy 
of AEs C-F to Department Counsel, who indicated on February 17, 2017, that the 
Government had no objections. Accordingly, I admitted AEs C-F into the record. 
 
Given the importance of the resolution of the criminal charges in this case, I 
reopened the record on February 17, 2017, to give Applicant an opportunity to provide 
corroboration for his testimony that he had completed the requirements of his accelerated 
rehabilitation and resolved his probation issue. Applicant received my Order, sent by 
certified mail, on February 28, 2017, and he had a March 6, 2017 deadline for mailing a 
response. No documentation had been received by March 20, 2017, two weeks after the 
deadline.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The only SOR allegation is that Applicant was arrested in August 2012 on charges 
of burglary and criminal mischief and that an order for his re-arrest was issued for failure to 
complete the terms of his probation (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant admitted to the probation 
violation when he answered the SOR, but he also indicated that it was a misunderstanding. 
He had assumed that his probation was fulfilled, and he denied any intent to violate the 
terms of his probation. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old high school graduate with some college credits. He was 
raised in the foster care system from a very young age. He had a succession of 
placements until age 13, when he was placed in a stable foster environment with a caring 
family. (Tr. 27-29.) He began working for his employer, a defense contractor, in December 
2014 and seeks a secret clearance for his duties. (GEs 1, 3; Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 3 
 
After two years at a local college studying criminal justice (Tr. 30), Applicant 
transferred to another college in December 2010 to play football for the school. In August 
2012, Applicant was playing basketball with a friend from grade school when his friend 
suggested that they could come up with some money by robbing someone with whom this 
friend had some “business” dealings. Applicant was struggling to pay his bills, and he 
agreed with the plan. Together they went to the victim’s apartment. When the victim 
opened the door, they pushed him out of the way and stole a safe containing 
approximately $7,000. Applicant did not have a weapon on him or strike the victim. After 
Applicant and his childhood friend split the money, they went their separate ways. 
Applicant was subsequently arrested and charged with burglary, a class C felony, and with 
criminal mischief, a class B misdemeanor. Applicant refused to implicate his childhood 
friend in the crime because he feared retaliation and no longer wanted to be associated 
with him. Approximately one month after his arrest, Applicant pleaded guilty. Because it 
was his first offense, he was placed in an accelerated rehabilitation program. He was 
ordered to complete two years of probation and 40 hours of community service with the 
charges to be expunged in two years provided he fulfilled the terms. Applicant was not 
required to pay restitution to the victim because the police suspected that the stolen funds 
had come from the victim’s illegal activity.1 The victim would not tell the police what was 
taken. Applicant used his share of the stolen money to pay for the attorney who 
represented him in the criminal proceeding. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 37-44, 46, 61, 68-70.) Applicant 
understands that he made a “stupid choice” by becoming involved in the home invasion 
and theft in August 2012. “[He] just wasn’t thinking.” (Tr. 38, 62.) 
 
On October 21, 2014, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in application to work for his current 
employer. In response to the police record inquiries, Applicant disclosed his criminal 
charges in August 2012, for which he received two years of probation and 40 hours of 
community service. He indicated that the charges were expunged. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant began working for his employer in early December 2014. He attended 
training for the first month to learn his trade. (Tr. 33-34.) On February 18, 2015, Applicant 
was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM). Applicant detailed his involvement in the criminal offense in August 2012. He 
explained that as a first offender, he was given accelerated rehabilitation. Concerning his 
probation, Applicant indicated that he had given his address to the probation office, but he 
did not have to report to a probation officer. He explained that he had completed 32 hours 
of his 40 hours of community service and that he expected to complete his hours in the 
spring of 2015. Applicant expressed his understanding that the criminal charges would be 
expunged two years from the date he was charged. He denied any contact with his co-
perpetrator since the crime or with anyone else involved in any illegal activity. (GE 3.) 
 
                                                 
1 Applicant came to learn that the victim, who had come from a good family and was an excellent student in 
high school, was a drug dealer. (Tr. 68, 70-72.) 
 
 
 4 
Applicant “got caught up with work” and forgot to complete the rest of his community 
service. In January 2015, the court issued an order for him to be arrested for violating the 
terms of his probation.2 According to Applicant, he learned about the order after he had 
purchased a used car so that he could drive to work. He tried to return the car because he 
was paying too much for the vehicle and became angry when the dealer refused to take it 
back. The dealer called the police, who informed him there was an order for his re-arrest. 
Applicant assumed it was the situation with his community service. Approximately two days 
after he explained the situation to the police chief, he made a payment of $400 in lieu of 
completing his community service because he was working full time for the defense 
contractor and part time for a landscaping company, and he did not have the time to 
complete his community service hours.3 (Tr. 45-47, 50-51.) Applicant provided no proof 
that he paid the $400, completed his community service hours, or fulfilled some other 
condition to satisfy his probation. 
 
In December 2015, the DOD CAF issued an SOR to Applicant alleging the order for 
his arrest in January 2015 for violating the terms of his probation. Applicant explained that 
he had assumed that his probation was satisfied because he had paid his court fees and 
completed his community service. He denied any intention to avoid the conditions of his 
probation and indicated that he never received notice from his lawyer or the court of any 
additional requirements that he failed to fulfill. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant started his employment at entry level, and he progressed through five 
steps to his current step-six position. (Tr. 34-35.) In July 2016, he received a pay increase 
to his current wage of almost $18 an hour. (Tr. 66.) He has been reprimanded twice at 
work: for violating the smoking policy and for lost time when he had a car accident during 
his initial six-month probationary period and missed a day of work. (Tr. 34-35.) Applicant is 
grateful for his job. He credits his employment with the defense contractor as the primary 
reason for avoiding further trouble and being “a changed person.” He feels “part of 
something.” The job has given him the income to pay his bills and some extras, like taking 
his girlfriend out to eat or going downtown and having a few beers while watching a football 
game. (Tr. 64-66, 75-76.) 
 
Applicant does not knowingly associate with anyone involved in criminal activity. (Tr. 
81.) Applicant had been involved in a cohabitant relationship with his girlfriend for about a 
year as of July 2016. They dated for a little over a year before they moved in together. (Tr. 
36-37, 77-78.) She works as a cook at a local hotel. (Tr. 37.) When Applicant goes out, it is 
usually with his girlfriend. (Tr. 81.) They also socialize as a couple with one of Applicant’s 
co-workers and this co-worker’s girlfriend. (Tr. 81.) Applicant helps out informally at a local 
community center by refereeing youth basketball games for an hour twice a month. (Tr. 
55.) 
                                                 
2 The Government had some information that the re-arrest order had been issued in January 2015 (Tr. 47), 
although no documentation was presented of the order or of the probation violation. 
 
3 Applicant testified that he had to obtain the receipt showing his payment, which could shed light on the date 
about when he learned of the order for his arrest. (Tr. 50.) His post-hearing submissions did not include the 
receipt or court records showing that the charge had been expunged.  
 
 5 
Character references 
 
 Applicant’s social worker in the foster-care system watched Applicant grow into a 
very resilient young adult. The social worker expressed pride at the person Applicant has 
become. He believes Applicant will continue to build on the successful career that he has 
started with the defense contractor. (AE F.) A foster brother attested that he has seen 
Applicant mature in his work ethic and in his decision-making process. (AE C.) Applicant’s 
cohabitant girlfriend described Applicant as “passionate” about his career. She believes 
Applicant has changed to the point where he will not allow himself to fail again. (AE E.) 
Applicant expressed his pride in his job to his biological half-sister. (AE B.) An operations 
supervisor, who has had an opportunity to observe Applicant’s work performance 
throughout Applicant’s tenure with the defense contractor, has found Applicant to be 
conscientious, punctual, dependable, and willing to accept any task given him. Applicant 
has proven himself to be an “excellent employee.” (AEs A, D.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
 
 6 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is articulated in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The criminal conduct concerns are established by Applicant’s August 2012 felony 
burglary and misdemeanor criminal mischief charges and his violation of probation by 
failing to fully complete his community service hours within two years of him being given 
accelerated rehabilitation. There is no evidence of a criminal conviction on his record. Even 
so, disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted,” 
and AG ¶ 31(e), “violation of parole or probation, of failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program,” apply. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal 
behavior happened; or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” applies in part in that the burglary and criminal mischief occurred approximately 
four years ago when he was 22 years old, lacked purpose in life, and did not consider the 
possible consequences to his behavior. His candor about the incident on his SF 86, during 
his OPM interview, and at his hearing, lend credence to his testimony that he did not 
knowingly set out to violate his probation by failing to complete all of his community service. 
Nonetheless, his criminal conduct was serious and his violation of probation was too recent 
to fully mitigate the negative implications for his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment under AG ¶ 32(a). 
 
 As of his hearing in July 2016, Applicant had been with his defense contractor 
employer for approximately 20 months. Applicant’s supervisor attested to Applicant being a 
reliable, excellent employee. The fact that Applicant has progressed, apparently rather 
quickly, from step one to step six at work, is another indicator of his commitment to his job. 
More generally, it reflects his growing maturity and desire to become a responsible, 
productive adult; as he stated, to be the good person that his foster family raised him to 
 
 7 
be.4 His good work record with his employer is evidence of successful rehabilitation that is 
considering mitigating under AG ¶ 32(d), which provides: 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant also exhibited some reform by admitting his participation in the crime in August 
2012. 
 
 However, Applicant also cast some doubt about whether he can be relied on to 
exercise the sound judgment that must be demanded of persons granted security 
clearance eligibility by not completing the terms of his accelerated rehabilitation within the 
time allotted by the court. Applicant provided conflicting accounts of the status of his 
probation. On his October 2014 SF 86, Applicant stated, “I received probation for 2 years 
and also did 40 hours of community service, charges were expunged.” (GE 1.) However, 
when he was interviewed by the OPM investigator on February 18, 2015, Applicant 
discrepantly advised that he would finish his remaining eight hours of community service in 
the spring of 2015. (GE 3.) He did not mention the order for his re-arrest for violation of 
probation. It is unclear whether he knew as of his interview about the January 2015 order 
for his re-arrest. However, he knew when he completed his SF 86 that he had not yet fully 
satisfied his community service hours. At his hearing, Applicant testified that he was 
allowed to pay $400 in lieu of completing the rest of his community service. Under ¶ 
E.3.1.15 of the Directive, the burden is on Applicant to produce evidence to mitigate 
established security concerns related to his failure to complete the conditions of his 
accelerated rehabilitation for a criminal felony. Documentation showing that the charges 
had been expunged, that he had completed his accelerated rehabilitation, or to corroborate 
his claim of paying $400 would have gone a long way toward addressing the security 
concerns. Without some evidence showing that all criminal charges have been completely 
resolved, I cannot give dispositive weight to AG ¶ 32(d). As the record stands, I cannot find 
that the criminal conduct security concerns are fully mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).5 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have 
                                                 
4When asked whether there was anything he could point to beside his stable employment to show that he is a 
changed person from 2012, Applicant responded, “I go to work and I come home. I spend a lot of time with my 
girlfriend. I know—I just want to grow and be the man that I know my foster family knows I can be. They raised 
me to be a good person.” (Tr. 62.) 
 
5The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
 
 8 
to consider Applicant’s very poor judgment in becoming involved in the criminal burglary 
and theft in August 2012. His youth at the time is a mitigating factor, but he also had every 
incentive to comply with the terms of his accelerated rehabilitation and failed to do so. The 
conditions of his two-year probation term were not particularly onerous. He had only to 
fulfill 40 hours of community service for the charges to be expunged from his record. The 
Government must be assured that individuals who are granted security clearance eligibility 
can be counted on to fulfill security requirements irrespective of work and time demands or 
personal convenience. Even assuming that Applicant forgot about his remaining 
community service hours because of work, he was on notice as of the SOR of the 
importance of showing that he had resolved the issue. He failed to take advantage of the 
opportunity to provide the evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised by the court 
order for his re-arrest for violating his probation. 
 
It is well settled that once a security concern arises, there is a strong presumption 
against the grant or continuation of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 
1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). At some future date, 
Applicant may well be able to demonstrate the judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
necessary for security clearance eligibility. For the reasons already discussed, I am not yet 
able to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility. 
  
Formal Finding 
 
Formal finding for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, is: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                             
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
