 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 Redacted )  ISCR Case No. 15-06026 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has used marijuana since December 2013, and she intends to continue to 
use marijuana as medically prescribed because alternative treatments for her condition 
have not been as effective. Marijuana use is illegal under federal law and prohibited by 
Department of Defense (DOD) policy. Clearance is denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On May 5, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and explaining why it was unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her security clearance 
eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6 (Directive), Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on May 27, 2016. She requested a 
decision on the written record without a hearing. On June 20, 2016, the Government 
requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
administrative judge under ¶ E3.1.7 of the Directive. On July 20, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. On July 22, 2016, I 
scheduled a hearing for August 9, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) and three 
Applicant exhibits (AEs A-C) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on August 18, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that, as of May 5, 2016, Applicant has used marijuana from 
approximately December 2013 to present (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that she intends to continue to 
use marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.b). She admitted the allegations but explained that she uses 
marijuana under a medical prescription and does not abuse her prescription. After 
considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old welder with an associate’s degree awarded in July 2011. 
She began working for her employer, a defense contractor, in December 2014. She worked 
part time in retail from October 2014 to December 2014, after being unemployed for about 
2.5 years. She had previously worked in the restaurant industry. She has never held a 
DOD security clearance. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant has been married since September 2012. (GE 1.) She has two children: a 
son now age 23 who is serving in the U.S. military, and a daughter now age 14 who lives 
with her. (GE 2; Tr. 27-28.) 
 
Applicant was required to submit to a pre-employment drug screen for her employer. 
On September 13, 2014, she submitted a hair sample, and she informed the collector that 
she has a medical marijuana card. The drug screen was negative for all substances tested, 
including marijuana. (AE A.) According to Applicant, she used small amounts of marijuana 
every day for a couple of months before submitting the hair sample. (Tr. 32.) 
 
On December 5, 2014, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). Applicant responded affirmatively to 
an inquiry into whether she had illegally used any drugs or controlled substances in the last 
seven years. She disclosed that she had used marijuana from December 2013 to 
November 2014 “DAILY 0-3 TIMES PER DAY.” Applicant also answered “Yes” to whether 
she intends to use the drug in the future and stated, “MEDICAL MARIJUANA IN CBD NOT 
THC.”1 (GE 1.) 
                                                 
1 According to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH), CBD or cannabidiol is 
an active cannabinoid which may relieve pain, lower inflammation, and decrease anxiety without causing the 
“high” of delta-9-THC. See https://nccih.nih.gov. 
 
 3 
On April 29, 2015, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in part about her drug use. Applicant admitted that 
she uses marijuana daily in quantity totaling a gram every four days. She resides in a state 
that allows for the use of marijuana when prescribed for medical reasons, and she has a 
medical marijuana card valid from June 3, 2014, to June 3, 2016. Applicant indicated that 
she obtains her marijuana legally. She denied ever testing positive for marijuana, including 
for her current employer, or ever using marijuana at work. She expressed an intention to 
continue to use marijuana as prescribed for pain. Applicant denied any susceptibility to 
blackmail or coercion because of her medical marijuana use, which she indicated is known 
to her spouse, other family members, and her employer. (GE 2.) 
 
Applicant went to see her gastroenterologist in February 2016, who noted that she 
takes medical marijuana for a chronic medical condition. He advised her to avoid 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory ibuprofen medications. (AE C.) In response to DOHA 
interrogatories, Applicant admitted that she was still using marijuana as of April 6, 2016. 
Applicant indicated that the marijuana contains minimal amounts of THC. (GE 2.) A 
physician at the medical marijuana center confirmed by letter dated May 26, 2016, that 
Applicant was currently a qualified medical marijuana patient who has been advised by her 
physician to avoid nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories. (AE B.) 
 
At her hearing in August 2016, Applicant admitted that she had tried marijuana and 
found that it helped, so she obtained a valid prescription for medical marijuana. She does 
not now recall the specific circumstances of her first use. (Tr. 34.) She has been using 
marijuana with some consistency under a valid prescription for medical marijuana. (Tr. 23.) 
Depending on how she feels, she uses small amounts of marijuana daily to every few days, 
usually in late afternoon or at night. Marijuana helps alleviate fatigue and other issues 
related to her medical condition, and she had experienced unpleasant affects from drugs 
like Naproxen. She expressed a willingness to submit to random drug screens to show that 
she is not using marijuana to excess. (Tr. 18-20.) Applicant obtains her marijuana, which 
has a pretty low THC level but a higher “CBD” level, from an authorized provider. (Tr. 25.) 
She does not intend to cease her use of medical marijuana, even though she understands 
that it conflicts with federal law. (Tr. 26.) 
 
Applicant has never had any adverse involvement with law enforcement because of 
her use of marijuana. (Tr. 28.) Her use of marijuana has not negatively impacted her job 
performance. (Tr. 28-29.) She has never smoked marijuana before reporting for work. (Tr. 
29.) Applicant finds that the more physically active she is, the better she feels. Her work as 
a welder helps, as does jogging, which she significantly increased in 2016. (Tr. 31.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
 4 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
 5 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),2 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Applicant began 
using marijuana in approximately December 2013. After she tried marijuana illegally with 
good effect in alleviating symptoms of her chronic medical condition, she obtained a 
prescription for medical marijuana and used the drug with some consistency to at least 
August 2016.3 There is no evidence that she has abused her prescription or violated state 
law by sharing or selling some of the marijuana that she obtained from an authorized 
provider. However, federal law does not recognize marijuana as having any legitimate 
medical use. See 21 U.S.C. § 812(B) (defining Schedule I drugs as having a high potential 
for abuse, no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the United States, and lack 
accepted safety for use under medical supervision). State laws pertaining to marijuana use 
do not alter existing national security adjudicative guidelines, and marijuana use remains 
against DOD policy. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies. Her 
possession and purchase of marijuana implicates AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, 
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia.” Moreover, because she intends to continue to use 
marijuana to alleviate her medical symptoms, AG ¶ 25(h), “expressed intent to continue 
illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use,” is 
established. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 apply. Applicant’s decision to 
continue to use marijuana, despite knowing that it is against federal law and DOD policy, 
raises serious doubt about her judgment and willingness to comply with DOD requirements 
and regulations. AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” cannot reasonably 
apply. She has not demonstrated an intention to abstain from marijuana, so AG ¶ 26(b) is 
not established. The drug involvement security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of her conduct and 
                                                 
2Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I drug. 
 
3 Applicant’s medical marijuana card, which was issued on June 3, 2014, was valid for two years. She 
presented no evidence that she had a valid marijuana card when she first used marijuana in December 2013. 
Nor did she submit a copy of her current medical marijuana card, which she presumably renewed in June 
2016. 
 
 6 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).4 
 
Applicant has been advised by a physician to avoid nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
medications, which have exacerbated rather than alleviated her medical problems. Even 
though acceptable alternatives to medical marijuana like jogging have provided some relief, 
she remains committed to medical marijuana. It is well settled that once a security concern 
arises, there is a strong presumption against the grant or continuation of a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 
U.S. 905 (1991). For the reasons discussed, I am not able to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                 
4The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
