 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04266 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 21, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on 
March 30, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence identified as Items 2 through 7, 
and they were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant submitted documents 
that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, and they were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on December 27, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He married in 1995 and has four children, ages 22, 21, 
18, and 16. He began employment with a federal contractor in June 2014. Before then 
he was self-employed.1 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in November 2011, and his debts were 
discharged in April 2012. On his security clearance application (SCA), in response to 
the inquiry “provide the amount (in U.S. dollars) involved in the bankruptcy,” he 
disclosed $183,000.2  
 
 During his background interview in July 2014, Applicant explained that he did not 
recall the full details of all accounts included in his bankruptcy, but they included credit 
cards and mortgages. He refinanced his primary residence at the same time as the 
bankruptcy, and it was not included in the court action. He stated he was never 
delinquent on any debts or accounts included in the bankruptcy, but stopped making 
payments on three mortgages (his primary residence and two investment properties), in 
order to facilitate refinancing his primary residence and selling the investment properties 
through a short sale. He indicated he resolved the investment properties through short 
sales. He filed bankruptcy to clear all balances and debts left when the short sale did 
not yield as much as he owed on the properties. He stated that in accordance with his 
attorney’s advice he included all of his accounts in the bankruptcy. He did not reaffirm 
any accounts other than his primary residence.3  
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcy documents reflected that he had real estate assets of 
$472,051, and $271,408 of personal property. Bankruptcy Schedule D reflected 
$854,791 was owed to creditors holding a secured claim (unsecured portion was 
$185,250) and $666,402 for creditors holding unsecured nonpriority claims. His total 
liabilities were listed as $1,521,194.4  
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Items 4, 5, 6, 7. 
 
4 Item 7. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant confirmed with the government investigator that in addition to his real 
estate mortgage debts that were discharged, he had other debts discharged. These 
debts included second mortgage loans, credit cards, cell phone bills, two timeshare 
debts, a boat loan, gas credit card, and a Jet Ski loan. He disagreed with some 
accounts presented to him by the investigators. He indicated that he continued to make 
payments on several accounts, including loans on four or five cars, cell phones, one 
boat, and one Jet Ski. He also stated that the only debt he reaffirmed in the bankruptcy 
was for his primary residence. Schedule F from the bankruptcy documents reflect 
accounts as noted above, and also debts for auto taxes, unemployment compensation, 
medical bills, an auto loan deficiency, a nonsufficient check, cable television, insurance, 
property taxes, and numerous accounts for various services and utilities.5 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the FORM, he stated: 
 
This bankruptcy was the result of investing in [state] real estate properties. 
After purchasing two homes the [state] real estate market declined. I was 
forced to short sale these homes resulting in losses to the bank. The bank 
issued me a 1099C Cancellation of Debt for $600,000 from the losses 
adding the $600,000 as income to my yearly income as well as trying to 
collect the amount short due from the mortgage.6 
 
 A federal tax lien was filed against Applicant in approximately June 2011 for 
$35,055. Applicant entered into an agreement with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
in August 2012, agreeing to make monthly payments of $370 toward the delinquent tax 
and applying any future tax refunds toward the debt. A September 2015 letter from the 
IRS confirms it applied Applicant’s 2014 tax refund to the 2009 balance owed, reflecting 
a balance of $6,415. Applicant’s response to the FORM indicated that his continued 
monthly payments in 2016, along with his 2015 tax refund satisfied the remaining 
balance owed on this tax lien. He provided a letter from his accountant reflecting the 
amount anticipated for his 2015 federal tax refund.7   
 
 A state tax lien was filed against Applicant in approximately August 2012. 
Applicant entered an installment agreement with the state agreeing to make monthly 
payments of $326. He provided documents to show he complied with the agreement 
and had one remaining payment in July 2015. A letter from his accountant shows he 
was entitled to a refund from his state for tax year 2015.8 
  
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated: 
 
                                                          
5 Items 3, 4, 7. 
 
6 Item 2.  
 
7 Answer to SOR with attachments; AE A, B. 
 
8 Answer to SOR with attachments; AE A, B  
 
4 
 
 
[I]t was required by law to disclose any and all outstanding debt, which 
would include but not limited to current loans/and or mortgages whether 
they were being paid current by myself or was part of our bankruptcy 
discharge. At the advice of our attorney [Mr. X, of city, state] ALL chapter 
7 bankruptcy laws were adhered to by our counsel.9 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information regarding his current finances or 
budget. Regarding his business debt, he stated that after the recession, his business 
declined with the cost of fuel, and he had to downsize and adjust his business. 
Applicant did not provide specific information regarding what if any debts from his 
business were included in his bankruptcy or any other specifics about his business or its 
financial state.10 Applicant stated that he was current on all of his accounts and his 
attorney advised him to include them in his bankruptcy. He did not provide any 
documents to support his statements. He stated that he has “no intention of taking on 
further risks that could jeopardize my credit as this bankruptcy still requires me to 
answer for how this happened.”11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
9 AE A. 
 
10 AE A. 
 
11 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.12 
 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant had a large amount of debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2012, which 
he was either unwilling or unable to pay. He had a federal and state tax lien entered in 
2011 and 2012, respectively. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant resolved the federal and state tax liens from 2011 and 2012, which 
were the result of mortgage debts that were canceled on two properties he purchased 
for investment. AG ¶ 20(c) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c because these debts are 
resolved.  
 
 Applicant attributed his Chapter 7 bankruptcy to these two real estate 
investments that he was unable to maintain due to the decline in the market. He 
indicated he stopped making payments on the mortgages so he could short sale the 
properties. The record does not contain specific information regarding the properties, 
such as when they were purchased, the purchase price, the amount of first and second 
mortgages, down payments, whether they were rented, for how long, and why Applicant 
could not pay the mortgages. Applicant alluded to a downturn in his business as a 
cause for his financial problems, but did not provide specific information as to his 
 
7 
 
 
finances at the time. Applicant stated that he was current on all of his accounts and was 
advised by his attorney to include them in his bankruptcy. He did not provide any 
documents to support his statements. When questioned by a government investigator, 
Applicant could not recall specific information about his debts, but indicated the 
accounts were included in his bankruptcy. The bankruptcy documents reflect that he 
had over $600,000 of unsecured nonpriority claims. The accounts included numerous 
credit cards, a gas credit card, auto taxes, a boat loan, two timeshares, property taxes, 
unemployment compensation, utilities, and many other debts. It appears that all of these 
accounts were discharged. There is insufficient evidence to determine the reason why 
these accounts were discharged if they were not delinquent or why he did not reaffirm 
them. It is unclear why Applicant noted on his SCA that his bankruptcy was for 
$183,000, when his documents indicate a much higher amount. He failed to provide 
sufficient information to explain that inconsistency.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a downturn in the real estate 
market. He also mentioned that his business suffered a downturn. These were 
conditions beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) he must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. I am unable to conclude that including debts that 
were not delinquent in one’s bankruptcy as a responsible method for managing debts. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient amplifying information about his business, income, 
finances, or the numerous accounts he included in his bankruptcy. Applicant failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to conclude he acted responsibly regarding his debts. AG ¶ 
20(b) has minimal applicability. 
 
There is no evidence Applicant participated in financial counseling, but likely did 
as part of his bankruptcy filing. No evidence was provided regarding Applicant’s current 
finances, income, expenses, and business. There is insufficient evidence to conclude 
his current finances are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) also partially applies regarding his 
financial counseling. Having one’s debts discharged in bankruptcy may be a legitimate 
and legal means to resolve debt, but after reviewing the evidence in this case I do not 
find it amounts to a good-faith effort to repay creditors. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He adhered to installment plans to pay his federal and 
state tax liens. It has been almost five years since his debts were discharged in Chapter 
7 bankruptcy. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence regarding his bankruptcy 
and the substantial debt that was discharged. He indicated that he included all of his 
debts in the bankruptcy because he was required per his attorney’s advice. Although 
that may be accurate, it does not negate the fact that his bankruptcy discharged a large 
number of consumer debts for timeshares, a boat, a jet ski, credit cards, along with 
mortgage loans, debts for services, utilities, medical, unemployment compensation, and 
auto and property taxes. By including them in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, he reaped the 
financial benefit of not having to pay debts he incurred, and avoided his responsibility to 
manage his finances. While bankruptcy is a legal means of resolving one’s debts, it 
does not necessarily demonstrate financial responsibility, reliability, or good judgement. 
At this time, he has not established a reliable financial track record. He failed to meet 
his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
