 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
      DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02801 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems resulted from a period of living beyond his financial 
means, a failed business, and not withholding sufficient income to pay taxes. He received 
a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy discharge in 2012. Since then, he has made lifestyle changes; 
paid, resolved, or established payment agreements for most of his delinquent debts, 
including his federal tax debt; and his credit report shows no new delinquent debt. He is 
in control of his financial situation and no longer lives beyond his financial means. 
Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information 
is granted.   
 
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 24, 2013. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on October 26, 2015, issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 5, 2015 (Answer), and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
 
The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on May 4, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 13, 2016. Applicant requested a 
postponement, and the second notice of hearing was issued on May 18, 2016, scheduling 
a hearing for June 21, 2016. The hearing was held as rescheduled. Government exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5, and Applicant’s exhibits (AE) 1 through 14, were admitted into evidence 
without objection. On June 28, 2016, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s response, he denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and submitted 
documentary evidence showing that he paid the state tax lien in June 2014. He generally 
admitted the remaining SOR allegations and provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are 
incorporated into my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He completed a bachelor’s degree in management 
information systems in 2002, and has worked in the information technology (IT) field for 
the last 26 years. Applicant married his wife in 1991 and they have three children, ages 
19, 16, and 11.  
 
Applicant worked for another federal agency between 1991 and 1993, and was 
granted the equivalent of a secret clearance. Between 2002 and 2010, he worked for two 
federal contractors and was granted a clearance in 2003, which has been continued to 
present, sometimes at the top-secret level. His current employer, a federal contractor, 
hired applicant in 2011.  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2013. In response to Section 26 
(Financial Record) of the SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had financial problems, which 
included a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2012, and owing federal and state taxes. 
Applicant did not withhold sufficient money from his income to pay taxes, and he took 
early withdrawals from his retirement and children’s education accounts for which he 
incurred taxes and penalties.   
 
Applicant’s wife is a schoolteacher. Between 2000 and 2008, she stopped working 
and stayed home to take care of their children. In 2008, she returned to work because of 
Applicant’s financial problems. Applicant candidly testified that between 2000 and 2010, 
he did not manage his budget well and lived beyond his financial means. He had 
insufficient withholdings from his salary to pay his taxes because he needed the money 
to pay his bills and living expenses.  
 
In 2008, Applicant withdrew money from his savings, retirement accounts, and 
children’s education plans to stand up his own business. In 2010, he quit his job to 
dedicate himself to his business. Within six months of starting his business, Applicant 
realized his business was not making sufficient income to be successful. Because of his 
 
3 
                                         
 
accumulated debts, his attorney advised him to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection 
in 2011.  
 
Applicant’s security investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed 
the federal and state tax liens and the bankruptcy filing. Applicant’s history of financial 
problems is documented in his credit reports, his SOR response, and his testimony.  
 
Concerning his 2012 bankruptcy, Applicant testified that he reaffirmed some of the 
bankruptcy debts, including a car loan and his two mortgage loans. He noted that he paid 
off the car loan and later sold it. The bank modified the first and second mortgage loans 
because of his past good payment history. He is current on his mortgage payments and 
continues to live in the same house to present. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his tax problems were due to his negligence. He failed to 
withhold sufficient money from his income to pay his taxes, and he failed to calculate the 
taxes and penalties he would have to pay for the early withdrawal of retirement and his 
children’s education plans funds. Applicant withdrew the funds in 2008, and that same 
year he immediately started a payment arrangement with the IRS, which continues to 
present. Since 2008, Applicant has paid $14,700 to the IRS. As of May 2016, Applicant 
owes $9,835 for tax year 2008; $14,648 for tax year 2009; and $6,447 for tax year 2011. 
(AE A, TAB 8) 
 
Applicant’s documentary evidence shows he currently has a good credit rating and 
no delinquencies. His budget, financial information, and credit reports show that he is not 
living beyond his financial means. He has a strong financial footing with only one student 
loan for his daughter. His financial history indicates that over the last 20 years Applicant 
paid 25 accounts (never late on this payments), and he had seven accounts discharged 
via the 2012 bankruptcy. He needs his clearance and current job to continue paying his 
debts and supporting his family. Taking care of his family is his priority. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his financial problems. He 
acknowledged his bad financial decisions. He believes that his failed business was a 
circumstance beyond his control that heavily contributed or exacerbated his financial 
problems. He testified that his financial situation is now stable and that he is motivated to 
resolve his financial problems. He is keeping his own budget and managing his expenses. 
He disclosed to his employer his financial problems and the SOR. Applicant believes he 
has learned his lesson and promised to maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
Applicant is considered to be a highly professional, ethical, trustworthy, and 
responsible employee. He is judicious and careful handling and protecting sensitive 
information and following security rules and regulations. Applicant understands that he is 
required to maintain his financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
 
4 
                                         
 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in his credit reports, his 
SOR response, his testimony, and the record evidence. Applicant acknowledged he was 
 
5 
                                         
 
living beyond his financial means between 2000 and 2010. Applicant used his credit cards 
to pay for his extravagant lifestyle. Additionally, he failed to withhold income to pay for his 
taxes and compounded his financial problems by withdrawing money from his retirement 
and children school accounts to stand up his business. His business failed within a year.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” “(c) 
a history of not meeting financial obligations” and “(e) consistent spending beyond one’s 
means.” The record established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 
19(e), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
                                            
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
6 
                                         
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
There is no evidence to show Applicant had financial problems before 2000. His 
wife stopped working as a schoolteacher to take care of the children between 2000 and 
2008. She resumed working as a school teacher in 2008 to help Applicant pay the debts. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his financial problems resulted from his negligence. 
Although he filed for bankruptcy protection, he reaffirmed some of his debts and 
successfully paid some of them off, including a car note. He also modified his home 
mortgages and is current on his payments. Applicant paid the state tax lien alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a in 2014. 
 
Concerning the IRS tax debts and liens, Applicant’s documentary evidence show 
he timely filed his income tax returns. He failed to pay his taxes in full in 2008 (and other 
following years), because he did not have the money. Notwithstanding, Applicant 
immediately established payment arrangements with the IRS (the same year the debt 
was accrued) and has been consistently repaying his back taxes. Since 2008, he has 
paid $14,648 in back taxes.  
 
Applicant is currently in control of his own finances. The credit reports show that 
he has a good credit rating and has not acquired any new delinquent debt. His budget, 
financial information, and credit reports show that he is not living beyond his financial 
means. He has a strong financial footing with only one student loan for his daughter.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his financial problems. He 
acknowledged his bad financial decisions. He believes that his failed business was a 
circumstance beyond his control that heavily contributed or exacerbated his financial 
problems. His financial situation is now stable and he is motivated to continue resolving 
his financial problems. He is keeping his own budget and managing his expenses. He 
disclosed to his employer his financial problems and the SOR. Applicant believes he has 
learned his lesson and promised to maintain his financial responsibility. 
 
 
7 
                                         
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s past financial problems do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant’s efforts 
are sufficient to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. I find there are 
clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved and is under control.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 48 years old. He has worked for a federal agency and federal 
contractors (on-and-off) since 1991, sometimes holding access to classified information. 
He should have been more diligent managing his finances and withholding income to pay 
his taxes. Notwithstanding, under the totality of the circumstance of this case, Applicant’s 
evidence is sufficient to establish his current financial responsibility. He showed good-
faith efforts to resolve his tax debt. He is in control of his financial situation. Applicant 
understands that he has to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance 
and retain his job. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
