                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
      )
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX )      ISCR Case No. 15-03688
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison Patricia O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 9 November 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued an SOR to
Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations.2
Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 7 July 2016, and I
convened a hearing 25 August 2016. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 2 August 2016.
The record  consists of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-6, hearing exhibit (HE) I, and1
Applicant exhibit  (AE) A-C. AE CA was timely received post-hearing. The record closed 7 September 2016,
when Department Counsel stated no objection to AE C.
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, except for 1.c.  He is a 32-year-old
associate analyst employed by a defense contractor since May 2010. He has not
previously held a clearance, but had a favorable public trust determination in May 2010.
He married in June 2016 (Tr. 29), and has two stepchildren and a four-year-old
daughter with his wife.
The SOR alleges, and GE 2-4 establish, two delinquent debts totaling nearly
$15,000. Applicant admits two debts totaling over $13,000. He also admits failing to file
his 2006 Federal income tax return (SOR 1.a). He claimed to have been unaware of
that fact until he had some problems with his 2011 returns, yet he did not file his 2006
return until 2013 (Tr. 34). Applicant provided no proof of that claim. His documentation
that a June 2012 state tax lien was satisfied in March 2014 (AE B, C) does not
corroborate his claim that the tax lien was somehow related to his 2006 Federal income
tax return.
SOR debt 1.b is the deficiency amount remaining on a vehicle owned by
Applicant that was repossessed and sold in May 2010 (GE 6).  Applicant’s May 20103
credit report (GE 4) reflects the full charged-off amount before the sale. Applicants
August 2013 (GE 3) and March 2015 (GE 2) credit reports reflect that the credit bureaus
investigated Applicant’s dispute and resolved it in favor of the creditor—a conclusion
Applicant disputed. Applicant provided no corroboration of his claimed disputes (Tr. 38-
39).
 SOR debt 1.c is a delinquent education loan that was inadvertently omitted from
Applicant’s consolidation of his education loans, which are otherwise current (AE A). In
March 2014, Applicant entered a rehabilitation agreement with the lender, and made the
required monthly payments between March and November 2014 (AE C). He did not
document whether he is now current.
SOR debt 1.d was a final utility bill that became delinquent when it was not
forwarded to Applicant’s new address. Applicant paid the bill in January 2016, after he
Applicant has given conflicting explanations about his level of understanding concerning the consequences3
of having his vehicle repossessed. In his June 2010 interview with a Government investigator (GE 6), he
stated that after his vehicle was repossessed, he contacted the dealer about payment arrangements, but was
told that the vehicle was about to be sold and that he would be responsible for the balance owed after the sale.
In November 2010, Applicant told the investigator that when he called the dealer, the dealer wanted all the
remaining balance for Applicant to redeem the vehicle. He also stated that he no longer owed the dealer any
money because it was settled once his vehicle was taken and sold. In August 2013, Applicant told the
investigator that the dealer wanted $13,000 to redeem the vehicle, but Applicant could not afford that amount.
He claimed that he was unable to locate the current holder of the debt. However, in his January 2016 Answer,
Applicant reiterated his questionable claim that he was no longer responsible for the vehicle debt because the
dealer had repossessed and resold it. He repeated the claim at hearing (Tr. 27, 35-39, 44-48). He provided
no documentation that would justify the claim.
2
 
became aware of it (AE C). Applicant reported his failure to file his Federal income tax
return and his vehicle deficiency balance on his July 2013 clearance application (GE 1).
 
Applicant traces his financial problems to not making enough money in his job
and falling behind on his bills (GE 6). Except as noted in the SOR, Applicant brought all
these delinquent debts current. 
Applicant has not had any credit or financial counseling. He provided no current
budget. Applicant has not been in contact with any of his creditors recently. He provided
no work or character references, and provided no evidence of community involvement.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or 
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, disputed facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the
burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant failed to document that he
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
3
 
filed his 2006 Federal income tax returns, and has deliberately failed to address the
deficiency amount on an automobile repossessed in May 2010.5
The mitigating factors for financial considerations provide little help to Applicant.
His financial difficulties are recent and not infrequent, and the stated cause cannot be
considered unlikely to recur because the automobile deficiency remains unresolved due
to Applicant’s intransigence.  Applicant’s previous low income may be considered a6
circumstance beyond his control, but even if it could be so considered, Applicant has
not been responsible in dealing with his debts. He has simply ignored the automobile
deficiency.  His stated reason for failing to pay the deficiency is incorrect. He has taken7
no action to address this debt.8
In addition, Applicant has received no credit or financial counseling. He has no
budget. Consequently, it is clear that the automobile debt is not being resolved.  9
Further, Applicant provided no character or employment evidence to reasonably support
a “whole person” analysis in favor of granting his clearance. I conclude Guideline F
against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a, b: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs c, d: For Applicant
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; (g) failure5
to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is  unlikely to recur . . . ;
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;8
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications9
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
4
 
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
5
 
