 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01153 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, but he refuted the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 21, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On May 12, 2016, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received the Form on May 
 
2 
 
 
13, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s 
evidence. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 8 are admitted 
into evidence. Applicant provided documents that are marked as Items A and B, which 
are admitted into evidence without objection.1 The case was assigned to me on March 
20, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and denied the allegation 
in SOR ¶ 2.a. He also provided amplifying comments in an attached statement to his 
Answer. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He graduated from high school in 1976 and obtained a 
certificate in 2002 from a technical school. He is married and has two grown sons, and 
one grown stepson. He has been employed by a federal contractor since May 2006. He 
reports a previous top secret clearance granted in 2009.   
 
 The SOR alleges two charged-off student loan debts totaling about $74,485; and 
one allegation that Applicant falsified section 26 of the Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions/SF-86 or Security Clearance Application (SCA) that he submitted by 
failing to disclose both delinquent student loans, which he had co-signed with his son. 
His son obtained these two student loans in May of 2005 to attend college. Credit 
reports from June 2014, November 2015, and May 2016 verify both debts.2 The student 
loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($61,819) and 1.b ($12,666) were opened in 2005. The 
credit bureau reports reflect that the last payments made on both loans were in 
September 2010 and they were charged off in January 2011.  
 
 Applicant stated in his Response to the FORM he believed the student loans 
were the responsibility of his son. Applicant’s son did not alert Applicant when the son 
fell behind on payments.3 Applicant contends in his Response to the FORM that he only 
became aware of the delinquent loans when he was “confronted by the auditor in 
August 2014”.4 Yet, in his letter attached to his Answer to the SOR, he states that he 
found out that these accounts were more than 120 days past due while he was looking 
to buy a house. There is no indication when this occurred, but the last payments on the 
student loans were made in September 2010. “I then in turn made some payments to 
help my son catch up.”5  Thus, it appears that Applicant was aware of these 
                                                          
1 Comprised of a one-page letter from his son and another one page letter from Applicant himself. 
 
2 Items 5, 6 and 7.  
 
3 One-page letter dated May 30, 2016, signed by son and attached to Response to Form. 
 
4 One-page letter dated June 6, 2016, signed by Applicant and attached to his Response to Form.  
 
5 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
 
problematical loans before he completed his SCA in May 2014. Applicant also stated “I 
have more than $125,000.00 combined in my savings and 401k accounts” and “not 
listing and not fully knowing what ‘charged off’ account meant, was my fault. I will begin 
the process to do what I can about this debt.”6 No additional evidence was offered to 
corroborate Applicant’s claim that he made six or seven catch-up payments on behalf of 
his son, or more recent efforts to resolve these debts.   
 
                                             Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
6 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.11 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant is responsible for student loan debts for which he co-signed in 2005. 
The delinquencies began accumulating in 2010 and remain unresolved. Applicant 
claims that he actually made six or seven payments to get these loans back on track 
when his son fell behind. No corroboration has been offered for these supposed 
payments. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and, 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
  Applicant repeatedly stated he thought the student loans were his son’s 
responsibility, despite the fact that Applicant co-signed for the student loans and agreed 
to be responsible for these debts if necessary. His son’s financial problems were 
conditions beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must 
provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There have been no recent payments on these student 
loans according to the credit bureau reports. Without additional evidence, there are no 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply.   
 
  Applicant has provided no evidence of his current financial situation except to say 
that he has $125,000 in his savings/401k account. Thus, he appears to have adequate 
financial means to pay down these delinquent student loans. Yet, he has provided no 
evidence of following through on his stated commitment to resolve the issues with these 
delinquencies. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. His failure to address his delinquent debts casts doubt upon his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
6 
 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Since Applicant denied any intent to provide false information on his SCA, his 
intent is an issue. Pursuant to ¶ E3.1.14 of DOD Directive 5220.6, the Government is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and evidence on facts alleged in the SOR that 
have been controverted. Intent can be inferred or determined from the circumstances. 
Applicant knowingly co-signed for his son’s student loans. Applicant noted in his Answer 
to the SOR that he found out about these delinquent student loans when he was looking 
to buy a house. He does not state when that occurred. He claims he took measures to 
bring the loans current, albeit temporarily, by making six or seven payments. It is not 
clear when. Yet, he did not later verify the status of these loans, while completing his 
SCA some four years later.  While this lack of due diligence may have been negligent, it 
does not show the specific intent necessary to find deliberate falsification of the SCA.   
Based on the present record, there is insufficient evidence to find that he knew 
he had debts that were more than 120 days delinquent at the time when he completed 
his SCA. It is reasonable that Applicant may have believed that because he made some 
payments on the student loans to bring them current at one point, that they no longer 
were in a delinquent status. There is insufficient evidence to conclude he deliberately 
failed to disclose his financial delinquencies. Therefore, the above disqualifying 
condition is not established 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. He has failed to meet his burden 
of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, but he did refute the security concerns arising under Guideline E.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:            Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2 Guideline E                         FOR APPLICANT 
 
         Subparagraph   2.a:             For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
_____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
Administrative Judge 
