 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05221 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 30, 2016, and requested a hearing. I was 
assigned the case on July 15, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
2 
 
 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 20, 2016, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on October 25, 2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, 
which I admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s discovery letter and 
exhibit list were marked as hearing exhibits (HE) I and II. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through E, which I admitted into evidence without objection. I held the 
record open for Applicant to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AE F and 
G, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
November 1, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all allegations in the SOR (with some 
explanations). I adopt those admissions as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. He is single, never married, and has no children. He 
has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since January 2015. He has 
a bachelor’s degree.1   
 
 The SOR alleged: (1) Applicant used marijuana from approximately July 2009 to 
at least March 2015; (2) He purchased marijuana from about July 2009 to at least July 
2014; (3) He intended to continue using marijuana, despite applying for a DOD security 
clearance in December 2014; and (4) His roommate uses marijuana daily. These factual 
allegations form the basis of the concerns under both Guideline H and Guideline E. 
  
 Applicant suffers from a condition known as Osgood-Schlatter disease (OSD). 
This condition leaves the recipient with a painful lump below the kneecap. It seems to 
happen to children, who are involved in active sports, and young adults, who are going 
through puberty and having spurts of growth. With children as the main target, OSD has 
been nicknamed "knobby knee". OSD affects the bone, cartilage, and tendon near the 
top of the shinbone that encompasses the tendon located where the knee attaches. 
OSD in adults is not common, but if they have had this disease when they were young 
they may keep getting it as an adult. Adults can also contract this disease if they 
participate in repetitive activities or experience pain when extending their leg.2 
 
 Applicant testified that he has had OSD since he was 16 years old. He presented 
documentation showing he was last diagnosed with OSD in 2013 by a medical doctor 
(M.D.). He admitted buying, possessing, and using marijuana starting in 2009 when in 
college. He stated the sole purpose of using marijuana was for pain management of his 
OSD. He claims he never used marijuana recreationally. Beginning in 2011 until about 
July 2014, he purchased about seven grams of marijuana per week and used one gram 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6, 19, 34; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 20; AE F; See: http://www.newhealthadvisor.com/osgood-schlatter-in-adults.html 
 
 
3 
 
 
a day. During this time, he was living in states where marijuana was illegal. He knew his 
use and possession of marijuana was illegal. In July 2014, he moved to a state where 
medical marijuana was legal. He received a prescription and began using marijuana to 
relieve his OSD pain. He purchased his marijuana at several authorized medical 
dispensaries. He purchased marijuana mainly in topical-lotion-form that could be 
applied directly to his knees. He still smoked marijuana on weekends when the pain 
was more severe. Applicant testified that using marijuana was the only alternative he 
had for pain management. He was not a candidate for surgery because of his age, and 
he was unwilling to have opioid pain medicine prescribed to him. His marijuana 
prescription expired in November 2016 and he has not renewed it.3 
 
 In December 2014, Applicant filled out his security clearance application. In it, he 
disclosed his extensive use of marijuana. He also stated that he intended to continue to 
use marijuana to relieve his OSD pain because it was legal in his residing state and  
was effective. He was hired by his defense contractor-employer in January 2015. Upon 
employment, he was aware the employer had a drug-free policy. He was drug tested 
when he was hired. He knew marijuana use was contrary to federal law. He continued 
using marijuana after his employment until about March 2015 when he had a 
background interview. During this period of use, he knew the use was against company 
policy. He did not inform his employer of his use. He claims he has not used marijuana 
in any form since talking to the investigator in March 2015. He stopped using then 
because it became clear to him that if he continued using marijuana he would not 
receive a clearance. He admitted that he still possessed some amount of the prescribed 
marijuana topical lotion on the date of the hearing. He testified that he is willing to stop 
using marijuana. He provided a written statement of his intent not to use it in the future. 
When asked how he would cope with his OSD pain without marijuana, he stated he 
would use over-the-counter pain medicine (ibuprofen), go to work, come home, and go 
to sleep.4 
 
 Applicant no longer lives with the roommate referred to in the SOR. They went 
separate ways in July 2015. He does not associate with this roommate, nor has he had 
contact with him since July 2015.5 
 
 Applicant presented letters of support from friends and family. All indicate that 
Applicant is a good person and deserving of trust. A coworker recommended that he be 
granted a clearance.6 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. 20-21, 23-24, 29-31, 33; GE 2; AE F. 
 
4 Tr. 24, 26-27, 34-35, 41, 44, 47; GE 1; AE G. 
 
5 Tr. 37. 
 
6 AE A-E. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25, and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 Applicant purchased, possessed, and used marijuana at various times from 2009 
to March 2015. In his December 2014 security clearance application, he expressed his 
intent to continue using marijuana. I find that all of the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the drug involvement 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26, and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a regular basis between 2009 and March 2015. He 
continued to use marijuana after he was hired, knowing that his employer had a drug-
free policy and that use was illegal under federal law. Given Applicant’s stated pain from 
OSD and his previous reliance on marijuana to manage that pain, I cannot conclude 
that future use of marijuana will not recur. His failure to inform his employer about his 
 
6 
 
 
continued marijuana use after filling out his security application and after his hiring casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, as does his current 
possession of marijuana. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant prepared a statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. 
However, given his recent reliance on marijuana to deal with his OSD pain issues, and 
his continued possession of some amount of marijuana, his statement carries little 
weight. Applicant needs to establish a sustained period of abstinence in order for his 
stated intent to have validity. His dissociation from his marijuana roommate is sufficient 
to find in favor of Applicant regarding SOR ¶ 1.d. Otherwise, AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply 
to the remaining allegations.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 The same analysis that applied to the disqualifying conditions under Guideline H, 
also applies under AG ¶ 16(c). 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 Applicant’s extensive use of marijuana through the years was not minor. 
Although the reason Applicant uses marijuana is unique, the evidence does not support 
a conclusion that a future recurrence is unlikely. His failure to inform his employer about 
his continued marijuana use after filling out his security application and after his hiring 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, as does his 
current possession of marijuana. Applicant’s disassociation with his roommate makes 
AG ¶ 17(g) applicable, but AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all  
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s medical 
situation and letters of support from friends and family. However, I also considered that 
he continued to use marijuana after filling out his security clearance application, being 
hired by a company that has a drug-free policy, and knowing such use was violating 
federal law. Applicant provided insufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.d:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
