 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-03083 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R, Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
 This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Due to circumstances largely beyond his control, Applicant experienced 
tax-related issues and other financial difficulties, but mitigated the concern by acting 
responsibly under the circumstances. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on September 9, 
2014. On October 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on March 25, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 28, 2016, 
and the case was assigned to me on June 30, 2016. On that same day, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled 
for July 26, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were admitted without objection. I kept the 
record open until August 9, 2016, to enable him to submit additional documentary 
evidence. He timely submitted AX D and E, which I have admitted without objection.  
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 3, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file his 2009 through 2013 Federal tax 
returns as required, and that he owes two delinquent debts totaling $12,730. In his 
Answer, Applicant admits each of the allegations, and explains his taxes and the two 
debts. Applicant’s admissions in his Answer are incorporated in my findings of fact. The 
delinquent debts are corroborated by credit bureau reports from November 2015 and 
October 2014. (GX 2; GX 3.) 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old aircraft inspector working for his current defense-
contractor employer since 1999. He has worked on the same defense contract since 
1986. After graduating from high school, he served honorably on active duty in the U.S. 
Army from January 1979 until October 1985, and held a clearance during part of that time. 
He married in 1983, and separated in 2010. He has two adult children. (GX 1.) 
 
Applicant’s tax issues (SOR ¶ 1.a.) and other financial difficulties (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c) began in 2010 when his wife moved out of their marital home. Applicant had his 2009 
Federal tax return professionally prepared to file jointly with his wife as “married,” as he 
had done throughout his marriage. However, his wife had become uncommunicative and 
uncooperative, and she refused to sign the return. He was unable to ascertain if his wife 
was filing a return, and if so, under what marital status. He was also uncertain about how 
his wife’s failure to properly file a return could affect his tax liability, and did not want to 
be held personally responsible for his wife’s tax liabilities. He preferred not to file as 
“married filing separately” because it would increase his tax liability. As a result of these 
circumstances, Applicant did not timely file his 2009 Federal tax return. Applicant did not 
resolve his tax filing conundrum, and did not timely file his 2012 through 2013 Federal tax 
returns. (Tr. 65-68.) 
 
3 
 
 
In 2014, increasingly concerned about the potential ramifications of his unfiled 
returns, Applicant hired a tax attorney to resolve his tax issues. He was advised to 
promptly file all unfiled returns, and did so through the professional tax preparation 
company he always used. At that time, Applicant discovered he owed approximately 
$10,000 in delinquent taxes, fees, and penalties. (GX 4; Tr. 43.) Applicant’s tax debt is 
not alleged in the SOR.  
Upon becoming aware of the approximate amount of taxes he owed, Applicant 
opened a designated savings account in which he amassed $12,000 to pay the tax debt. 
(AX B; Tr. 22-25.) He continued to retain the tax attorney for a monthly fee of $350 to 
work with the IRS to resolve the tax debt, and to monitor Applicant’s credit to ensure that 
Applicant’s wife was not incurring any unauthorized joint debt with Applicant. (Tr. 20; 
Answer.) At the hearing, Applicant expressed his frustration with the tax attorney for not 
having reached a resolution with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and made several 
offers to give a $12,000 check to me, as an agent of the Federal government, to pay the 
tax debt. (Tr. 12-13; Tr. 22; Tr. 24-25; Tr. 72.) Ultimately, Applicant personally contacted 
the IRS and reached an offer in compromise for a total repayment of $10,000. He paid a 
$186 fee and made an initial 20% payment of $2,000 in August 2016. He will pay the 
balance of $8,000 in installments, however, he has the funds set aside to pay the balance 
in full and is willing to do so. (Answer; AX D; Tr. 20-25.) 
Applicant timely filed his 2014 and 2015 tax returns through the professional tax 
preparation company, and was entitled to a $1,234 refund in 2015. This refund was 
retained by the IRS and applied to Applicant’s tax debt. Applicant recognizes that he 
should have taken definitive action much earlier than he did and regrets his failure to do 
so. (Tr. 67-70.) SOR ¶ 1.a is being resolved. 
The $11,659 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is for a $10,000 personal loan taken by 
Applicant in 2007 to finance improvements on his marital home. After his wife left in 2010, 
Applicant became solely responsible for many household expenses that had previously 
been shared, including this debt. Ultimately, he was unable to make the monthly 
payments and the account became delinquent. At some point, the creditor stopped 
contacting Applicant. (Tr. 32-34.) 
In early 2014, Applicant hired a credit-consulting firm to assist him in resolving his 
delinquent accounts. However, in about September 2014, he personally contacted the 
creditor for the personal loan to determine the status of the debt and to try to resolve it. 
The creditor informed Applicant that the debt was “written off” and no further action was 
required by him. Applicant relayed this information to the credit-consulting firm, and it 
disputed the debt. (GX 4; Tr. 58-61; GX 3.) 
At some point in late 2014 or early 2015, Applicant terminated the monthly services 
of the credit-consulting firm. (Tr. 58.) In early 2015, Applicant again contacted the 
personal-loan creditor and was informed that the debt was considered a “recovery” 
 
4 
 
 
account and was eligible for repayment. He arranged for $300 monthly payments to be 
automatically withdrawn from his bank account beginning in March or April 2015. 
However, Applicant had inadvertently given incorrect banking information to the creditor 
and the payments were not withdrawn. Upon realizing this, Applicant contacted the 
creditor and his bank and rectified the error. During this process, Applicant also 
renegotiated his monthly payments to $200, as part of his ongoing efforts to live within 
his means. (Tr. 28-31.) SOR ¶ 1.b is being resolved. 
The $1,071 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is for cable equipment. When Applicant 
moved to his current residence in 2013, he returned his two cable boxes and closed his 
account. At an unspecified time, he became aware that his credit bureau report (CBR) 
showed this account as delinquent. He contacted the company to dispute the debt and 
was informed that his closed account listed a $0 balance. (Tr. 39-41; Answer.) The 
account does not appear on the October 2015 CBR. SOR ¶ 1.c is resolved. 
In 2013, Applicant moved to his current residence to decrease his monthly rent 
payments from $1,100 to $650. He does not have any current delinquent debt and lives 
within his means. (GX 2; Tr. 32-33.) He is considered to be “a conscientious and 
dependable employee.” (AX C.) 
  
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to  
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
6 
 
 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s testimony, corroborated by the record evidence, establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose from circumstances largely beyond his 
control. Specifically, when Applicant’s wife left him in 2010, he was unable to meet the 
household financial obligations on his income alone. Additionally, his wife refused to sign 
their 2009 joint tax return and would not give Applicant the necessary information to file 
on his own. Uncertain of how to resolve his tax-filing issues, he also failed to timely file 
his 2010 through 2013 tax returns. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant acted responsibly and in good faith to resolve his financial issues and 
ensure he was not incurring any joint delinquent debt with his estranged wife by retaining 
the professional services of a credit-consulting firm and a tax attorney in 2014, over a 
year before the SOR was issued. He proactively set aside $12,000 to pay off his tax debt. 
While Applicant arguably should have acted sooner to resolve his tax-filing issues, he 
relied on the tax attorney, to whom he paid $350 a month, to reach an agreement with 
the IRS. Ultimately, concerned and frustrated that his financial issues remained 
unresolved, he took action. He resolved his delinquent personal loan (SOR ¶ 1.b) by 
contacting the creditor himself and entering into a repayment plan. He entered an offer in 
compromise with the IRS and made a large initial payment. He contacted the creditor of 
SOR debt 1.c and successfully disputed it.   
 
 “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 
at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. 
ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that a person make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).    
 While Applicant’s finances are not perfect, he has taken significant actions to 
regain control of his finances and has established a sufficient track record of debt 
resolution. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e) apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
8 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the Army for six years, and held a clearance for part 
of that time. He has worked on the same defense contract for over 30 years, and has held 
a clearance the entire time. He took steps to resolve his financial issues, including the 
unalleged tax debt, over a year before the SOR was issued. He sincerely regretted not 
taking earlier action to resolve his tax-related issue. Applicant addressed the SOR debts 
in a responsible manner and has not incurred any recent delinquent debt. His conduct 
demonstrates that he has the good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness required of 
those granted access to classified information. I am confident that he will continue his 
good-faith efforts to maintain his financial stability. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
