 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05013 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Atoy H. Wilson, Esq. 
 
 
March 1, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 3, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On March 5, 2016, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 6, 2016 (Answer), and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 31, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 15, 
2016 scheduling the hearing for July 18, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 4, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AppXs) A through E, which were admitted 
 
2 
 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was closed on 
September 19, 2016, after the receipt of AppX E. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (TR) on July 26, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 33 years old. (TR at page 19 lines 19~24, and GX 1 at page 5.) He 
has been employed with a Government contractor since July of 2014 in “Security.”  (GX 
1 at page 10.)  He currently does not hold a security clearance. 
  
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 11 debts, all but one of them are student loans, totaling approximately 
$52,000. Applicant admits all but one of the allegations, 1.k., the non-student loan, 
explaining that he is unaware of this alleged past-due debt. (TR at page 65 line 24 to 
page 67 line 13.) The alleged debts were listed on credit reports dated December of 
2014, January of 2016, and May of 2016.  (GXs 2~4.) 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
 1.a.~1.j.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to three different creditors for past-
due student loans totaling about $52,000.  He attributes this past-due indebtedness to 
periods of unemployment from 2009~2014.  (TR at page 37 lines 1~14, and at page 44 
line 23 to page 48 line 9.)   Applicant mistakenly thought that he had begun to address 
his outstanding student loans through a debt consolidation program; but when 
interviewed regarding his application for a security clearance, he discovered that his 
consolidated payments only addressed the student loan alleged in subparagraph 1.j.  
(TR at page 32 line 19 to page 33 line 1, at page 65 lies 20~23, and AppX C.) 
 
 Prior to his hearing, Applicant initiated a debt consolidation program to address 
his remaining student loans.  (TR at page 63 line 13 to page 65 line 23, at page 67 line 
24 to page 69 line, at page 81 lines 3~18, and AppXs A and B.)  He has now submitted 
a post-hearing exhibit showing that his debt consolidation has been successful, and that 
he now owes $43,026.02 at an interest rate of 5.375%.  (AppX E at pages 4~6.)  I find 
that Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to address his outstanding student loans. 
 
 1k.  After his hearing, Applicant has determined that the alleged past-due debt to 
Creditor K, in the amount of about $365, is his debt.  (TR at page 65 line 24 to page 67 
line 13, and AppX E at page 3.)  This debt has been “Settled in Full,” as evidenced by 
correspondence from the successor creditor to Creditor K.  (AppX E at page 3.)   
 
  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent student loans. His 
actions demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Three Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment . . . ), and the 
individual acted reasonably under the circumstances; and 
 
d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant thought he was addressing his admitted 
student loans, but was mistaken.  He has now established a consolidated loan payment 
plan for his student loans, and has settled the remaining small debt of allegation 1.k.  
His behavior happened so long ago, and occurred under such circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) provide mitigation. 
 
 
5 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has the support of 
those who know him in the work place.  (AppX E at pages 1and 2.)  Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.k.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
