KEYWORD:  Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST:  To the extent that Applicant is arguing that he did not deliberately provide false
statements during the processing of his security clearance application, we conclude that the
Judge’s finding of deliberate conduct is sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO:  15-04856.a1
DATE:  03/09/2017
DATE:  March 9, 2017
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-04856
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 12, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On January 31, 2017, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Eric
H. Borgstrom denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the military from 1986 until 2008, at which time he retired.  He has
earned an associate’s degree.  Applicant has worked full time for a DoD contractor since 2011.  He
has experienced unemployment due to job layoffs,  and he attended college after leaving the
military, living off of his retirement pay and the G.I. Bill. Applicant’s SOR lists several delinquent
debts, for such things as a collection account in the amount of nearly $20,000, a child support
arrearage, and a debt owed to a gym.  He stated that his child support came out of his retired pay
monthly, although his child support obligation is calculated on a weekly basis, resulting in him being
in arrears from time to time.  The Judge found that an additional SOR debt, a delinquent credit card
account, had been resolved.
Applicant was charged with DUI/DWI in 1985, 1998, and 2003.  When he completed a
security clearance application (SCA) in 2002, Applicant did not disclose his 1985 and 1998 DUIs. 
When questioned by an investigator during his clearance interview in late 2003, Applicant disclosed
the latest arrest but denied any other “negative contact” with law enforcement.  Decision at 4. 
During a later interview, he stated that he had failed to disclose the 1998 arrest because it had
resulted in probation before judgment.  When asked about the truthfulness of his 2002 SCA answers,
he stated that he was not “totally honest.”  Id. at 5.  However, he stated that he had not intentionally
omitted his criminal charges.  He admitted that he was afraid that his misconduct would affect his
career and that he was embarrassed by his infractions.  Applicant admitted the misconduct in his
most recent SCA.  However, in his Answer to the SOR and FORM response he denied intentional
falsification during 2002 and 2003.  He stated that he believed he did not have to disclose the 1985
incident because he had already done so prior to joining the military.  He reiterated his contention
that he omitted the 1998 incident because it had resulted in probation before judgment.  He provided
no explanation for his denial of other alcohol incidents during the 2003 interview.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems, notably his child support
arrearage, may well recur.  He also concluded that Applicant has not demonstrated responsible
action in regard to his debts.  Applicant has been gainfully employed for several years but has taken
no steps to resolve his large collection account, nor is there  evidence of financial counseling or clear
indications that Applicant’s problems are under control.  Concerning the falsifications alleged under
Guideline E, the Judge found that they were deliberate.  He stated that Applicant’s various
explanations were inconsistent and not supported by the record, and he reiterated his finding that
Applicant had provided no clear explanation for his 2003 interview in which he denied any alcohol-
related offenses other than the most recent one.  The Judge concluded that Applicant had yet to
acknowledge his misconduct, precluding a finding that he had demonstrated rehabilitation.
Discussion
Applicant’s brief includes matters from outside the record, which we cannot consider. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  His arguments regarding his financial delinquencies are not enough to rebut
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No.  15-02040 at 2 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 2017).  Neither are they enough to show that the Judge
weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 15-08842 at 3 (App. Bd. February 14, 2017).  
Applicant apologizes for “the appearance of being untrustworthy in the past with my
responses to security clearance questions.”  Appeal Brief at 3.  To the extent that he is arguing that
he did not deliberately provide false statements during the processing of his 2002 SCA, we conclude
that the Judge’s finding of deliberate conduct is sustainable.  We note the relative age of Applicant’s
false statements.  However, given the Judge’s finding that Applicant has failed to provide  credible
explanations for them, his adverse decision under Guideline E is consistent with the record that was
before him. 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed:  James E. Moody     
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed:  James F. Duffy       
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board

