                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-06811
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Available information is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about the
presence of Applicant’s close relative in Nigeria. However, he did not mitigate the
security concerns about his delinquent debts that he has not resolved despite having
the means to do so. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On September 15, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for
his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a
security clearance.  1
On April 20, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guidelines  for foreign2
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
1
influence (Guideline B) and financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely
responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on September 21, 2016, and I convened a hearing
in this matter on October 26, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled, with Applicant
appearing by video teleconference. Department Counsel presented Government
Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5. Applicant testified in his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s
Exhibit (Ax.) A. All exhibits were admitted without objection. Additionally, Department
Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts about the Federal
Republic of Nigeria (Nigeria) that might be germane to this adjudication. The
Government’s request is supported by a legal memorandum and six attached
documents included in the record as Gx. 6. After the hearing, Applicant submitted
additional information that is admitted without objection as Ax. B.  A transcript of the3
hearing (Tr.) was received on November 3, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $26,485 for five
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.e). The mortgage-related debt at SOR 1.c
($25,316) constitutes about 99 percent of the total amount at issue. Under Guideline B,
the Government alleged that Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Nigeria
(SOR 2.a). Applicant admitted, with explanations and remarks, all of the SOR
allegations. (Answer) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following
additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 43 years old and works for a defense contractor specializing in
overseas logistics support for the U.S. military. He has worked for his current employer
since July 2011 after being unemployed for just over a year. He previously worked for
another defense contractor in a similar capacity between December 2007 and May
2010, when the contract ended and he was laid off. (Gx. 1) 
Applicant was born and raised in Nigeria. He came to the United States in July
1993 at age 19. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from December 1997 until
being administratively separated in September 2007. Applicant was naturalized as a
U.S. citizen in July 2004. He bought a home in the United States in 2005, and he has
since paid off that mortgage. Since December 2007, Applicant has lived and worked
overseas as an employee of defense contractors supporting U.S. military efforts. He
periodically returns to the United States for regularly-scheduled periods of leave.
Applicant testified that he has about $500,000 in personal savings. (Gx. 1; 36 - 37, 74)
In 2006, while still on active duty, Applicant was approached by a fellow Navy
member about investing in a residential subdivision development opportunity in which
he was involved. Applicant obtained financing to purchase and build on a lot in that
subdivision. His plan was to build and sell a new house, hoping for an estimated profit of
$50,000 based on existing market conditions. By the time the house was ready for sale,
the housing market had begun its collapse. Applicant refinanced the mortgage to cash
out about $4,000 in equity to cover his mortgage for a few months. Thereafter, Applicant
used his own money to pay the mortgage and eventually tried to rent the property. By
sometime in 2008, he had to have the tenant evicted. Applicant was never able to
negotiate a mortgage modification or short sale. The mortgage was foreclosed and the
 Ax. B consists of emails proffered to corroborate his testimony about the debt alleged at SOR 1.c.3
2
house sold at auction. The debt alleged at SOR 1.c likely represents the remaining
deficiency on the mortgage. The state in which all of this occurred allows lenders to
collect such deficiencies and the debt is still listed in his credit history. (Gx. 2 - 5; Tr. 34 -
36)
Applicant was overseas while the house was being built and relied on his Navy
associate to handle the process of finalizing the mortgage, trying to sell the house, and
refinancing the mortgage. Applicant gave his associate power of attorney to manage
these affairs. The information Applicant submitted after the hearing is a collection of
emails regarding the refinancing and attempts to sell the house. Applicant did not
present any information showing what, if any, steps he has taken since the foreclosure
to resolve the remaining mortgage deficiency after auction. (Ax. B; Tr. 41 - 53, 57 - 62,
72)
As a result of the foreclosure on his investment property, Applicant also incurred
a state tax bill for $575. As alleged at SOR 1.a, it remains unpaid. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 5)
The other debts alleged in the SOR are for delinquent cell phone (SOR 1.b), and
natural gas (SOR 1.d and 1.e) services Applicant discontinued over the past ten years,
ostensibly when he either was leaving the military or departing for another overseas
civilian job. Applicant established that he has paid the gas bills. He also claimed to have
paid the cell phone bill. Both allegations are resolved for Applicant. (Answer; Gx. 3 - 5;
Tr. 33, 40)
Applicant’s mother, a citizen of Nigeria, still resides in Nigeria. She is an
octogenarian who rarely leaves her home because she is blind and inform. Her niece
lives nearby and cares for her. Applicant’s contact with his mother is irregular, but
almost always occurs via telephone. Applicant stopped in Nigeria to visit his mother as
he was returning to the United States to appear for his hearing in this matter. Applicant
does not support his mother financially but has occasionally paid for unplanned
expenses. (Answer; Gx. 1; Tr. 64 - 70)
In response to Department Counsel’s request, I take administrative notice of the
following facts about Nigeria contained in Gx. 6:
Since gaining independence from Great Britain in 1960, the Federal Republic of
Nigeria has been beset by a host of internal problems, including government corruption,
a poor economy, kidnappings, and communal violence. Only after the death of a military
head of state in 1999 was a democratic style constitution and form of government put in
place. However, the viability of democratic institutions has produced mixed results. Of
late, Nigeria also has been subjected to violence perpetrated by Boko Haram, a violent
terrorist group intent on imposing Islamic Sharif law in Nigeria. The Nigerian
government’s response to Boko Haram, an international terror organization, has only
served to exacerbate an already poor human rights record. Abandonment of due
process, extra-judicial killings, and other abuses by Nigerian government security forces
have increased in the past few years, often under the guise of counter-terror activities.
The U.S. State Department has issued multiple and detailed warnings to U.S. citizens
traveling to Nigeria, and has advised they not travel at all to certain parts of the country.
3
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Foreign Influence
The security concern about foreign influence is stated at AG ¶ 6:
 See Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
4
[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
More specifically, available information requires consideration of the following AG
¶ 7 disqualifying conditions:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.
The SOR is supported by reliable information that showed his mother is a citizen
of Nigeria who still resides there. Based on the available information about Nigeria, I
conclude her presence there creates a heightened risk of coercion or exploitation. AG
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.
Available information also requires application of the following AG ¶ 8 mitigating
conditions:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.;
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation.
Applicant’s relationship with his mother is close by definition. Nonetheless, it is
not likely to cause a conflict between his obligation to protect classified information and
the interests of the Nigerian government. Applicant’s mother is old and infirm and it is
unlikely she would be the target of coercive actions by the Nigerian government or by
5
groups such as Boko Haram. He has no regular contact with her and does not provide
consistent financial support to her. By contrast, Applicant has lived and worked in the
United States for 20 years. He also served in the U.S. military even before he became a
citizen. He has substantial assets in the United States. His mother has no connections
to the Nigerian government. The foregoing presents a sufficient basis for application of
the cited mitigating conditions, and I conclude available information sufficiently mitigates
the security concerns about Applicant’s relatives in Nigeria.
Financial Considerations
Although Applicant has satisfied the personal debts at SOR 1.b, 1.d and 1.e,
available information shows he still owes $25,891 for the debts at SOR 1.a and 1.c. 
These facts reasonably raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is
addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy   debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts. 
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations).
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant made a poor investment choice when he decided to build a house as
part of his friend’s real estate venture while Applicant was living and working overseas.
While one can question the wisdom of trying to manage such an enterprise by long
distance, it is reasonable to assume that the deal went bad through unforseen market
conditions beyond Applicant’s control. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are partially applicable
6
here. However, Applicant did not show that he has acted prudently in response to the
foreclosure. The Government met its burden of proof in documenting the debts at SOR
1.a and 1.c, but Applicant did not present any information showing what he has done to
resolve those problems. To his credit, he has paid off the mortgage on his principal
residence, and he claims to have about $500,000 in personal savings. On the other
hand, he has not resolved a state tax lien stemming from his real estate venture and he
has not contacted the creditor regarding a remaining deficiency after the house was
sold at auction. All of the foregoing precludes full application of any of the AG 20
mitigating conditions. The security concerns about Applicant’s finances remaining
unresolved.
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has served in the United States military, and his civilian work
provides direct support to ongoing military efforts abroad. Nonetheless, the fact that
Applicant has not addressed lingering financial obligations despite having the means to
do so underscores the doubts about his suitability for access that have been raised by
the Government’s information. Because protection of the national interest is the
principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
7
