1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05797 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his eligibility 
for access to classified information. He did not present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from his problematic financial 
history. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on November 24, 2014. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. About a year and a half later on April 9, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information.1 The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
2 
 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 3, 2016, and requested a decision based on the 
written record without a hearing.   
 
On June 1, 2016, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information.2 Included in the relevant and material information were seven items of 
evidence, which are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits 1 through 7. The file 
of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on June 9, 2016. 
He responded to the FORM on July 13, 2016. His response included three documents, 
which are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits A, B and C, and they are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 7, which is a report of investigation 
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the March 2015 
background investigation. The ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of 
the Directive.3 Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant 
that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver 
of the authentication requirement. I have reviewed the complete record and have 
concluded that the ROI contains evidence that is largely irrelevant to the issues presented 
in this case.  Those parts of the ROI that are relevant present evidence that is needlessly 
cumulative of evidence already admitted.  The ROI is, therefore, inadmissible.4   
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old and at the time of his security clearance application he 
had been employed since June 2014 by a defense contractor. His current clearance 
sponsor is also a defense contractor.   
 
 In his November 2014 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed an 
educational loan in default in the estimated amount of $20,000.  He stated that he had 
been “unable to keep up with [the] student loan.” He explained that he planned to resolve 
this default through a student loan consolidation company.5 
                                                          
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG were published in the 
Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
4 See Fed. R. Evid. 401 – 403.   
5 Exhibit 4.  
3 
 
The SOR alleged an educational loan in collection in the amount of $51,850 and three 
consumer accounts in collection in the amounts of $240, $196 and $145. Applicant’s 
answer to the SOR admitted the debts and claimed that the three consumer accounts 
had been paid in full and that he had applied for a payment plan with respect to the 
defaulted student loan. Applicant’s response to the FORM provided documentation 
showing payment of the $240 and $196 debts but did not provide documentation sufficient 
to show payment of the $145 debt.  Nor did the response show the establishment of or 
adherence to a payment plan for the educational loan.     
 
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.6 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”7 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.8 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.9 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.10 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.11 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.12 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.13 
 
                                                          
  
6 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (no right to a security 
clearance).  
 
7 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
8 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
9 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
11 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
12 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
13 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
4 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.14 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.15 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,16 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about a [person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.17 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) [t]here are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
                                                          
14 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
16 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
17 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. It appears that his principal 
financial problem is based on a delinquent student loan. With that said, I have given very 
little weight to the three consumer collection accounts, because the amounts are minor, 
and Applicant’s response to the FORM included acceptable documentation that two of 
those three accounts have been paid, albeit after the issuance of the SOR.18 
 
 Based on the written record before me, I am unable to credit Applicant in 
extenuation or mitigation as to the delinquent student loan.  That loan’s first major 
delinquency was in June 2013.19  He has held full-time employment since March 2004.20  
Applicant has had ample time to address the delinquent student loan.  In fact, in his 
November 2014 security clearance application Applicant stated his intention to make 
payment arrangements.21  Instead, he waited until after the issuance of the SOR to apply 
for a payment plan, and there is no evidence that a payment plan is in place. A security 
clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant's debts. 
Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.22   
 
 The record demonstrates Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts and 
a history of not meeting financial obligations.  The record does not indicate that Applicant’s 
financial problems were due to conditions largely beyond his control or that the problem 
is being resolved, is under control or that Applicant made good-faith efforts to repay 
overdue creditors.   
 
 The record creates doubt about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good 
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not 
meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
                                                          
18 Applicant’s response to the FORM provided a document prepared by Applicant purporting to show that 
the collection action for a mobile phone account was paid in full. That document, however, was not a 
business record of the collection agency or the original creditor showing payment. It is, therefore, not 
acceptable proof of payment.  
 
19 Exhibit 6.  
 
20 Exhibit 4.  
 
21 Exhibit 4.  
 
22 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008).   
6 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:           Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:           For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:           For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:           Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
