 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06966 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the security concerns related to his connections to Iraq and 
Jordan. Based upon a review of the record as a whole, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On December 8, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on or about June 6, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on October 6, 2016. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on November 8, 2016, setting the hearing for November 30, 2016. On that 
date, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through F into evidence. All exhibits were 
admitted. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 9, 2016. The record 
remained open until December 16, 2016, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional exhibits.  
 
Post-hearing, Applicant timely submitted three exhibits, which he labeled AE F, 
AE G, and AE H.1 Department Counsel objected to Applicant’s second document 
marked AE F (Administrative Notice (Sweden)) on the basis that it was irrelevant 
because SOR ¶ 1.f was withdrawn. Based on said withdrawal, Department Counsel’s 
objection is sustained and the exhibit is not admitted. Department Counsel’s objection to 
the final paragraph of AE G as being argumentative rather than factual is overruled, and 
the exhibit is admitted. Department Counsel had no objection to AE H; hence, it is 
admitted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
 At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. to state as follows: 
 
  1.a. Your father-in-law is a citizen of Iraq and a resident of Jordan. 
 
  1.b. Your mother-in-law is a citizen of Iraq and a resident of Jordan. 
 
 Department Counsel also moved to withdraw the following allegation in the SOR: 
 
 ¶ 1.f. Your friend is a citizen and resident of Sweden. 
  
 Applicant had no objections to said amendments and Department Counsel’s 
motions were granted. (Tr. 8.) 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq and Jordan. The request and the attached documents 
pertinent to Iraq and Jordan are included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) 1 and 2. 
                                            
1At the commencement of the hearing, Applicant submitted AE F, which is a copy of his renunciation of 
foreign citizenship. In the post-hearing submission, Applicant also marked the exhibit titled Administrative 
Notice (Sweden) as AE F. For purposes of clarity, I remarked that exhibit as AE I. 
 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant did not object to my consideration of those administrative notice documents. 
(Tr. 15). Applicant also submitted administrative notice documents pertinent to Iraq, 
which are included in the record as AE G. The facts administratively noticed are limited 
to matters of general knowledge that are pertinent to Iraq and Jordan, and not subject to 
reasonable dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of 
Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all factual allegations contained in the SOR and offered 
explanations. (Answer.)   
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He was born in Iraq. He attended high school there. In 
1995, Applicant left Iraq and initially went to Guam before arriving in  Denmark, where 
he stayed for a couple years. In 2000, he arrived in the United States with a permanent 
residency card. His parents, who came here previously through the U.S. Safe Haven 
Act, sponsored his immigration. He attended a technical institute from 2003 to 2005 and 
obtained a certificate in automotive technology. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2010. He has a current U.S. passport that expires in 2020. He formally 
renounced his Iraqi citizenship in November 2016. (Tr. 22; GE 2, 5; AE F.) 
  
 Applicant’s wife was born in Iraq. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen. They have 
two children, who were born in the United States. (GE 2; AE A.)  
  
 Both of Applicant’s parents were born and raised in Iraq. They have been U.S. 
citizens for 10 years. Applicant has three brothers and one sister, all of whom were born 
in Iraq. They are U.S. citizens. (Tr. 23-24.) These family members resided in the United 
States before Applicant arrived here. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 Applicant’s in-laws were born in Iraq, and moved to Jordan within the past year. 
(Tr. 40.) They are awaiting approval to go to Australia. He speaks to them two or three 
times a year. (Tr. 28-27.) He last spoke to them three weeks ago, when they called him 
after his return to the United States from a deployment, as noted below. Applicant’s wife 
has two sisters and two brothers, who were born in Iraq. They reside in Australia. 
Applicant’s wife does not have any relatives or property presently located in Iraq. (Tr.  
46-48.) 
 
 Applicant has an aunt and uncle who are citizens and residents of Iraq. His uncle 
works as a chauffeur for an international non-government organization and his aunt is a 
homemaker. The last time he saw them was in 2013 when he visited Iraq. He spoke to 
his uncle four or five months ago by phone. Applicant also has a cousin, who is a citizen 
and resident of Iraq. He owns an automobile business in Iraq. Applicant has contact 
with him about three times a year. Between 2013 and 2014, Applicant traveled to Qatar 
four times to purchase automobile supplies and vehicles for his cousin’s business 
because his cousin cannot travel easily outside Iraq. (Tr. 29-30, 41-42.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 None of Applicant’s relatives living in Iraq is connected to the Iraqi military. None 
of them has visited Applicant in the United States. (Tr. 29-31, 45, 52.)   
 
 Applicant has held various employment positions, in addition to experiencing 
periods of unemployment. He has worked as a cashier, a store manager, a building 
supervisor, a chauffeur, and translator for an immigration court. He was unemployed 
from 2012 to 2014 and 2010 to 2011. Two years ago, he started working as a linguist 
for his current employer. (Tr. 19-20; GE 5; AE D.)  
  
 Since arriving in the United States in 1995, Applicant has returned to Iraq six 
times for personal visits. He went in 2001 and 2004 to see his grandparents with whom 
he lived for many years, and his aunt, uncle, and cousin. In 2008, he went to Iraq to see 
his family and fiancée. In 2010, he returned to Iraq to get married. In 2012, he 
celebrated his daughter’s baptism there. His in-laws were living in Iraq at that time. In 
2013, he visited Iraq for his cousin’s wedding. (Tr. 21, 28, 36-39.) He always stayed with 
his grandparents while they were alive; subsequently, he rented a home during visits. 
His grandparents passed away prior to 2010. (Tr. 40; GE 5.) 
 
 In February 2015, Applicant returned to Iraq while working for the U.S. 
Government as a linguist. He was there six months, before returning to the United 
States for leave. While in the United States, his son was born. He returned to Iraq in 
November 2015 for six months and came home in April 2016 for one month. He then 
went back to Iraq in May 2016 and stayed until November 2016, when he returned for 
leave. He was scheduled to go back to Iraq in December 2016. Since starting this 
position, he has decreased his contact with family members in Iraq. He said he does not 
see them during deployments because he is not permitted to have contact. He takes his 
job seriously and keeps a low personal profile. (Tr. 43-45.) 
  
 Applicant does not own property or have financial accounts in Iraq. (Tr. 22-23.) 
He owns a home in the United States. He and his wife have about $50,000 in savings. 
They are current on their bills and timely filed all tax returns. (Tr. 26-27.) 
 
 Applicant submitted recommendation letters and a certificate of appreciation, 
attesting to his capabilities and contributions as an interpreter and translator. A major in 
the U.S. Marines stated that Applicant’s language skills, and his knowledge of Iraq and 
its culture, were an invaluable asset during Applicant’s deployment from January 
through May 2016, and in previous deployments. An Army major spoke of Applicant’s 
achievements and exceptional abilities. A Marine captain praised Applicant’s honesty 
and integrity. These officers consider him responsible and trustworthy. (AE B, C.)   
 
 Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted pride in his U.S. citizenship. He is 
dedicated and enthusiastic about his ability to serve as a cultural advisor and linguist to 
the U.S. military, as confirmed in the letters of recommendation. (AE B.)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Iraq 
I have taken administrative notice of facts contained in U.S. Government 
pronouncements concerning the state of Iraq, as outlined in HE I, including the 
following: Iraq faces many challenges fueled by sectarian and ethnic divisions. 
Numerous terrorist groups are increasingly active throughout Iraq. The Islamic State of 
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or Islamic State) control some of the country’s territory. 
Threats of kidnapping and violence are high, and the Department of State warns U.S. 
citizens that all but essential travel to Iraq should be avoided. Additionally, human-rights 
related problems including disappearances, torture, denial of fair public trial, and limits 
on freedom of speech and expression have been noted. (HE 1.) 
 
Jordan 
 
Jordan is a small, Middle Eastern country governed by a constitutional monarchy.   
It has a developing economy. Jordan has a pro-Western foreign policy, and has had 
close relations with the United States for more than forty years. Torture, arbitrary arrest, 
prolonged detention, denial of due process, and restrictions on freedom of speech are 
Jordanian human rights problems. Despite aggressive governmental action against 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Jordan remains high. Jordan cooperates with the 
United States in fighting international terrorism. Terrorists in Jordan target U.S. interests 
to exploit and undermine U.S. national security interests. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. (HE 2.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
 
 
 
6 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for foreign influence are set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;2 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant has familial connections with his aunt, uncle, and cousin, who are 
residents and citizens of Iraq. His in-laws are citizens of Iraq and residents of Jordan. 
These relationships potentially create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation because terrorists in Iraq or Jordan seek intelligence or engage in behaviors 
that are hostile to the United States’ interests. Applicant’s relationship with his relatives 
also creates a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and [his] desire to help” family members living in 
Iraq or Jordan. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
  
  After the government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation. Three 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
conditions based on the facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
                                            
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, that factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
In the event terrorists would learn of Applicant’s identity and/or presence in Iraq 
while deployed, his aunt, uncle, and cousin could be placed in positions that would force 
him to choose between their safety and U.S. interests. However, the possibility of that 
conflict occurring is diminished because Applicant does not have contact with them 
while he is in Iraq, and has diminished his overall contacts with them. The likelihood that 
terrorists in Jordan would learn of Applicant’s identity is minimal, as Applicant does not 
work there and has no other connections to the country. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has some 
application.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) provides strong mitigation. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he 
“can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” He has 
lived in the United States since 2000. He became a citizen in 2010. His wife and two 
young children are U.S. citizens. He owns a home and has financial investments in the 
United States. His parents and four siblings are naturalized U.S. citizens, residing here. 
He attended a technical school in the United States. He has worked at various jobs in 
the United States, including as a translator for an immigration court. He expressed a 
strong sense of loyalty to the United States and zeal for his job supporting U.S. military 
forces and missions overseas.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) has some application to the security concerns raised because 
Applicant’s contacts with his aunt, uncle and cousin are infrequent. He speaks them a 
few times a year and has not seen his aunt and uncle since 2013. The last time he saw 
his cousin was between 2013 and 2014. He speaks to his in-laws two or three times a 
year. The last time was while they were in Jordan, and after Applicant recently returned 
home from Iraq.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The Appeal Board 
 
 
 
 
9 
requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his 
[or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The Guideline B security concerns do 
not arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but rather circumstances that 
warrant further analysis. First, there are significant risks of terrorism and various human 
rights abuses in Iraq and Jordan. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists in 
both countries are hostile to the United States and actively seek classified information. 
Terrorists, and even friendly governments, could attempt to use Applicant’s aunt, uncle, 
cousin, and in-laws to obtain such information. Second, Applicant had numerous 
connections to Iraq before he immigrated to the United States in 1995. Following his 
birth, he spent his formative years there, amongst family and friends. Third, he 
maintains some contact with three family members in Iraq, and his in-laws in Jordan.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. Applicant’s ties to the United States are much stronger than his ties to family 
members living in Iraq or Jordan. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United 
States for 16 years, and has been a naturalized citizen since 2010. His spouse is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, as are his two children. His parents and siblings are U.S. 
citizens and residents. He owns a home in the United States and has an investment 
account. In his current employment, he provides vital and direct support to the U.S. 
armed forces as a cultural advisor and translator. There is no evidence that he has ever 
taken any action that could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his 
loyalty to the United States seriously. He has worked diligently for a defense contractor 
since 2015 in an important capacity. He jeopardizes his physical safety while working in 
Iraq. His supervisors assess him as loyal, trustworthy, and responsible. There is no 
derogatory information about him in the record.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence 
security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                        
         
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
