 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-03249 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esquire 
       For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On November 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response, Applicant admitted the four allegations raised under 
Guideline F and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on June 30, 2016. 
That day, a hearing was scheduled for August 17, 2016. It was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered three documents, which were accepted without 
objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-3. Applicant offered testimony. The record was held open 
through September 1, 2016, in the event the parties wished to submit additional 
material. That date was subsequently moved to October 3, 2016. In the interim, the 
 
 
 
 
2 
transcript (Tr.) was received on August 25, 2016. Between August 31, 2016, and 
October 3, 2016, Applicant provided two documents in a series of e-mails. The chain of 
e-mails was accepted as Ex. A, while the documents were accepted as Exs. B-C 
without objection. With no further emails submitted by October 17, 2016, the record was 
then closed.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old system network analyst employed by a defense 
contractor. He has worked for the same employer for over 11 years. He has maintained 
a security clearance for about seven years. Applicant earned a bachelor of science in 
chemical engineering and a master’s degree in business and finance. He is married and 
has two preschool children. He has not received financial counseling.  
 
Applicant has a net income of about $900 every two weeks. His wife generates 
about $3,000 every two weeks. She also has outstanding student loans. (Tr. 33) They 
have about $6,000 in savings. Applicant has a retirement with a balance of about 
$150,000; the balance maintained in his wife’s retirement account is unknown. Applicant 
has a monthly mortgage payment of $3,145 and a $320 monthly car loan payment on 
one of their three vehicles. (Tr. 19) At the end of the month, he has a net remainder of 
about $800, which he usually applies to the household coffers. He recently opened an 
education savings fund for his son, which entails an annual $550 contribution. Overall, 
the couple lives within their means.  
  
At issue are multiple student loans acquired by Applicant in pursuit of post-
graduate work he completed in 2010. The loans were in forbearance through 2013. (Tr. 
36) The delinquent loans were mostly opened between 2007 and 2009. He attributed 
their past-due status to a weak job market at graduation, insufficient salary, and the 
addition of two children to his family. (SOR Response) The loans admitted in SOR 
allegations 1.a-1.c amount to approximately $122,500. He believes that all seven 
student loans at issue have been consolidated and are in repayment. (Tr. 38)  
 
During the hearing, Applicant discussed various strategies he has undertaken to 
rehabilitate both privately held and publicly administered student loans. He included in 
his discussion private student loans that are delinquent, but not at issue in the SOR. (Tr. 
21-23) With interest, they amount to about $88,000 beyond the sums reflected in the 
SOR. Applicant stated that garnishment payments on these loans have been initiated.  
 
 Due to recent changes in the law, Applicant is aiming to have all of his student 
loans, both private and publicly administered, consolidated and moved out of the 
garnishment status imposed in early 2016.1 (Tr. 26, 35-36) Applicant’s financial 
information is drawn from a student loan rehabilitation request form dated September 1, 
2016. The form was created by an intermediary servicer for the U.S. Department of 
                                                          
1 When asked whether he had made any student loan payments between the time the loans came out of 
forbearance status and when they went into garnishment in early 2016, Applicant stated: “There had been 
some due to tax returns, or tax garnishments and there have been some payments, yes.” (Tr. 37) 
 
 
 
 
3 
Education (ED). That paperwork reflects a total monthly income of $12,926 and 
expenses amounting to $10,129, including $1,217 in Federal student loan payments.  
 
At issue in SOR allegation 1.b is a loan loan opened August 2009. It is presently 
with a loan servicing entity (LSE). It represents a past-due amount of $3,543 on a total 
loan balance of $45,515. No documentary evidence was presented directly linking any 
efforts by Applicant to address this account. Applicant is restricted in his options for 
consolidating his student loans because many of the currently available options are with 
entities that will not work with individuals who have had a default. (Tr. 42) 
 
The three delinquent accounts at 1.c are serviced by Nelnet Loan Services 
(NLS). They involve past-due sums of $2,574, $1,098, and $1,844. They were opened 
between 2007 and 2008. The credit report at Ex. 3 shows that they are subject to 
scheduled payments of $367, $156, and $263, respectively. The only documentary 
evidence provided by Applicant clearly regarding these accounts is a three-page 
excerpt, without letterhead, showing $70 payments made every other week to NLS 
made between September 2014 and October 2016. (Ex. C) His name is not noted, nor 
is there any reference to an account number or numbers. The payments are drawn from 
a major bank. There is a four digit number following each entry noting NLS, but the 
significance of the number is unclear. 
 
 Applicant was unable to confirm whether his current package of loans with ED, 
the source of the student loans noted at SOR allegation 1.a, includes any of the other 
student loans (ie. NLS) noted. (August 31, 2016, e-mail at Ex. A) He wrote that the ED 
servicer “is unable to provide an email with the full account summary as requested 
during my hearing as they only have records of when they received accounts for 
rehabilitation.” Applicant has no correspondence to offer showing the progress on any of 
his various student loans since their inception. He was awaiting correspondence from 
the ED servicer “regarding details of the 9 months financial arrangement program to get 
loans back in good standing with garnishment being removed in December with a 
monthly payment of $433 instead of $2195 and my account is transitioned to a new 
servicer. They adjusted my payment based on my income.” (August 31, 2016, e-mail at 
Ex. A) Any paperwork including such information was not offered into evidence. 
 
 By email of September 28, 2016, Applicant referenced “the current agreement” 
for rehabilitating his Federal student loans, but not those serviced by NLS. He wrote that 
it removes his Federal loans from default into good standing and consolidates them with 
a new lender after his final December 28, 2016, payment. No documentation was 
offered, however, reflecting Applicant’s loans were thusly converted.  
 
Attached to that exchange is the September 1, 2016, rehabilitation request form 
noted above. It references six accounts for inclusion in the rehabilitation program. They 
include the three accounts at issue in SOR allegation 1.a (#2438, #2439, and #2439), 
reflecting balances of $17,487, $42,352, and $11,574. Unsigned and incomplete, the 
September 1, 2016, form contains two pages of instructions for returning the completed 
form; two pages for Applicant to provide financial information; two pages of applicable 
 
 
 
 
4 
terms and methods of loan rehabilitation acceptance; an address to send the completed 
form; notices; a checklist of required information and materials for rehabilitation financial 
disclosure; and a vehicle certification. (Ex. B) There is no express indication in the 
documentation that it has been received, completed, or that the rehabilitation process 
was initiated. 
 
 During the post-hearing email exchanges with the Government, Applicant also 
wrote that his NLS loans were being held by a corporation, to which his first deduction 
had recently been paid. He also noted terms of an agreement with that entity. No 
documentary evidence reflecting that payment or agreement, however, was submitted.  
 
 In addition, at SOR allegation 1.d, Applicant has four accounts placed for 
collection concerning traffic or parking tickets for $300, $200, $105, and $50, 
respectively. One of the smaller debts may have been for lack of an inspection sticker 
on the vehicle’s window or driver’s plate. (Tr. 49) Applicant has been in dispute with the 
governmental entity over these accounts “for years.” (Tr. 43) He did not go to court to 
contest the tickets. With one citation, he sent it back to the issuer with a request the 
ticket be reconsidered, but no response was received. (Tr. 44) Applicant did not initially 
receive information regarding two tickets because they were misrouted. The week 
before the hearing, he went to the central office personally. He was directed to a form to 
complete to express his disputes. Applicant provided no documentary evidence, 
however, regarding any of these tickets or any disputes filed. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to safeguard such information. Under Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, decisions 
shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to 
the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, Applicant admitted the allegations concerning approximately $120,000 in 
delinquent student loan account balances and collection efforts for about $655 in 
government-issued tickets and citations. This is sufficient to invoke financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
  
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
Regarding the multiple delinquent debts at issue, the documentary evidence 
offered shows little to no progress on their being addressed or resolved. Generally, 
Applicant provided no facts that showed the creation of these delinquent debts was 
necessarily based on factors outside of his control and that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances at the time. At best, his claim that misrouting was the reason for his 
not having received two of the tickets at issue could raise AG ¶ 20(b) in part.  
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. Moreover, he did not provide 
documentary evidence reflecting efforts to dispute any of the accounts at issue. The 
student loan rehabilitation application evidences that Applicant had access to a 
necessary form to implement his plan to rehabilitate and consolidate his loans accounts. 
In the state presented, however, it does not demonstrate any progress to that end; it 
certainly does not reflect the notable progress suggested by Applicant in his emails.  
 
Finally, while Applicant’s documentation regarding NLS payments shows regular 
$70 payments being made to NLS, the documentary evidence submitted fails to reflect 
the identity of the payer or, more importantly, the accounts at issue. The absence of this 
necessary information is fatal inasmuch as such information is necessary to link the 
accounts at issue to the efforts shown. Applicant’s proffered documents, however, fail to 
provide sufficient evidentiary proof of progress. Under these facts and given the 
documentary evidence presented, no other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
 
 
 
 
7 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis, as well as relevant and available 
facts regarding the Applicant as an individual. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
previously addressed, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a credible 39-year-old system network analyst who has worked for 
the same employer for over 11 years. He is married with two young children. Applicant 
completed his master of business and finance degree in 2010. As a result he acquired 
student loans, which were deferred until 2013. Timely payment apparently became 
difficult. Intermittent payments on the loans, and tax return proceeds went to the student 
loan balances. Later, garnishments were imposed on the past-due accounts.  
 
In both his testimony and subsequent e-mails, Applicant described efforts he has 
taken and progress he has made toward rehabilitating and consolidating his student 
loans. The documentary evidence he provided, however, does not depict the efforts and 
progress described. As well, no documentary evidence was offered regarding the tickets 
and citations at issue. This process demands corroborating documentary evidence. It is 
necessary to support a case in mitigation and enable an applicant to carry his burden. 
Here, without more, financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
