 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-04765 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On February 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).1 In a response notarized on March 3, 2016, he admitted all allegations 
and requested a determination based on the written record. On April 21, 2016, the 
Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with five attachments (“Items”). 
The case was assigned to me on March 21, 2017. Based on my review of the case file 
and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate personal conduct and financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old welder who has worked for the same employer since 
November 2014. He earned a General Educational Development certificate (GED) and is 
currently enrolled in a vocational program. Except for a period of unemployment from April 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
2014 to November 2014, he has been continuously employed since 2009. He is single 
and has no children. 
 
From 2010 to 2011, Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency. He was 
arrested in approximately the summer of 2010 and charged with trespassing. In October 
9, 2010, he was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana, an illegal drug. On 
or about December 31, 2011, he was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana 
and possession of beverage by underage persons.  
 
Applicant is indebted to a creditor for about $5,895 for the balance due on a 
repossessed vehicle. This account was opened in 2012. In response to the SOR, he wrote 
that while he admits this debt, he is paying off this balance in two weeks. No documentary 
evidence of a payoff was later offered. In addition, Applicant admits he is indebted to a 
creditor for a collection account concerning a balance owed to a rental car company in 
the approximate amount of $772. This account was opened in 2013. He wrote he did not 
previously know about this collection effort and he thought any balance owed was paid 
by his “insurance at the time and [he] will pay this amount.” (SOR Response)  No 
corroborative documentary evidence was submitted. 
 
In November 2014, Applicant completed and certified a security clearance 
application (SCA). In response to Section 22, he denied having been arrested by any type 
of law enforcement in the preceding seven years, or having ever been charged with an 
offense involving alcohol or drugs. In response to Section 23, he denied having illegally 
used any drug or controlled substance in the preceding seven years. In response to 
Section 26, he denied having had any property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or 
foreclosed, or had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency within the past 
seven years. When interviewed by an authorized investigator for the DOD, he deliberately 
failed to disclose any of the above information previously denied. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several issues area that is not sufficient 
for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct or concealment of information about one’s conduct 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community stranding. 
 
 Applicant falsely denied having been arrested by a law enforcement officer or 
having used an illegal drug in the seven years preceding the certification of his November 
2014 SCA. He falsely denied having any property repossessed or having had any bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency in the preceding seven years. He also failed 
correct or disclose this information to an authorized investigator for the DOD. Therefore, 
AG ¶ 16(a)(b) and (e) apply.  
 
 The guideline also provides several possible mitigating conditions, AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
 
 
 
5 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations.  
 
 Providing false or purposefully incomplete information in the pursuit of a security 
clearance is a highly serious matter. It undermines the basic trust underlying the very core 
of the relationship between the Government and one seeking to maintain a security 
clearance. Here, the misrepresentations were recent and they are admitted. Applicant did 
not falsify his answers on the advice of counsel, nor did he avail himself of the opportunity 
to correct the record constructed on his SCA when he met with an investigator. Any steps 
he may have taken to relieve any stressors he may have faced at the time are not 
disclosed or explored. Under these facts, none of the available mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
Under AG ¶ 18, the security concern under this guideline is that failure or inability 
to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has nearly 
$6,700 in delinquent debt. He admits responsibility for the two accounts cited. This is 
sufficient evidence to invoke two of the available disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           Other than claiming he was previously unaware of the existence of the smaller 
debt, Applicant provided no information or documentation regarding these debts.2 There 
is no evidence he has tried to contact either creditor or tried to formally dispute either 
account. There is no evidence he has received financial counseling. The accounts were 
opened before Applicant’s only cited period of unemployment. No information as to the 
circumstances surrounding his acquisition of these delinquent debts, except that he writes 
he was previously unaware of the smaller debt, was offered. Given these considerations, 
none of the available mitigating conditions apply.            
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c) sets forth the need to 
utilize a whole-person evaluation. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated 
my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
                                                          
2 Even if this is true, and there is no reason to suggest it is not, that still would not relieve Applicant of his 
responsibilities as to the other delinquent debt at issue. 
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant is in his early 20s, single, has no children, earned a GED certificate, and 
is currently in a vocational program. Other than some months in 2014, he has been 
continuously employed since 2009. Few other relevant facts are known aside from his 
admissions regarding marijuana use, arrests, two delinquent debts, and Applicant’s 
admission that he falsified material facts on his SCA. Given the scant information 
provided, I find Applicant failed to mitigate personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns. Clearance is denied.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Guideline E  - Personal Conduct 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
