 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01582 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 7, 2014. On 
September 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006. The guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they 
replaced the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 16, 2015, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
 
 2
case on May 27, 2016, and sent a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on June 3, 
2016, and did not respond.1 The case was assigned to me on February 24, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant did not expressly admit or deny any of the allegations in the SOR, but he 
provided explanations. I have treated his responses as denials. 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old welder employed by a defense contractor since May 
2014. He completed a technical school and received a welding certification in April 2015. 
He has never married and has no children. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “No” to all questions about 
financial delinquencies. His credit bureau report (CBR) dated May 16, 2014, nine days 
after he submitted the SCA, listed the six delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. (Item 3.) 
The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: auto loan charged off and placed for collection of $14,174. In 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that the auto was involved in an accident, and 
the creditor took back the car and was working with the insurance company to resolve it. 
In the June 2014 PSI, he told the investigator that he voluntarily surrendered the vehicle 
because he could not afford the payments. (Item 5 at 4.) The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: delinquent auto lease payment charged off for $489. The May 2014 
CBR reflects that Applicant disputed this debt and it was resolved against him. In 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he contacted the creditor and was trying to 
settle this debt. He provided no documentary evidence of negotiations, payments, or a 
payment agreement.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: department store account charged off for $356. The May 2014 CBR 
reflects that Applicant disputed this debt, but the dispute is not resolved. In Applicant’s 
answer to the SOR, he stated that he contacted the creditor and was trying to settle this 
debt. He submitted no documentary evidence of negotiations, payments, or a payment 
agreement. 
                                                          
1 The FORM included Item 5, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted on June 24, 2014. 
The PSI was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant 
that he was entitled to comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, 
deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not authenticated. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I conclude that his failure to respond to the FORM waived any 
objections to the PSI summary. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are 
expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-
10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (Item 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to other documents in the record. 
 
 3
 SOR ¶ 1.d: delinquent medical bill for $177. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, 
he stated that he was unaware of this debt. He submitted no documentary evidence of 
efforts to identify, dispute, or otherwise resolve this debt. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f: telecommunication bills placed for collection of $159 and 
$125. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that both debts were paid in full. He 
provided no documentation of payment. 
 
 The SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA by answering “No” to all the 
financial questions and failing to disclose the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f. In 
Applicant’s response to the SOR, he stated that he did not disclose the debts alleged in 
the SOR because he was unaware of them when he submitted his SCA. 
 
 The SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that on May 18, 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with a felony drug offense and driving while in possession of a controlled substance, a 
misdemeanor. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that he was driving a car rented by his 
girlfriend, he was pulled over in a random traffic stop, and his girlfriend had left a plastic 
bag in the car containing her prescription pain medications and some marijuana. He 
stated that, after he was arrested, his girlfriend came to the police station, told the police 
that the prescription drugs and the medical marijuana were hers, and he was released. 
There are no police or court records in the record supporting this allegation. The allegation 
was based on the PSI, which reflected that Applicant was questioned about this offense. 
The PSI summary reflects that Applicant told the investigator that he was stopped for a 
seatbelt violation, the prescription drugs and marijuana were found in the car, his girlfriend 
told the police that the prescription drugs and marijuana were hers, and he paid a fine for 
the seatbelt violation and possession of marijuana. (Item 5 at 5.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
 4
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
 5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the CBRs establish two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under 
this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. If the delinquent auto loan alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a was 
due in part to an automobile accident, it would constitute a condition largely beyond his 
control. However, Applicant has given inconsistent answers regarding his inability to pay 
the auto loan. In his answer to the SOR, he claimed it was due to an accident, but in the 
PSI he claimed he voluntarily surrendered the car due to his inability to make the 
payments. His inconsistent explanations need not be resolved, however, because he has 
 
 6
not acted responsibly. He submitted no evidence that he contacted the creditor or took 
any affirmative steps to resolve the debt. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant has not sought or received 
financial counseling, and he has taken no substantial steps to resolve any of his 
delinquent debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant’s CBRs reflect that he disputed the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, but he produced no evidence establishing the basis for 
the disputes. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition for the allegation that Applicant falsified his 
SCA is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . .” When a falsification allegation is 
controverted, as in this case, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, 
standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s 
level of education and experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose 
relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 
08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant claims that he did not disclose any of the debts alleged in the SOR 
because he was unaware of them. His explanation is plausible with respect to the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.f in light of his overall inattention to his financial obligations, but 
it is not plausible or persuasive regarding the delinquent auto loan in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant 
gave two conflicting explanations for the delinquent loan. Regardless of which explanation 
is true, it is clear that Applicant knew he had not made the required payments on the car 
loan and the debt was not resolved. He has provided no reasonable or plausible 
explanation for not disclosing the delinquent auto loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. I conclude 
that the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions for the incident involving a seat-belt violation 
and possession of drugs are: 
 
 7
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information; and 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and  
 The evidence supporting SOR ¶ 2.b is inconsistent and incomplete. There are no 
police records or court records to support the description of the event in the PSI. It is 
implausible that Applicant’s girlfriend would have claimed responsibility for the drugs and 
the marijuana but that Applicant would be charged with possession of marijuana but not 
the other drugs. The single seat-belt violation admitted by Applicant is a minor incident 
that is insufficient to raise security concerns. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(c) and 16(d) are not 
supported by substantial evidence. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are relevant to Applicant’s falsification of his 
SCA: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant made no effort to correct the omission 
from his SCA until he was confronted with the evidence. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s falsification was not “minor,” because 
falsification of a security clearance application “strikes at the heart of the security 
clearance process.” ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) It was arguably 
“infrequent,” because there is no evidence of other falsifications, but it was recent and did 
not occur under unique circumstances. 
 
 
 8
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). Because Applicant requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts 
and his personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
  
 
 9
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
