                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-05123     
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) The SOR was dated January 19, 2016. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2016.   A notice of1
Applicant initially retained counsel for the case, then decided to represent herself. This caused a delay in      1
scheduling.
1
hearing, dated November 14, 2016, was issued, scheduling the hearing for February 3,
2017. Government Exhibits (GX 1-10) were admitted into the record. Applicant
submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX A-R).  I held the record open until February 24, 2017.2
Applicant submitted additional documents, which were marked as AX S-W, and 
admitted into the record without objection. She testified, but did not present witnesses.
The transcript was received on February 13, 2017. Based on a review of the pleadings,
testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted seven factual allegations in the
SOR totaling about $35,000, and denied or disputed the remaining factual allegations
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). She provided detailed explanations for
each allegation, and she acknowledged the two filings for bankruptcy.
Applicant is a 40-year-old systems engineer with a defense contractor. She is
single and has a daughter. She graduated from high school in 1994 and received her
associate’s degree in 2007. Applicant attended more college classes until 2010, but has
not yet obtained her undergraduate degree. Applicant has worked for her current
employer since October 2011. She was previously granted a security clearance in
2000. She completed her most recent security clearance application in 2014. (GX 1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts, including student loans, collection
accounts, charged-off accounts, a past-due mortgage payment, which total
approximately $33,500. (GX 5-8) The  SOR also alleges that Applicant filed a Chapter 7
bankruptcy in 1995, which was discharged in June 1999 ($16,000) and another Chapter
7 bankruptcy ($33,000), which was filed in March 2005 and discharged in June 2005.
(GX 9-10)
Applicant explained that her financial difficulties began when she was younger
and was the sole support for her child. She received very little, if any financial support
from the child’s father. She acknowledged that she did not understand the importance
of a credit history. At the time, she incurred considerable medical bills due to 
emergency visits to the hospital for herself and her daughter. (Tr. 10) When she
became overwhelmed with her debts and did not have sufficient income to pay her
medical and other bills, she knew she was overextended and filed for bankruptcy (SOR
1.a) in 1999. (GX 4 and 10)
From 1999 until 2005, Applicant’s annual salary was in the range from about
$30,000 to $50,000. She started to work with the Consumer Credit Counseling Service
(CCS) for about a year, but did not continue. (GX 4, Tr. 29) She started a monthly
The exhibits in the original file had been marked by the attorney initially representing Applicant as A_K, but      2
were remarked at the hearing as H through R. The post-hearing submissions were marked S_W.
2
budget, but she did not continue with the practice. Applicant could not afford the
monthly amounts the CCS required for the accounts.
She acknowledged that perhaps she was living above her means. Applicant
explained after CCS,  she reached out to her creditors and made some payments on
the smaller accounts, but she could not afford the larger ones. She stated that she was
living paycheck to paycheck. (Tr. 34) She filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005, which
discharged debts totaling $33,000. (SOR 1.b) From 2008 until about 2014, Applicant
had no financial issues. (GX 6) She continued to get better jobs, which paid more
money. However, certain things occurred over which she had no control. At that point,
she became delinquent with her mortgage payment and could not afford her student
loan payments of $600 a month. (Tr. 37)
Applicant was able to purchase a home, but major repairs, including HVAC
system and car problems occurred. She and her dad bought a vehicle together, but it
had major problems and Applicant called to have the dealer take the car in 2015. The
car was auctioned. Applicant received recent notification that the account was satisfied.
(AX U, V) Applicant’s credit score has improved. (AX F) She realizes that just improving
a credit score is not sufficient mitigation with financial security concerns, but she
believes it proves that she is not ignoring creditors and is paying her bills. (Tr. 24) She
also monitors her credit report through a service so that she can immediately address
any unresolved issues. Applicant provided each letter of dispute that she sent to her
creditors and to the credit bureaus. (AX I, M)
During Applicant’s January 2015 investigative interview, she explained that
during the years 2007 to 2012, she was self-employed and earned little or no income.
She worked as a butler, personal trainer, store cashier and other jobs to support her
child. Applicant has consistently worked hard to improve her employment opportunities
and is now in a responsible full-time position. (GX 1) However, she had to obtain
student loans to attend classes. The student loans were in forbearance, but went to
default. She is now in the process of rehabilitating them. (AX J and Q ) Applicant was
paying accounts before she received the 2016 SOR. (Tr. 66)
The allegation in  SOR 1.c, $2,222 collection account, was not Applicant’s debt
but it is unclear about the status, although removed from her credit report; 1.d, a $1,601
collection account from a credit union was paid, and had been in a payment plan where
Applicant paid $42.14 a month.(AX A); 1.e, a $1,660 wireless account was not
Applicant’s account; 1.f, a $3,510 past-due mortgage account is current and regular
payments are being made in the amount of $1,111.04 (AX D); 1.g , a $4,025 120 days
past-due student loan has been rehabilitated and payments of $150 a month have been
made since early 2016 (AX E); 1.h, a $15,344 charged-off account has been in 
repayment status since 2016 (AX B); 1.i, a $2,179 past-due account was removed from
credit report after dispute; 1.j, a $4,514 charged-off account in repayment status since
2013 with monthly payments of $100. The account was settled with a final payment in
2017. (AX C, W) 
3
 Applicant’s current annual salary is about $77,000. (Tr. 33) In 2000 and 2016,
she received financial counseling. She has a savings account. She has steady
employment. Applicant maintains a budget. (AX S) She a monthly net remainder of
$700. She noted that she received a small inheritance from her dad who died recently.
(Tr. 44) She has the ability to pay her bills. The accounts that have been removed from
her account after she disputed them will be looked at again by Applicant to see if she
owes money.
Applicant submitted six letters of reference which attest to her character and
reliability. One project manager, who has known her for 16 years, stated that Applicant
is a seasoned senior level IT professional who has achieved multiple certifications over
the years. Another colleague described Applicant’s ability to respect classified
information and rules and restrictions. An HR specialist wrote that Applicant consistently
goes above and beyond the duties in her position and has risen through the ranks to
show leadership skills and a level of determination. A security personnel, who has
known Applicant for several years, attests to her dedication to work and to her family. 
She also went to school to improve her skills and obtain knowledge while working and
caring for her family by her self. (AX G, K)
 Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
4
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance3
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
5
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of
trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
The Government produced sufficient evidence to show that Applicant accrued
delinquent debts and filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999 and 2005. The debts were
discharged. The Government produced credible evidence to establish additional
delinquent debts occurred after the second bankruptcy discharge. Consequently, the
evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a), and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Applicant’s current financial difficulties began in about 2014. She was working but
due to her student loans coming out of deferment and the HVAC repairs to her home,
she fell behind in bills, especially her mortgage. She had no control over these
circumstances. She obtained student loans to better her opportunities for employment.
She took menial jobs and worked her way through the ranks to a good position that pays
well and is steady employment. She obtained counseling and follows a budget. She
disputed two debts and will address them, but she believed because they were removed
from her credit reports that they were resolved. Her plan is to again contact those
creditors. She has been in payment plans and consistently made monthly payments.
Some of those are now fully satisfied. She has no current accounts that are delinquent.
She filed for bankruptcy when she was very young and admitted that she was not
knowledgeable about financial matters. The second bankruptcy was discharged in 2005.
She was supporting her daughter alone, with no financial help from the father. She loves
her work and has great recommendations.  AG ¶ 20 (a) partially applies; 20(b) applies; 
20(c) applies and 20(d) and 20(e) apply in this case.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old single mother. She has held a security clearance since
2000.  She has very good job recommendations. She has handled classified information
over the years with no recorded problems. She was very young and a single parent
when she filed for bankruptcy. She was not educated in financial matters. She was
receiving no financial help from the child’s father. She worked any job that she could find
to support her family. She has risen through the ranks to a responsible, steady job. She
has addressed her delinquent debts. She worked and attended school so that she could
better her employment opportunities. However, she needed to obtain student loans to
attend classes. Part of her delinquent debt was from the student loans. She also had car
and house issues.
 
 Applicant has  established that she has taken sufficient actions to reasonably
and responsibly resolve her debts. Applicant has shown that she can responsibly
manage her financial obligations in a more timely manner. She has a budget and
received financial counseling. She has worked diligently to improve her overall financial
situation over the years. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or
doubts as to her judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, and eligibility for her security
clearance. I conclude that Applicant has  presented sufficient evidence of mitigation of
her financial considerations security concern.
. Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a:-1.j: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
9
