 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-06672 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges two delinquent debts totaling 
$23,316. In October 2015, he resolved the two delinquent SOR debts when they were 
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. He has a track record of paying 
his debts, and he does not have any currently delinquent debts. Financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 24, 2014, Applicant signed his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Item 2) On February 21, 
2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  
 
On March 8, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he requested 
a decision without a hearing. (Item 1) On April 13, 2016, Department Counsel 
completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM and 
provided an undated response. On July 19, 2016, Applicant provided some documents 
in response to the FORM. On March 20, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The case 
file consisted of seven exhibits. (Items 1-6 and Applicant’s FORM response) There were 
no objections to any exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact1  
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he took responsibility for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact. Additional factual findings follow.  
 
Applicant is a 65-year-old supply lead and facility manager, and he has worked 
for various DOD contractors for more than 20 years mostly overseas.2 He served in the 
Marine Corps from 1969 to 1973, 1977 to 1979, 1983 to 1985, and 1988 to 1989. He 
served in the Army from 1991 to 1992. He served on active duty in Vietnam (two tours) 
and Southwest Asia (Desert Storm). As a contractor, he was deployed to Kuwait (12 
years), Qatar (4 years), Iraq (3 years), and Afghanistan (6 years). He has been 
unemployed from May 2014 to present. He lost his employment when his contract 
ended. He diligently sought employment by sending hundreds of resumes to employers. 
 
Applicant’s first two marriages were dissolved with divorce. (Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI)) In 2007, he married. His children 
were born in 1980, 2003, and 2004. There is no evidence that he violated security rules 
or used illegal drugs. There is no evidence of employer performance evaluations or 
military personnel records.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SCA, 
OPM PSI, SOR response, bankruptcy schedules, and FORM response. The status of 
his two delinquent SOR debts is as follows. 
 
                                            
1 Some details have been excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits. 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s November 
24, 2014 Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions (e-QIP) (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA) and/or SOR response. (Items 1, 2) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a charged-off vehicle loan for $17,457. In June 2013, he 
purchased a 2013 Lincoln for about $50,000.3 His monthly payments were about 
$1,000. In May 2014, he became unemployed; he stopped making payments on the 
vehicle; the creditor repossessed his vehicle; and it was sold at auction. The unpaid 
balance was about $18,000. He offered $3,000 to settle the debt, and the creditor 
rejected this offer. The creditor filed a lawsuit to collect the debt. Applicant admitted the 
debt was delinquent up to the time it was discharged. (FORM response)       
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a debt placed for collection for $5,859. In May 2014, Appellant 
became unemployed, and he was unable to continue making payments on his credit 
card debt. He contacted the creditor and indicated he would resume payments when he 
obtained employment.  
 
In June 2015, Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy 
Code. In July 2015, he received financial counseling. He listed eight unsecured 
nonpriority debts totaling $24,465, including the two SOR debts. (Bankruptcy Schedule 
F) In October 2015, his nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged. Applicant’s 
monthly income is $950. (Bankruptcy Schedule I) Applicant’s 2014 and 2015 credit 
reports show debts in paid as agreed status and other positive resolution of debts. 
(Items 3, 4) He promised to pay his debts and maintain his financial responsibility when 
he obtains employment.   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
                                            
3 Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are from 
Appellant’s April 30, 2015 Office of Personnel Management personal subject interview and FORM 
response. (Item 6) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this 
decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets 
as well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, OPM PSI, SOR response, and FORM response. 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,4 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
                                            
4 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
February 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)).  
 
5 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) apply. Applicant’s delinquent SOR debt resulted 
when Applicant became unemployed in May 2014 when his employment contract 
ended. This unemployment is a circumstance beyond his control, and he acted 
responsibly by attempting to seeking employment and negotiating a settlement of his 
debt.     
 
Two recent Appeal Board decisions illustrate the analysis for applying AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(b). In ISCR Case No. 09-08533, the applicant had $41,000 in delinquent 
credit card debt and defaulted on a home loan generating a $162,000 delinquent debt. 
Id. at 2. That applicant filed for bankruptcy the same month the Administrative Judge 
issued her decision. Id. at 1-2. The applicant in ISCR Case No. 09-08533 was recently 
divorced, had been unemployed for 10 months, and had childcare responsibilities. Her 
former husband was inconsistent in his child support payments to her. The Appeal 
Board determined that AG ¶ 20(a) was “clearly applicable (debt occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and [the debt] does not cast doubt on the 
                                                                                                                                            
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)” even though  
applicant’s debts were unresolved at the time the Administrative Judge’s decision was 
issued. The Appeal Board also decided that the record evidence raised the applicability 
of AG ¶ 20(b) because of the absence of evidence6 of irresponsible behavior, poor 
judgment, unreliability, or lack of trustworthiness. Id. at 4.   
  
Similarly, in ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal 
Board addressed a situation where an applicant was sporadically unemployed and 
lacked the ability to pay her creditors. The Appeal Board noted “it will be a long time at 
best before she has paid” all of her creditors. The applicant was living on unemployment 
compensation at the time of her hearing. The Appeal Board explained that such a 
circumstance was not necessarily a bar to having access to classified information 
stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). The applicant in ISCR Case 
No. 08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had a 
repayment plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate 
that plan.” Id. The Appeal Board remanded the Administrative Judge’s decision because 
it did not “articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the 
Administrative Judge did “not explain[] what he believes that applicant could or should 
have done under the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor 
financial condition, or why the approach taken by applicant was not ‘responsible’ in light 
of his limited circumstances.” Id.   
 
 Application of AG ¶ 20(c) is warranted. Applicant received financial counseling. 
His financial situation was damaged by unemployment.7 He acted responsibly by 
paying as many debts as possible and establishing payment plans for several debts. 
Although there is limited evidence of record that he established and maintained contact 
with his creditors,8 his financial problem is resolved and his finances are under control.      
                                            
6 Applicant has the burden of proving the applicability of any mitigating conditions, and the burden 
to disprove a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
7 Applicant’s income is below the federal poverty level of $16,240 for a family of two and $24,600 
for a family of four, and he is eligible for various federal poverty programs, including Medicaid and 
Medicare (age 65). See Health and Human Services website, https://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty-guidelines. 
  
8 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable. Applicant used bankruptcy, a lawful method, to 
resolve his two delinquent SOR debts. He admitted responsibility for and took 
reasonable and responsible actions to resolve his debts, establishing some good faith.  
AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. He did not provide documentation establishing a 
reasonable dispute for any of his SOR debts.    
 
In sum, Applicant’s SOR alleges two delinquent debts totaling $23,316. In 
October 2015, his nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the 
Bankruptcy Code. Based on Applicant’s promise to pay his debts and his track record of 
paying his debts, future new delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on [Applicant’s] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there 
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” His 
payments of his non-SOR debts showed good faith. I am confident that Applicant will 
conscientiously endeavor to maintain his financial responsibility. His efforts are sufficient 
to mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 65-year-old supply lead and facility manager, and he has worked 
for various DOD contractor for more than 20 years mostly overseas. From 1969 to 
1989, he served in the Marine Corps for 10 years. He served in the Army from 1991 to 
1992. He served in Vietnam (two tours) and Southwest Asia (Desert Storm) when he 
                                                                                                                                            
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
was in the Marine Corps. As a contractor, he was deployed to Kuwait (12 years), Qatar 
(4 years), Iraq (3 years), and Afghanistan (6 years). He has been unemployed from May 
2014 to present. He lost his employment when his contract ended. There is no evidence 
that he violated security rules or used illegal drugs.   
 
In October 2015, Applicant’s two delinquent SOR debts totaled $23,316, and his 
nonpriority unsecured debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. 
There is no evidence of post-bankruptcy delinquent debts, and he assures he intends to 
pay his debts. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person 
analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
payment as indicated in his credit reports, OMP PSI, SOR response, and FORM 
response. He understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his financial 
responsibility. He took reasonable actions under his particular financial circumstances to 
address his delinquent debts. I am confident he will continue to maintain his financial 
responsibility.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
