 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-03220 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On October 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a January 4, 2016, 
response to the SOR, Applicant denied all allegations and requested a determination 
based on the written record. On April 20, 2016, the Government issued a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) with nine attachments (“Items”). Applicant did not respond to the FORM 
within the time allotted. I was assigned the case on March 23, 2017. Based on my review 
of the case file, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old company controller working for a defense contractor. He 
has worked for the same employer since 2007. In his present capacity, he has direct 
responsibility over administering all of the company’s financial obligations. Annual 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
budgets range from $140M to $160M. He has been associated with another corporation 
that is affiliated with his current employer for 45 years. Married, he is the father of three 
grown children and one minor child. There is no documentation showing Applicant has 
received financial counseling. This case involves five delinquent debts. Applicant 
provided scant facts regarding his finances, in general, and these debts, specifically. 
 
In 2007, Applicant was transferred from a project in one state to a different project 
in another state. Once transferred, he bought a new home for $510,000 before selling his 
previous property, which had been valued at $690,000. This occurred while a national 
real estate housing slump adversely affected home prices and slowed the sales of homes. 
Managing two mortgages simultaneously became financially onerous. His original house 
took about 18 months to sell. When it finally sold, it was sold for $410,000. In the interim, 
he fell behind on the mortgages, credit card payments, and other financial obligations. 
While none of these issues hurt his ability to make business decisions, Applicant was 
personally left financially distressed.  
 
At issue are five delinquent debts, amounting to about $20,400. They are reflected 
in SOR allegations 1.a-1.e. Regarding the debts at 1.a and 1.b for $1,803 and $476, 
Applicant wrote that he is not familiar with the debts. (SOR Response) He made a similar 
comment regarding the debts cited at 1.d and 1.e, for $236 and $609, respectively. (SOR 
Response) 
 
The largest debt, reflected at 1.c, pertains to a home equity loan that was written 
off with a balance of $17,283. The account was initially opened in 2007. Regarding this 
debt, Applicant only wrote: “This debt was written off when I sold my [first] house in 2008.” 
(SOR Response) No subsequent information was offered. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
 
 
 
 
3 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this guideline 
is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has over 
$20,000 in outstanding delinquent debts. This is sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
 
 
4 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           In the late 2000s, Applicant bought a second home before selling his first 
residence. Consequently, he balanced two mortgages simultaneously as the sale of the 
first house lagged due to a poor real estate market. Because Applicant failed to fully 
elaborate on his efforts to, for example, synchronize his real estate transactions or explain 
what efforts might have been made to hasten the sale of the first home, there is insufficient 
information to conclude that he behaved responsibly at the time. No research was 
apparently made regarding the other debts at issue, so Applicant did not offer any 
background details regarding the other accounts. Therefore, while the real estate market 
downturn was beyond his control, AG ¶ 20(b) only applies in part. 
 
             There is no documentary evidence Applicant has received financial counseling 
or formally disputed any of the debts at issue. There is no documentary evidence showing 
Applicant has initiated any action of the delinquent debts at issue. Consequently, none of 
the other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c) sets forth the need to 
utilize a whole-person evaluation.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under the 
guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a 66-year-old company 
controller who has worked for the same employer since 2007. He is married and has four 
children, including one minor. There is no question as to his loyalty, support of his 
industry, or his professional work ethic.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Regarding his delinquent debts, Applicant only provided information about the 
home finance loan at issue. He alludes to difficulty selling his former home around 2008 
during a sour real estate market. He noted that the account was written off. He failed, 
however, to offer any further insight about the delinquent debt, or relay any efforts he has 
exerted to address either the debt or its continued inclusion on his credit report. 
 
Applicant’s writing that he did not recognize the other delinquent debts at issue 
does not reflect any effort to investigate, validate, or dispute those debts or their inclusion 
in his credit report. This process does not require an applicant to satisfy all of his 
delinquent debts. It does expect an applicant to provide documented evidence of a plan 
or attempts to address such debt. Here, insufficient evidence regarding these delinquent 
debts was offered. Based on the scant information provided, I find Applicant failed to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
