 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08904 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Canada. In 2006, he moved 
from the United States to Canada; requested recognition as a Canadian citizen; and 
obtained a Canadian security clearance to enable him to work and have access to 
classified Canadian information. He met with high-level Canadian defense officials. He 
previously held a Department of Defense (DOD) top secret security clearance with 
access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI), and he met with high-level DOD 
officials. Foreign preference security concerns relating to his acquisition and use of a 
Canadian security clearance are not mitigated. Access to classified information is 
denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 24, 2014. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on April 1, 2016, issued a statement of reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline C (foreign preference).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 15, 2016, and requested a hearing.  
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2016. On June 24, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing setting the hearing 
for July 27, 2016. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered one exhibit (GE 1); Applicant offered 
one exhibit with 12 tabs (AE 1, Tabs A through K); and all exhibits were admitted 
without objection, except Department Counsel objected to AE 1, Tab B because it was 
not signed and dated and also due to lack of relevance. I overruled Department 
Counsel’s objection because the document was some evidence that Applicant’s 
Canadian security clearance was no longer in effect, and his objections go to weight 
and not admissibility. Applicant explained the relevance of the document during his 
presentation. (Tr. 12-17)  
 
Three exhibits admitted at his hearing were remarked from AE 1, Tabs J, K, and 
L to AE 1, Tabs V, W, and X to conform with the markings Applicant had placed on the 
post-hearing exhibits. On August 4, 2016, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the 
hearing. Applicant provided 12 post-hearing exhibits, which were admitted without 
objection. (AE 1, Tabs J-U) The record closed on August 26, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. His SOR and hearing admissions 
are incorporated into my findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact:   
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a DOD contractor who seeks international 
business on behalf of his employer. Since July 2014, he has been employed in Kuwait.  
 
Applicant was born and educated in the United States. In 1977, he received a 
bachelor’s degree, and in 1980, he received two master’s degrees in aeronautical 
science and in business administration in aviation, both with distinction. He has never 
married, and he does not have any children. He has lived 51 years in the United States, 
7 years in Canada, and 2 years in Kuwait. Additional information about his employment 
and qualifications are detailed in his resume, biography, and an article about his career. 
(Tr. 29-30; AE 1, Tabs, A, G, I, T)  
 
Applicant’s father was a commander in the American Legion. He has been a 
member of the Sons of the American Legion for 17 years. He is also a member of the 
Association of the U.S. Army. He votes in U.S. elections, and he did not vote in 
Canadian elections. He has a leadership role in an organization similar to the U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce.  
 
From 1981 to 1996, Applicant was employed in the aviation industry in the United 
States as a scientist, engineer, and engineering test pilot, and then he transitioned into 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
business development or sales. From 1996 to 2004, he was employed in the financial 
and insurance industry in the United States. Applicant held a U.S. security clearance 
from 1983 to 1993, first at the secret level and later through the top-secret SCI level. He 
has held a U.S. security clearance for about 11 or 12 years.  
 
Applicant is particularly proud of his contributions to the development of a U.S. 
Air Force bomber, fighter, and cargo plane and the NASA space shuttle during his 
employment by a major U.S. aviation contractor. He has thousands of hours in 
simulators and flight hours on various government aircraft. He said he made 
presentations or briefings in the Pentagon to Service Secretaries and the Secretary of 
Defense and in the Congress about sensitive DOD matters.  
 
In 2006, Applicant moved to Canada because he wanted to return to the aviation 
business, and he was unable to find employment in the United States. From 2006 to 
2009, Applicant lived and worked in Canada for a computer company in business 
development. He was working in Canada using a work permit. He needed a Canadian 
security clearance for his Canadian employment, but the Canadian Government did not 
recognize him as a Canadian citizen. His mother was born in Canada, and his father 
was born in the United States. Applicant sent his mother’s birth certificate to Canadian 
Government officials with a request for information on the status of his Canadian 
citizenship. He received proof of his Canadian citizenship retroactive to his date of birth. 
(Tr. 23-24, 47, 62; AE 1, Tabs N, O, P)  
 
In 2007, Applicant obtained a Canadian security clearance to enable him to have 
access to and to sell high-technology product and services. He worked with key 
Canadian national security agencies as well as some foreign entities using his 
Canadian security clearance. He had professional contact with the highest levels of the 
Canadian Defense Staff. (Tr. 56-57, 74-75; GE 1) He did not believe there was any 
overlap between the information he received under his U.S. security clearance and SCI 
access and the information he received under his Canadian security clearance. When 
he left employment with Company M (the company sponsoring his Canadian security 
clearance), his Canadian Security clearance ended. The FSO for Company M provided 
some documentation to Applicant indicating his Canadian security clearance was 
terminated.  
 
In 2008 or 2009, Applicant and his girlfriend purchased a condominium in 
Canada for $225,000. His girlfriend put $125,000 down to purchase the condominium. 
Applicant did not pay anything as a down payment. He owns the condominium with his 
girlfriend, and he values it at about $310,000. He does not have any other property in 
Canada. His girlfriend currently lives in Canada. On June 27, 2014, he gave a power of 
attorney to his girlfriend so that their condominium property in Canada could be sold.  
 
In 2006, he opened a bank account in Canada. At his hearing, he testified that he 
planned to close it when his property in Canada was sold. At the time of his hearing, he 
had about $9,000 in his Canadian bank account. On August 9, 2016, he closed his 
Canadian bank account. (AE 1, Tab J)  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
From 2009 to 2012, Applicant worked for another Canadian company in Canada 
in international business development. He was unemployed from April to November 
2012. From November 2012 to July 2014, he was employed in Canada by a technology 
company in international business development. In October 2013, Applicant received a 
Canadian passport. He used his Canadian passport several times for international 
travel, including to the United States. (Tr. 54-55; AE 1, Tab U) 
 
Applicant received employment at a U.S. company in June 2014. In July 2014, 
he turned in his Canadian passport to his facility security officer (FSO) and offered to 
renounce his Canadian citizenship. He was completing his SCA, and he realized he 
needed to turn-in his passport to his FSO to avoid a security concern. On August 12, 
2016, his FSO received permission from Applicant to destroy his Canadian passport, 
and his FSO destroyed his Canadian passport. The only action he took to renounce his 
Canadian citizenship was notify the FSO about his intention to renounce his Canadian 
citizenship.2 He believed stating an intent to renounce his Canadian citizenship would 
suffice. (Tr. 72-75)  
 
 Two distinguished U.S. business leaders and an ambassador lauded Applicant’s 
diligence and patriotism. He is enthusiastic, knowledgeable, professional, reliable, 
responsible, ethical, and honest. Their statements support reinstatement of his security 
clearance. (Tr. 29-30; AE 1, Tab H)   
  
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
                                            
2 The forms to renounce Canadian citizenship are available over the Internet. Renunciation is not 
complicated. A $100 fee must be paid. See Government of Canada website, http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/ 
citizenship/renounce-how.asp. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
   
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in Applicant’s case:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship.  
 
Applicant was born in the United States and held U.S. citizenship from birth. SOR 
¶ 1.a alleges and the record establishes Applicant held a Canadian security clearance 
that enabled him to have access to classified Canadian defense information. He 
obtained the Canadian security clearance after living in the United States for 51 years. 
His Canadian security clearance facilitated his receipt of Canadian employment and 
Canadian financial benefits. AG ¶ 10(a)(3) and 10(a)(5) apply.   
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions are sufficient to outweigh Applicant’s access to 
Canadian classified information and related employment in a Canadian defense industry 
for seven years.  
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-05869 at 5 (App. Bd. July 24, 2009), the Appeal Board 
addressed a case where an applicant left the United States, moved to Australia, served 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
in the Australian military, held an Australian security clearance, had children living in 
Australia, received Australian education benefits, voted in Australian elections, is 
entitled to a lump-sum Australian military pension, and used an Australian passport. The 
Appeal Board reversed the grant of a security clearance even though that applicant 
moved to the United States, renounced his Australian citizenship, divorced his 
Australian spouse, and surrendered his Australian passport.  
 
While the applicant in ISCR Case No. 08-05869 had closer connections to 
Australia than Applicant has to Canada, it is noteworthy that the Appeal Board found AG 
¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) were insufficient to mitigate foreign preference security concerns. 
Here, Applicant’s destruction of his passport, termination of his Canadian security 
clearance, closure of his Canadian bank account, and expression of an intent to 
renounce his Canadian citizenship are similarly insufficient. Renunciation of Canadian 
citizenship is not required under AG ¶ 11(e); however, renunciation of Canadian 
citizenship is not difficult. Applicant did not explain why he had taken no action to 
effectuate his intention to renounce his Canadian citizenship. Foreign preference 
security concerns are not mitigated. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline C in my whole-
person analysis, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a DOD contractor who seeks international 
business on behalf of his employer. Applicant was born and educated in the United 
States. He has lived 51 years in the United States, 7 years in Canada, and 2 years in 
Kuwait. He lived in Canada from 2006 to June 2014. 
 
From 1981 to 1996, Applicant was employed in the aviation industry in the United 
States as a scientist, engineer, and engineering test pilot. He is particularly proud of his 
contributions to the development of a U.S. Air Force bomber, fighter, and cargo plane 
and the NASA space shuttle during his employment by a major U.S. aviation contractor. 
He made presentations or briefings in the Pentagon to Service Secretaries and the 
Secretary of Defense and in the Congress about sensitive DOD matters. Applicant held 
a U.S. security clearance from 1983 to 1993, first at the secret level and later through 
the top-secret SCI level. There is no evidence of security violations. Two distinguished 
U.S. business leaders and an ambassador lauded Applicant’s diligence, patriotism, 
enthusiasm, knowledge, professionalism, reliability, responsibility, ethics, and honesty. 
Their statements support reinstatement of his security clearance.   
 
The foreign preference security concerns are more substantial. In 2006, 
Applicant moved from the United States to Canada. He sought out and obtained 
recognition as a Canadian citizen. He then obtained a Canadian security clearance to 
enable him to work and have access to classified Canadian information. He met with 
high-level Canadian defense officials.  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
The SOR did not allege that Applicant requested recognition as a Canadian 
citizen (to be eligible for a Canadian security clearance) or that his associations with 
Canadian defense officials raised a security concern. Thus, I will not consider that 
information except under the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, Applicant received a 
Canadian security clearance and for seven years he worked in and was involved with 
Canadian Defense industries in development or sales. This entails contacts with 
colleagues, employees, supervisors, competitors, and customers. In ISCR Case No. 14-
03112 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) the Appeal Board explained how such information 
should be considered:  
 
An applicant’s ties, either directly or through a family member, to persons 
of high rank in a foreign military (such as his in-law), are of concern 
because it is foreseeable that through such an association the applicant 
could come to the attention of those interested in acquiring U.S.-protected 
information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-12623 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 2, 
2015) . . . . In addition, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s having 
served in a foreign military and having held a foreign security clearance 
pose a danger of a conflict of interest is supportable under the facts of this 
case. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-00824 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 6, 2012) 
(Prior involvement with a foreign defense establishment or prior access to 
sensitive foreign military projects raises “significant questions that require 
scrutiny in evaluating an applicant’s security eligibility.”) (internal citation 
omitted; emphasis added)  
 
Considering the facts and circumstances of this case in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant evidence is insufficient to mitigate the foreign preference 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
