 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01420 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 5, 2016, and she elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 27, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on June 1, 2016. She was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns.  She did not 
provide any response. The case was assigned to me on February 17, 2017.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-8. FORM Item 6 is 
an unauthenticated summary of a December 3, 2012 interview with a government 
background investigator. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that she 
could object to FORM Item 6 and it would not be admitted, or that she could make 
corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that her failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered by 
me. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM, and she raised no objections.1 Therefore, 
I admitted FORM Items 5-8 into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 5-8, without 
objection.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges three student loan accounts, seven medical accounts, three 
unpaid judgments, and several other delinquent accounts. In her response to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted all of the alleged debts, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.j., 1.o., 1.r., 1.s., and 
1.t. She further claimed that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.h., and 1.r. were paid 
and that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.t. was “cleared” through her husband’s bankruptcy. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. After graduating high school in June 2001, she 
intermittently attended community college and a vocational school between August 
2001 and May 2011. After several periods of unemployment, she has been gainfully 
employed full time since November 2009. Since August 2012, she has been employed 
full time by a DOD contractor.3 
 
 Applicant was married in December 2007. She has two children, ages 13 and 16. 
In her response to the SOR, she referenced an “estranged husband;” however, she 
provided no further details about the circumstances or timing of their estrangement.4 
 
 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent. The Judge’s exclusion of the Report of Interview, containing 
mitigating evidence, was found to be error following applicant’s appeal.).  
 
2 FORM Items 1-4 consist of the SOR, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and related administrative 
materials. These documents are pleadings and are included in the record. 
 
3 GE 5. 
 
4 GE 4; GE 5. 
 
3 
 
 The 20 alleged debts are established in Applicant’s September 2012 and 
January 2015 credit reports, as delineated below: 
 
SOR ¶  Creditor Balance Date of Delinquency Evidence 
1.a. Student loan $3,548 2/2012 GE 8 
1.b. Student loan $1,442 2/2012 GE 8 
1.c. Student loan $942 3/2012 GE 8 
1.d. Utility $715 8/2010 GE 7; GE 8 
1.e. Utility $588 8/2012 GE 8 
1.f. Cable or Utility $502 9/2014 GE 8 
1.g. Credit Card $443 11/2009 GE 7; GE 8 
1.h. Utility $347 9/2013 GE 8 
1.i. Medical $316 3/2008 GE 8 
1.j. Cable or Utility $255 8/2013 GE 8 
1.k. Medical $189 7/2009 GE 7; GE 8 
1.l. Medical $174 12/2011 GE 7; GE 8 
1.m. Medical $141 2/2012 GE 8 
1.n. Medical $115 7/2012 GE 8 
1.o. Cable or Utility $103 8/2013 GE 8 
1.p. Medical $100 2/2012 GE 7; GE 8 
1.q. Medical $25 6/2013 GE 8 
1.r. Judgment $660 9/2010 GE 7; GE 8 
1.s. Judgment $266 8/2011 GE 7 
1.t. Judgment $12,670 5/2006 GE 7 
  
 During her December 2012 security interview, Applicant attributed her financial 
delinquencies to her husband’s two recent employment layoffs and her poor 
recordkeeping. She expressed an intent to contact these creditors and resolve her 
delinquent debts. In her response to the SOR, she claimed to have made payments on 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.h., and 1.r.; however, she provided no 
corroborating evidence. She further claimed that the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t. was 
resolved through her husband’s bankruptcy; however, she provided no documentation.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
5 GE 5; GE 6. 
 
4 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
 
5 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The 20 alleged debts, which became delinquent between 2006 and 2014, total 
approximately $23,543. Accordingly, the evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The Government established a case for disqualification, thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.6 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government.7 Conditions that could mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing, and there is no evidence that she has 
taken any steps to resolve or repay the 20 alleged debts. As a result, doubts remain as 
to her good judgment and financial responsibility. Thus, AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond her control and that (2) Applicant 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
6 
 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.8 Applicant has been gainfully employed 
since November 2009; however, she had prior periods of unemployment and her 
husband had unspecified periods of unemployment. Although she referred to her 
husband as “estranged,” she has provided no further information as to the timing and 
circumstances of her marital separation. Nonetheless, because the periods of 
unemployment may have hindered Applicant’s ability to address her delinquent debts, 
they may constitute circumstances beyond one’s control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Here, Applicant provided no evidence of any payments, a plan to 
resolve her delinquent debts, or of any steps taken in furtherance of a debt resolution 
plan. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
There is no record evidence of credit counseling or record a monthly budget to 
conclude that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under 
control. Rather, the absence of evidence of payments or other steps to resolve the 
alleged delinquent debts undercuts such a conclusion.  Therefore, AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply. 
 
Although she claimed to have paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 
1.h., and 1.r., Applicant provided no documentation of any payments made or steps 
taken to resolve any of her delinquent debts. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.   
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j., 
1.o., 1.r., 1.s., and 1.t. As to SOR ¶¶ 1.j. and 1.o., she indicated that she needed to 
conduct further research; however, she never substantiated her dispute. Likewise, she 
provided no documentation to substantiate legitimate disputes as to SOR ¶¶ 1.r. and 
1.s. Applicant’s claim that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.t. was resolved through her estranged 
husband’s bankruptcy is without merit. She provided no documentation to show that this 
judgment was included in her husband’s bankruptcy petition. More importantly, the 
discharge of her husband’s bankruptcy debts does not necessarily discharge 
Applicant’s liability on the judgment. Applicant has not provided documentary evidence 
to demonstrate that she is not liable for the alleged debts. Thus, AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. Absent evidence of debt repayment and financial responsibility, I find that 
financial considerations concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
  
Applicant was provided an opportunity in her SOR response and in response to 
the Government’s FORM to show what steps she has taken to resolve these 
delinquencies, and to provide documentation. She presented limited information about 
the circumstances that have hindered her ability to address her debts given her full-time 
employment since November 2009. She has presented no evidence to show steps 
taken to repay or resolve her debts or that she can maintain her current monthly 
financial obligations. As a result, the totality of the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.t.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
