 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-08274 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esquire 
       For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On July 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
In a response notarized on August 18, 2016, Applicant admitted 19 of 23 
allegations raised under Guideline F and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the 
case on January 10, 2017. The matter was scheduled on January 12, 2017, for a 
February 2, 2017, hearing. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered six documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-6. Applicant offered testimony. The record was held open through 
 
 
 
 
2 
February 24, 2017, in the event the parties wished to submit additional material. The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on February 8, 2017. On February 24, 2017, the 
Government forwarded, without objection, a seven-page narrative containing 
supplemental materials. The item was accepted as Ex. A, and the record was closed.. 
After review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old small business owner who has owned his present 
business since 2012. He first obtained a security clearance when serving in the United 
States Marine Corps, from which he was honorably discharged after serving on both 
active and reserve duty from 1977 through 2013. During that time, he served on three 
combat tours and disaster relief operations. He has earned both a bachelor’s degree 
and a master’s degree.  
 
Applicant has been married three times, twice ending in divorce. He has four 
children, ranging in age from 32 to 17 years of age. Two of them are serving in the 
United States military and a fourth is preparing to follow their lead. Of the 23 financial 
concerns at issue, debts totaling approximately $100,000, Applicant denies four of the 
debts as either paid or as having been included in a past bankruptcy action. (Tr. 8) 
 
Before the events of 9/11 in 2001, Applicant was self-employed, financially 
stable, and owned his own home. His only past financial issues were resolved in 2002, 
after he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. By the end of September 2001, 
however, he was recalled to military service and deployed to the Middle East. During 
that time period, without his guidance, his business failed. Much of his equipment was 
leased or otherwise liquidated. He filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in about June 2002 
and his debts were discharged in April 2003. 
 
In 2007, Applicant purchased a home at the height of a local real estate bubble. 
In 2010, he and a wife prepared to divorce. By that time, the home had depreciated 
considerably, causing a loss of approximately $150,000 on the property. During the 
divorce, he had to buy out her share of the home and sacrifice half of his retirement 
fund, savings, and other assets. (Tr. 17) His soon-to-be ex-wife moved out, leaving two 
of the children at home with Applicant to raise. Under these circumstances, he had  
considerable debt. 
 
From 2010 to 2011, Applicant was getting off active duty and building his 
company back. Because he was not yet 60 years of age, he was not yet eligible for full 
military retirement. Meanwhile, he won a significant contract in late 2011 and one in at 
the beginning of 2013. He had put all his remaining savings into a different business. At 
the end of 2013, the Government was unable to reach a budget causing a shut down. 
One of the results was the cancellation of numerous contracts, including those held by 
Applicant’s company. He also lost his medical insurance. Assessing his financial 
situation he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in January 2013. His action was dismissed later 
 
 
 
 
3 
that month for failure to include required documents, an action he initiated because he 
did not feel this was the right way to address his finances. (Tr. 21)   
 
In August 2014, Applicant’s son began experiencing serious health issues. 
Multiple emergency room visits, therapy, and time at a mental health facility added to 
Applicant’s acquisition of debt. Because Applicant’s son had special needs and was 
unable to go to school, Applicant cared for his child 24 hours a day and home-schooled 
him through January 2015. All of these factors combined to deplete Applicant’s financial 
reserves and led him to borrow money.  
 
Toward the end of 2014, Applicant had caught up on past arrearages related to 
child support. His ex-wife took him to court and applied for an increase in payments 
based on “potential,” not actual income. (Ex. A at 3) This increased his child support 
monthly payments to $831 at a time when he was at home with his son and could not 
afford the increased amount. At present, he is almost caught up on arrearages and has 
been regularly meeting the new amount for nearly a year and a half. (Ex. A at 3) 
 
In June 2016, Applicant relocated to care for his aging parents. Meanwhile, he 
has teamed with a major computer technology corporation, where he has redeveloped 
his company’s software to run on its platform. That entity has recently started selling 
Applicant’s company’s product. His business has multiple proposals pending with the 
private sector and local governments. It recently won two Federal government contracts 
it is now executing, and is currently supporting the Federal government and DOD 
through five contracts. Overall, the business is reemerging on a highly positive note.  
 
Meanwhile, Applicant has economized with considerable diligence. He has only 
maintained used cars since 2011. He is living within his means. He has put his student 
loans into rehabilitation. (Ex. A at 5) He is current on his regular, monthly obligations. 
(Ex. A at 6) With his small business thriving and expanding, he hopes its growth will 
also increase his own personal finances, as well.  
 
At issue in the SOR are 21 delinquent debts (1.c-1.w). The delinquent debts 
noted at 1.c-1.i and 1.v, ($572, $572, $2,632, $2,066, $781, $214, $18,225, and $204), 
are related to Applicant’s son’s medical care between 2013 and 2014. (Tr. 29, 58) 
Applicant has made some payments on all these debts, except for the one cited at 1.f 
which he is disputing, but he did not provide documentary evidence of those payments 
or that dispute. (Tr. 29-34)  
 
The debts cited at 1.j through 1.n are related to student loans amounting to 
slightly over $55,600. Those debts were shown to be in rehabilitation with a current 
combined balance of $56,314. (Ex. A at 5; Tr. 37-39) Under the rehabilitation plan, the 
lender will accept monthly payments of a minimum of $5. 
 
With regard to the debt reflected at 1.o concerning a $4,795 child support 
arrearage, Applicant stated he has been paying his monthly child support payment of 
$831, plus an extra $331 a month to address the arrearage. Although he provided 
 
 
 
 
4 
documentary evidence of timely payments of his monthly $831 obligation, there is no 
similar documentation reflecting the supplemental $331 payments. (Tr. 43-45) 
 
The debt at 1.p for $45,324 involves a mortgage account on a house he lost to 
foreclosure in 2007. Applicant wrote that it had been included in his last bankruptcy 
petition, but he did not provide documentation reflecting that assertion. (Ex. A at 6) 
Applicant admitted he has not addressed the delinquent debt at 1.q for $1,284 that was 
charged off. (Tr. 52) 
 
 Applicant said he paid debt at 1.r for $367 owed to a telecommunications entity 
and provided a current statement from that company showing a zero balance forward. 
However, the credit report citing this debt reflects a different account number and shows 
that the account was closed. Therefore, there is insufficient proof to find this has been 
paid. (Ex. 3 at 2; Tr. 53-54) 
 
The debt at 1.s is for $15,000, related to Applicant’s legal fees from his 2010 
divorce. He expected the final bill to be about $6,000, but it ended up considerably 
larger. He testified that he has made some payments, amounting to about $1,000, but 
he provided no documentary evidence reflecting such efforts. (Tr. 55) He similarly failed 
to provide documentary evidence of payments on the $2,548 balance for a home 
owner’s association balance noted at 1.t, a telecommunications balance of $367 cited at 
1.u, or a $55 parking ticket reflected at 1.w. 
 
At present, Applicant runs his business with some partners who take no salary. 
His salary payments vary in timing due to the timing of the company’s various contracts. 
A recent contract brought him a payment of about $9,000. (Tr. 62-63) At present he has 
about $3,000 in his checking account and under $1,000 in his savings account. (Tr. 62) 
His monthly mortgage payment is $470, utilities run about $350 a month, $432 per 
month for telecommunications, his vehicles are paid off, and no other large or notable 
monthly expenses. (Tr. 66) Applicant last received a tax refund of about $1,500. His 
income last year was about $40,000 and his wife has an annual salary of about 
$15,000. (Tr. 67)  Applicant has not received financial counseling. (Tr. 69) His wife 
manages the household bills and utilizes a budget. (Tr. 69) Applicant does not squander 
money. (Tr. 71) He presently lives within his means while building his company. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
 
 
 
5 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts amounting to about $151,000. This is sufficient to invoke 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
  
 
 
 
 
6 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
Applicant faced multiple dilemmas impacting his finances. His recalls to active 
military service constructively curtailed his small business and his divorce adversely 
impacted both his savings and his income between 2010 and 2012. To address 
mounting debt, Applicant initiated a Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing in January 2013. When 
he let the action be dismissed, however, Applicant proceeded without first identifying or 
implementing an alternative methodology for addressing his debts. Moreover, from 
August 2014 through January 2015, Applicant homeschooled and provided around-the-
clock care for his son after the child was hospitalized and spent time in a mental health 
facility. With his son, he borrowed what was needed to provide care for the child before 
he exhausted his financial reserves before borrowing what was needed to return his son 
to health. The sources of this borrowing were not identified. However, given that these 
factors were clearly outside of Applicant’s control the circumstances, I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies in part.   
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling, although his wife is apparently 
managing their current budget efficiently. Applicant provided documentary evidence 
reflecting that his student loans have been put into rehabilitation, where the lender will 
accept monthly payments of a minimum of $5. However de minimis those payments on 
a debt balance of over $50,000 may be, it does indicate an effort. While this may raise 
AG ¶ 20(d) to the limited extent it indicates a good-faith effort to some of the debts at 
issue, Applicant’s lack of documentary substantiation regarding any of the other 
accounts undermines application of AG ¶ 20(c). Finally, as no documentary evidence 
 
 
 
 
7 
was offered showing any formal disputes have been initiated, AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
noted in the factual findings were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a highly credible 57-year-old small business owner who served this 
country in the United States military honorably from 1977 to 2013, both in an active and 
reserve capacity. Indeed, his business was adversely affected by his return to service 
after the tragedy of 9/11. He lost a considerable amount of money in the housing 
market, then half of his savings, retirement account balance, and other assets in a 2010 
divorce. He was subjected to an increased monthly child support payment at a time 
when he was caring for an ill child 24 hours a day, then acquired an arrearage as a 
consequence. His constant care of his son during a six-month period of mental health 
issues, surgery, and confinement, led to the depletion of Applicant’s remaining financial 
reserves. Throughout it all, he has tried to move on and focus on his business, which is 
now poised for overdue success. 
 
There is no doubt Applicant has sacrificed for his country and his family. Based 
on his testimony and post-hearing submission, he has made significant progress on the 
delinquent debts at issue. However, Applicant failed to provide corroborative 
documentation supporting his assertions of action. This process expects that an 
applicant employ a reasonable strategy or plan to address one’s delinquent debts. It 
then requires documentary evidence that such a plan has been successfully 
implemented.  
 
Applicant’s plan, as described, reflects an approach of addressing one debt at a 
time in the best manner appropriate. This was shown by what he has thus far done with 
his student loans. Unfortunately, other efforts were not documented. While it appears he 
is currently living within his means, there is insufficient documentary evidence of 
progress on the substantial sums at issue to conclude financial considerations security 
concerns have been mitigated.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.n:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.o-1.w:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
