 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08259 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 13, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On May 13, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
who received it on May 18, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
object to the Government’s evidence. The Government’s documents identified as Items 
1 through 5 are admitted into evidence. Other than his Answer, identified also as Item 1, 
Applicant failed to submit any additional documentation. The case was assigned to me 
on March 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, numbered as ¶¶ 1.a to 1.y. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He obtained his high-school diploma in 1994. He 
earned his real-estate license in August 2004 through an online real-estate class. He 
was previously married from July 2004 through June 2010, and has two children ages 
13 and 11. He worked as a self-employed realtor from August 2004 to September 2011, 
and was unemployed from September 2011 to May 2012. He began his current job with 
a federal contractor in May 2012.  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2009 through 2013 as required, three federal tax liens totaling 
about $52,276, and 20 consumer and medical debts totaling about $84,560. Applicant 
completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in February 2015 and 
was interviewed by an authorized DOD investigator in August 2015.1 In his SF 86 and 
during his interview, Applicant disclosed his failure to file his federal and state income 
tax returns for tax years 2009 through 2013.2 He indicated that he planned to file all of 
his relevant tax returns by February 2016. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant noted 
that he is currently working on filing his back tax returns.3  
 
Credit reports from March 2015, January 2016, and May 2016 verify the debts 
that are alleged in the SOR, to include Applicant’s three federal tax liens.4 Applicant 
acknowledged that he still owes federal taxes, indicated an intent to set up a payment 
plan to resolve his outstanding federal tax debt once he filed his returns, and stated that 
he is currently working on his credit.5 Regarding the remaining debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d to 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3. 
 
2 Applicant also disclosed his failure to pay his federal and state income taxes for tax years 2009, and 
2011 to 2013. He indicated that he paid his state tax debt through a wage garnishment placed on him by 
his resident state. Items 2, 3.  
 
3 Item 1. 
 
4 Items 4, 5.  
 
5 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
3 
 
 
1.w, Applicant indicated that he planned to file bankruptcy by February 2016 and that he 
was working on his credit.6  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his divorce in 2010, the consequent 
expense of child custody hearings and his child support obligation, the downturn in the 
real-estate market in the same year, his period of unemployment, and his medical 
conditions. He failed to timely file his relevant federal and state income tax returns 
because he did not understand the forms, and he did not have the income to pay 
someone to file them on his behalf. He has not sought the assistance of a credit 
counselor.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 3. 
 
7 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.8 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
 
Applicant has failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2009 through 2013 as required, and he has numerous delinquent debts to include three 
federal tax liens. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has yet to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2009 through 2013. He also has three federal tax liens and a number of other debts that 
are unresolved. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. His failure to timely file his relevant tax returns and address his 
delinquent debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Circumstances beyond his control contributed to Applicant’s financial problems. 
For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide evidence that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not filed his relevant federal and 
state income tax returns nor has he set up a payment plan to resolve his outstanding 
federal tax liens, despite his indication that he planned to do so by February 2016. He 
has not provided evidence of bankruptcy or other actions he may have taken to resolve 
his debts. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant has not sought financial counseling. Applicant’s financial problems are 
not under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant has not provided evidence of 
 
6 
 
 
any efforts he may have taken to repay or otherwise resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does 
not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since 2012. Circumstances beyond 
his control contributed to his financial problems. He has failed to file his federal and 
state income tax returns from 2009 through 2013 as required, and he has a history of 
financial delinquencies that remain unresolved. His finances remain a security concern. 
He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.y:  Against Applicant 
   
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
