 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08745 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 28, 2016, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 5, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 13, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 28, 2017. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until March 14, 
2017, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. None were received and the 
record closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He graduated from high school in 1997, completed 
vocational education courses, and earned his civilian pilot’s license in 1998. He served 
in the military from 1997 until 1998 when he was honorably discharged due to medical 
reasons. He married in 2000 and divorced in 2003. He remarried in 2004 and has 
children ages 13 and 9. Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since 2014. His 
wife is employed by the county.1  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to a six-month period of 
unemployment beginning in March 2012. He took a lower-paying job and his wife was 
attending school and not working at the time. Applicant was made aware of the 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR during his December 2014 background 
interview and that they were a security concern. He acknowledged each debt, indicated 
he disputed each debt, and did not intend to pay any of the debts. He explained that the 
debts became delinquent when his income was reduced. Credit reports from October 
2014, December 2015, and July 2016, support the validity of the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR.2 
 
 In October 2016, several months after receiving the SOR, Applicant secured the 
services of a financial company to help him rebuild his credit. Its letter stated that it had 
“started the process of repairing and fixing his credit,” but it had not yet completed all of 
the necessary work on his file. It hoped to increase Applicant’s credit score and put him 
in a better financial position. Applicant testified that he did not take any action on his 
delinquent debts until he hired the financial company after receiving the SOR. He and 
his wife want to purchase a home and this company will deal with his creditors and 
secure financing for a mortgage. Applicant admitted the debts in the SOR were 
approximately four years old and he had not taken any action to resolve them until he 
hired the financial repair company. He testified he received financial counseling from the 
company.3  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 16-21; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 21-23; GE 2-5. 
 
3 Tr. 33-36, 45; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($398) for a delinquent 
cable bill, which he disputed, and it was removed from his credit report. He did not 
provide the credit report to show that the debt is resolved. He stated that he paid the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.d (medical $182), but did not provide supporting documents.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($9,199) is the deficiency amount for a repossessed 
vehicle. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,003) is a credit card debt that was defaulted on in 
2012 or 2013. It is not paid or resolved. Applicant indicated this debt is a duplicate of 
SOR ¶ 1.g. A July 2016 credit report supports that it is a duplicate debt and this 
allegation is resolved in his favor. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($8,734) is a car repossession 
deficiency debt that is unpaid and unresolved. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($666) is a credit 
card debt. Applicant has not contracted the creditor, and the debt is unpaid and 
unresolved.4  
 
Applicant earns approximately $75,000. His wife earns approximately $14,000. 
He purchased a new car in 2015 and financed it for $23,000. He purchased a 2007 
used car about two years ago and financed it for $20,000. He owns a motorcycle, 
purchased in 2009 and owes about $13,000 on it. He has approximately $600 in the 
bank. He has credit cards that he makes more than the minimum payments on that 
have balances totaling about $4,000. His wife has student loans, but he does not know 
the amount of them or their status. He pays between $700 and $800 a month for his 
children to participate in five different sports programs. He believes his financial 
problems were exclusively caused by his unemployment in 2012. He testified that he 
does everything he can to keep his children happy. He is now trying to clean up his 
credit because he is tired of paying high interest rates.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 23-34. 
 
5 Tr. 36-45. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
5 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous financial delinquencies. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not paid or resolved his delinquent debts. He has not taken any 
action to address them since he began employment in 2014. There is insufficient 
evidence to apply AG ¶ 20(a) as Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple and not resolved. 
  
                                                          
6 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to a six-month period of 
unemployment in 2012. This is a circumstance beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Although Applicant admitted he owed each debt, he did not intend to 
pay any of them and indicated he disputed them, without further explanation. He was 
placed on notice during his interview that his delinquent debts were a security concern. 
Four months after receiving the SOR, he contracted with a financial company to repair 
his credit because he hopes to purchase a house and is tired of paying high interest 
rates. He indicated he resolved two of the SOR debts. The record was held open for 
him to provide documentary proof of the resolutions, but he did not submit any. There is 
insufficient evidence that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances in 
resolving his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant testified he has had financial counseling and provided a letter showing 
that he contracted with a credit repair company. No evidence was provided to show he 
has paid or resolved any of the delinquent debts alleged. Applicant admitted he ignored 
the debts until months after he received the SOR. The first par of AG ¶ 20(c) applies 
because he has received financial counseling.  
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR debts, but also indicated in his background interview 
that he disputed each of them and did not intend to pay them. He did not take action to 
resolve them since he has been gainfully employed. Although he hired a credit repair 
service, there is no evidence he made a good-faith effort to repay any of the creditors or 
otherwise resolve the debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.   
 
 During his background interview he indicated he disputed each debt, but failed to 
explain the basis of the dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant has not 
provided a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the alleged debts or 
documented proof of his actions to resolve the debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comments.  
 
Applicant is 37 years old. He experienced financial difficulties when he was 
unemployed for six months in 2012. In 2014, he advised a government investigator that 
he did not intend to pay the delinquent debts and disputed each of them. In his answer 
to the SOR, he admitted each debt and testified about them at his hearing. He recently 
employed a credit-repair company, but he provided no evidence that his debts have 
been paid or resolved. Applicant does not have a reliable track record of acting 
responsibly toward his financial obligations. His conduct raises questions about his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations 
guideline security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
