 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04311 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns stemming from her financial 
problems. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 15, 2016, and she elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 4, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted his file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete copy to 
Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on May 12, 2016. She was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. She did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 7, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5.1 FORM Item 3 
consists of an unauthenticated summary of an interview with a government investigator 
conducted on November 21, 2014. In the FORM, Department Counsel advised 
Applicant that she could object to FORM Item 3 and it would not be admitted, or that 
she could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it 
accurate. Applicant was informed that her failure to respond to the FORM or to raise 
any objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered 
by me. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, and she raised no objections. Given 
Department Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s work experience, I find her waiver to 
be knowing and intelligent.2 FORM Items 2-5 are admitted into evidence as Government 
Exhibits 2-5, without objection. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts, and Applicant admitted all five debts. I 
have incorporated her admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 69 years old. She received a bachelor’s degree in 1971. She was 
married from 1969 until her husband’s death in October 2015. She has two adult 
children. From April 1998 to September 2009, she was employed full time as an 
executive assistant. Between September 2009 and May 2012, she was intermittently 
unemployed, self-employed, and employed part time. She has been employed full time 
since May 2012.3 
 
 Applicant’s October 2014 and December 2015 credit reports establish the five 
alleged debts, which became delinquent between June 2008 and January 2014. All of 
the debts are mortgage-loan accounts for rental properties.4 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant explained that her husband was 
unemployed from 2005 through 2013. She also explained that she has no plans or 
means to repay any of the alleged delinquent debts. She claimed that the loans were 
                                                          
1 FORM Item 1 consists of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR, which are pleadings and are 
entered into the administrative record. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
3 GE 2; GE 3; Response to SOR. 
 
4 GE 4; GE 5. 
 
3 
 
foreclosed upon or were in the foreclosure process and that she was not delinquent on 
any other accounts. She provided no documentation to corroborate any of her claims, or 
to establish that she is no longer responsible for the debts in the SOR.5 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
                                                          
5 Response to SOR. 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s five delinquent debts total approximately $138,013. These debts 
became delinquent between 2008 and 2014. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby shifting 
the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.6 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s financial struggles date from 2008 and are ongoing. There is no 
evidence of any steps taken to resolve the five alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond his control, and (2) Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant attributed her financial delinquencies to 
her and her husband’s lengthy unemployment. In addition, her husband’s death 
impacted her financial situation. These events constitute circumstances beyond one’s 
control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances.7 In her response to the SOR, Applicant states that she is unable to 
repay the alleged delinquent debts and that she is current on her remaining accounts. 
However, she has not provided any documentation of any debt-resolution or mitigation 
efforts as to the alleged accounts or evidence that she is current on her other financial 
obligations. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant acted responsibly 
to address her delinquent debts or to develop and implement a reasonable debt-
repayment plan.  AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has sought credit counseling. These is also 
no evidence of her monthly income or expenses to establish that her financial problems 
are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”8 
There is no documentation of any payments or debt-resolution efforts by Applicant on 
the alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Absent substantial evidence of debt-
resolution efforts and financial responsibility, I find that security concerns about 
Applicant’s financial problems remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
8 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
6 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems occurred as a result of her husband’s long-term 
unemployment, followed by his death in 2015, as well as her own sporadic employment. 
Nonetheless, she has provided no documentary evidence of any efforts to resolve or 
mitigate her delinquent debts. As a result, the totality of the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to her eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations and security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.e.:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
