                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-06971
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se
March 24, 2017
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On May 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline E for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992) (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 20, 2016, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a decision without a hearing in this case. Pursuant to Directive “Additional
Procedural Guidance Section E3.1.8, Department Counsel requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on September 8, 2016. The Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 13,
2016, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 20, 2016. At the hearing,
the Government offered Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted no exhibits. The record remained
1
open until November 3, 2016, to allow applicant to submit additional evidence, but none
was received.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on October 28, 2016. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record discussed
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 60 years old. He is unmarried and he has no children. Applicant
received a PhD in Aerospace Engineering in 1984, and a Master’s degree in
Engineering in 1978. Applicant is employed by a defense contractor as a Senior
Scientist, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in
the defense sector.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and untrustworthiness.  
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that on approximately six to eight occasions from the
1990s to at least 2010, Applicant removed all of his clothes while in an outdoor public
place. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. At the hearing, Applicant
reiterated what he had written on his RSOR that this behavior last occurred in October
2010, after his father died. He became a caregiver for his mother, and while he was
collecting things at his parent’s house, he felt the walls closing in on him. He went
outside to a wooded section adjacent to the backyard, and he removed his clothes. He
then began walking around on the surrounding golf course, until he finally returned to
his entry point and put his clothes back on. This occurred around midnight, and he
indicated there were no other people in the vicinity. (Tr at 20-21.)
He estimated before 2010 he had last engaged in similar conduct five or six
years earlier. He described that on that earlier event, which took place in his
condominium, “I took off my clothes, walked down a few flights, came back up, put my
clothes back on and left.” This happened at around 11 at night, and he indicated that no
one was around during this incident. Applicant concurred with the SOR allegation that
he engaged in this conduct from six to eight times, and his goal was always that no one
would see him while he was nude. He further stated that he did not want to engage in
this conduct at such places as nudist colonies or beaches, where it was legal, because
he did not want to be seen. Applicant testified that he now realizes the potential
repercussions of his conduct, and he does not intend to engage in this conduct in the
future. The information about Applicant’s conduct was first revealed when he was
undergoing a polygraph examination. (Tr at 21-27.) Applicant discussed several
2
theories, but he was not able to provide a definitive explanation for his conduct. (Tr at
32-33.)
During his testimony, Applicant testified that he has never received any
counseling or therapy for this conduct. Applicant also conceded that neither his family,
friends, girlfriend, or co-workers know about his past conduct that is the subject of the
security clearance hearing. The record was held open after the hearing to allow
Applicant to tell some of these people about the concerns raised in the SOR and to
have these people submit letters explaining that they were now aware of these
allegations. These letters could potentially eliminate or lessen the possibility that he
could be subject to coercion. (Tr at 35-39.) No post-hearing letters or other evidence
was submitted.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
3
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E, I conclude that
Applicant’s history of inappropriate, and potentially illegal conduct as reviewed above, 
is a concern to the Government under Guideline E. I find that Applicant’s conduct does
apply under ¶ 16 (d), which concerns “credible adverse information that is not explicitly
covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information  . . . supports a
whole-person assessment of questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, . .
. unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.” I also find that
Applicant’s failure to reveal his conduct to any other person, has made him potentially
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation or duress under ¶ 16 (e) “personal conduct, or
concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known,
may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.”
In reviewing the mitigation conditions, I considered that Applicant’s conduct
occurred over the span of many years, and Applicant could not provide a reasonable
explanation for it. I also considered that  Applicant has not obtained counseling to help
him curb this conduct, nor has he taken any positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. For these reasons, I find that no
4
mitigating condition under ¶ 17 is applicable in this case. I, therefore, resolve Guideline
E against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why no mitigating conditions apply under Guideline E, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
       In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
        
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
6
