 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
  ) 
 [NAME REDACTED]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06179 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns stemming from his financial problems. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 2, 2016, and he elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 11, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on May 26, 2016. He was afforded an 
opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
responded to the FORM on May 26, 2016. The case was assigned to me on February 
16, 2017. 
 
On March 14, 2017, I reopened the record to permit the parties to supplement 
the written record. On March 14, 2017, Applicant submitted additional documents, and 
the record closed on March 20, 2017.1 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5.2 FORM Item 3 
consists of unauthenticated summaries of interviews with a government investigator 
conducted on October 19, 2014 and June 18, 2015. In the FORM, Department Counsel 
advised Applicant that he could object to FORM Item 3 and it would not be admitted, or 
that he could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make 
it accurate. Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise 
any objections could be constituted as a waiver, and the evidence would be considered 
by me. Applicant responded to the FORM, and he raised no objections. Given 
Department Counsel’s advisement and Applicant’s education and work experience, I 
find his waiver to be knowing and intelligent.3 Therefore, FORM Items 2-5 are admitted 
into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 2-5, without objection. 
 
In his FORM response and supplemental FORM response, Applicant submitted 
ten documents, which are admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-J, without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent tax debts and two other delinquent debts. 
Applicant admitted all four debts in his response to the SOR. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He attained an associate’s degree in September 2009, 
and he has attended additional undergraduate-level classes since September 2009. He 
served in the U.S. military from October 2007 to March 2012. He worked in a retail store 
from March 2012 to September 2012. He has been gainfully employed full-time for a 
                                                          
1 My order and the relevant emails are admitted into the record as Administrative Exhibits (AX) I, II, and 
III, respectively. 
 
2 FORM Item 1 consists of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR. These documents are 
pleadings and are entered into the administrative record. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 15-05252 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (Applicant’s waiver of the authentication 
element must be knowing and intelligent.). See ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016) 
(“Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and 
reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.”) 
 
3 
 
DOD contractor since September 2012. Applicant was married from March 2006 to 
November 2012, and he has two children – ages 13 and 14.4 
 
 When Applicant attempted to electronically file his 2013 federal income tax return 
in April 2014, his return was rejected due to a duplicate return having been filed listing 
one of his dependent children. He later filed this return in September 2015 and entered 
into a payment agreement for his 2013 and 2014 federal income taxes. The remaining 
balance is $240.71. The delinquent 2013 federal income taxes were alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a.5 
 
 For identical reasons, Applicant’s electronic filing for his 2013 state income tax 
return was rejected. The return was received in September 2015.  He made monthly 
payments on his state taxes from September 2015 to September 2016, and all taxes 
were paid. The delinquent 2013 state income taxes were alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.6 
  
 The debt in SOR ¶1.c. ($289) became delinquent in November 2012. This 
utilities debt was settled in January 2016 for $145.7  
 
 Applicant’s November 2015 credit report lists the small debt ($53) in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
as an overdraft charge by a credit union. He disputed the debt with the credit bureaus 
but then withdrew the dispute when it impeded his purchase of a home. He continues to 
disagree with this debt, but he has taken no further action. This debt remains unpaid.8  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial struggles to his divorce in late 2012. The 
separation and divorce required him to purchase new furnishings and a vehicle, as he 
was financially responsible for his daughter and granddaughter. He was also providing 
financial assistance to his former spouse. There is no evidence of financial counseling; 
however, Applicant’s current monthly budget reflects a positive net monthly remainder 
of approximately $2,800.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
4 GE 2. 
 
5 GE 2; GE 3; AE D; AE E; AE G; AE J. 
 
6 GE 2; GE 3; AE D; AE H; AE I. 
 
7 AE B. 
 
8 GE 5; Response to SOR; AE A; AE C. 
 
9 Response to SOR; GE 3; AE A; AE F. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had unpaid taxes and delinquent debts. His financial problems began 
in 2012. Accordingly, the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.10 Conditions that 
could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 
20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the  basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant attempted to timely file his state and federal income returns for 2013; 
however, these filings were rejected due to a duplicate dependent. He later filed the 
returns, entered into payment agreements, and reduced the outstanding balance to 
$241. He satisfied one debt (SOR ¶ 1.c.) and one small debt (SOR ¶ 1.d.) remains 
unresolved. In light of Applicant’s actions to resolve his delinquent debts, his financial 
indebtedness does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
                                                          
10 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.). 
 
 
6 
 
The application of AG ¶ 20(b) requires both that (1) Applicant’s financial 
indebtedness resulted from circumstances beyond his control and that (2) Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.11 Applicant went through a separation and 
divorce, and he was financially supporting his former spouse, his daughter, and his 
granddaughter. He provided documentation of his problems filing his tax returns. 
Because these circumstances hindered Applicant’s ability to address his delinquent 
debts, they constitute circumstances beyond one’s control in the context of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that an applicant act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant filed his state and federal returns, entered into payment 
agreements, and made regular payments in accordance with the agreement. Although 
he still owes $241 on his federal taxes and the $53 debt remains unresolved, 
Applicant’s actions establish a reasonable plan for repayment and concomitant conduct 
in furtherance of that plan.12 Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) applies.   
 
There is no record evidence of credit counseling; however, Applicant provided a 
monthly budget reflecting a positive net monthly remainder. Furthermore, he has 
reduced his delinquent debts to $293. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”13 
Applicant provided documentation of his tax payments in accordance with his payment 
agreements and the significant reduction in his tax debt. He also settled another debt. 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies. 
 
Applicant has been unable to ascertain the origin of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
Nonetheless, he has not provided sufficient evidence to establish a reasonable basis for 
a dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial 
delinquencies. Although a small delinquent balance remains unpaid, he developed a 
reasonable plan for debt resolution and repayment and has taken significant steps in 
furtherance of this plan. He has also shown that he can maintain his current monthly 
financial obligations while making debt repayments. I find that Applicant has mitigated 
the financial considerations concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008). 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) (“All that is required is that an applicant act 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
‘concomitant conduct,’ that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”). 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment).  
 
7 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial 
delinquencies. Applicant entered into payment agreements and adhered to those 
payment agreements to significantly reduce his delinquent debts. He has established a 
track record of debt repayments while maintaining his current monthly obligations. I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
