                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-07050
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Available information is not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about
Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is
denied.
Statement of the Case
On October 18, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for
his employment with a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have a
security clearance.1
On March 9, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline  for financial2
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
1
considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and
requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on September 26, 2016, and I convened a hearing
in this matter on November 15, 2016. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department
Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4. Applicant testified in his own behalf
and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - C. All exhibits were admitted without
objection. One witness also testified for Applicant. A transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was
received on November 22, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $76,161 for two
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.b). Applicant admitted, with explanations and
supporting documents, both SOR allegations. (Answer) In addition to the facts thus
established, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 52 years old. Since at least July 2001, he has worked in information
technology (IT) positions with several companies and has held a security clearance
since about July 2002. In September 2011, Applicant was terminated from his job for
alleged timecard violations, something he has denied. Applicant was unemployed until
the end of 2011, but he has been steadily employed since January 2012. Applicant’s
income has increased by about $10,000 since he started his current job as a software
developer in October 2012. (Gx. 1; Tr. 56 - 59)
In 2001, Applicant bought a house using a mortgage to finance the $135,000
purchase price. In 2008, he opened a home equity line of credit (HELOC) to borrow
against the value of his house in order to resolve between $20,000 and $25,000 in retail
debt he owed at the time. He also needed money to help his mother pay for medical
expenses. At the time he was fired in September 2011, the balance on this account was
about $38,000. When he became unemployed, he stopped making payments. Although
he claims he contacted the creditor for his HELOC after he went back to work to discuss
the past-due status of his account, he did not resume making regular payments after he
went back to work in 2012. In July 2013, the HELOC lender obtained a judgment
against Applicant for $51,446.81. That debt is alleged at SOR 1.a. (Answer; Gx. 2; Gx.
4; Ax. B; Tr. 35 - 36, 52)
In June 2009, Applicant opened a credit card account with the same lender from
whom he obtained the HELOC. That account also became past-due when Applicant lost
his job in 2011. It became delinquent even after Applicant started working in 2012. In
April 2013, the creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant for $19,101. (Answer; Gx.
2; Gx. 4; Ax. B)
The same law firm represents the creditor identified in SOR 1.a and 1.b. In
accordance with an agreement between Applicant and that firm, he started making
monthly payments on the SOR 1.b judgment in May 2013.  There are several gaps in3
his record of payments; however, Applicant has been gainfully employed the entire time
and did not provide a plausible explanation for why he has missed payments under the
agreement. Applicant told a Government investigator in December 2012 that he started
making $1,000 payments on this account in February 2012. He also repeated this claim
 It appears the agreement calls for Applicant to start paying the SOR 1.a debt after paying the SOR 1.b debt.3
2
at hearing; however, Applicant did not provide any information that documents such
payments. (Answer; Ax. A; Ax. B)
Applicant acknowledged that before he was fired in 2011, he did not have much
margin for error due to the way he managed his finances. A review of all of the
information probative of Applicant’s credit history and management of his personal
finances shows that he also defaulted on a third account with the creditor listed in the
SOR, and that he defaulted on more than $50,000 in student loans before enrolling in a
student loan rehabilitation program. (Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. B; Tr. 43 - 48, 59 - 60)
Applicant has not received any financial counseling or other professional
assistance with his finances. He claims his current finances are sound, but he did not
provide any detailed information about his current income and expenses. There is no
indication that he has not complied with his income tax obligations. (Tr. 39 - 42)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
 See Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government presented sufficient information to support the SOR allegations
under this guideline. The facts thus established reasonably raise a security concern
about Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, the record as a whole requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations).
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant claims his debts are the direct result of the loss of employment in
September 2001. He disputes the reasons for that termination. AG ¶ 20(a) applies to
the extent that the event was several years ago and appears to be isolated. Applicant
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
4
has otherwise been gainfully employed with a steady income since 2001. As to AG ¶
20(b), Applicant’s loss of employment for two months over five years ago does not
support application of this mitigating condition. Even if unexpected or beyond his
control, Applicant had the time and resources necessary to pay or otherwise resolve his
debts. By his own admission, Applicant was already in financial peril when he lost his
job. Indeed, the HELOC had been obtained to pay off significant retail credit debt.
Applicant has not sought any financial counseling and he has only made the payments
shown in his exhibits because there are civil judgments against him. As to his payment
history since 2013, Applicant did not adequately explain why he has missed several
payments over the past three years despite having steady income. All of the foregoing
precludes application of any of the AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. The security concerns
about Applicant’s finances remaining unresolved.
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s failure to timely address his financial obligations despite having
the means to do so underscores the doubts about his suitability for access to classified
information that have been raised by the Government’s information. Because protection
of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must
be resolved against the Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                                       
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
5
