 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03937 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 26, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On January 8, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E and detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
an administrative judge to determine whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
On February 9, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated March 30, 2016, was provided to him by letter dated March 31, 
2016. Applicant received the FORM on April 7, 2016. He was afforded a period of 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not submit any information within the 30-day period. On February 10, 
2017, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His admissions 
are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old laboratory technician employed by a defense 
contractor since April 2013. (Item 3) He graduated from high school in 1974. (Item 4). 
He served in the U.S. Army from 1975 to 1995, and was honorably discharged. (Items 
3, 4) Applicant married in 1982, and has four children. (Items 3, 4) He has held a 
security clearance since 1975. (Items 3, 4)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR lists nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $38,509, 
ranging from a $634 charged-off credit card account to a 2009 judgment for $15,126.  
One of those debts is a mortgage with a past-due amount of $9,262 on a $221,373 
balance. These debts are substantiated by Applicant’s admissions, his July 2013 Office 
of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI) and his July 2013, 
April 2015, and March 2016 credit reports. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.i; Items 4, 5, 6, 7)  
 
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to loss of income without providing 
specific details. He points to the timeframe of 2008 and 2009 when he incurred most of 
these debts. (Item 4) Applicant has not held a full-time job since 2006. (Item 3) Since 
2013, he has also worked part-time for a health-based cleaning system company that 
his wife owns. (Item 4) The FORM does not elaborate whether Applicant is unable or 
unwilling to work full-time.  
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant stated that his wife was diagnosed with cancer in 
2012 and at that time, he was the sole home care provider for her as well as their 
teenage son and daughter. (Item 2) He did not; however, provide any specific 
                                                          
1 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was 
the most current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
information as to the extent to which his caregiver status or his wife’s illness impacted 
their past or present financial situation. 
 
  The file lacks any evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent SOR accounts. He 
did not describe financial counseling or present a budget. The record lacks 
corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes 
for his financial problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted that 
Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary 
response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as 
appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . 
your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” 
on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 When Applicant completed his June 2013 SF-86, he failed to list required 
information regarding past debts as well as a 1993 driving while intoxicated (DWI) 
arrest. (Items 2, 3) After being confronted during his July 2013 OPM PSI, Applicant 
acknowledged five of the debts alleged in the SOR and claimed they had been 
previously resolved except for SOR ¶ 1.b, which he had been paying but still had a 
balance due. (Item 4) However, in his SOR answer, Applicant admitted that those same 
debts remained delinquent.  
 
 During the same OPM PSI, Applicant further claimed that he did not list his 
delinquent accounts on his SF-86 because he had not recently reviewed his credit 
report and did not know the details regarding his accounts. (Item 4) In his SOR answer, 
he admitted providing false information. (Item 2) 
 
 Furthermore, during his OPM PSI regarding his past arrest for DWI, he “agreed” 
that he had never been arrested for alcohol or drugs. (Item 4) Yet in his SOR answer, 
he admitted his 1993 DWI, but explained that he believed that the DWI was not a public 
record based on the disposition of probation before judgment that he received. (Item 2) 
He further added in his SOR answer without referring to the financial or arrest 
falsification that he did not intend to falsify any material facts on his SF-86 and that he 
could not remember some of the events from his past due to “stressful times,” including 
the impact of his wife’s 2012 cancer diagnosis on their family. (Item 4) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
      
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations/Personal Conduct 
  
  The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the 
SOR. The facts established raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG 
¶ 18 as follows: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations). In response to the Government’s information, it 
was incumbent on Applicant to produce information sufficient to refute or mitigate the 
facts established against him. He did not submit any documents in response to the SOR 
or the FORM. Applicant did not show that he had paid or otherwise resolved any of his 
delinquent debt.  
 
The Government also met its burden of production in support of the allegation 
under personal conduct. The facts established raise a security concern addressed in 
relevant part, at AG ¶ 15 as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities). 
 
Applicant failed to list his debts and DWI charge as required on his SF-86. None 
of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 17 apply. Applicant does receive some credit for 
later acknowledging his debts after being confronted during his OPM PSI and admitting 
his debts and DWI in his SOR answer. However, this fact and his rather qualified 
response is not enough to overcome his willful misrepresentation of his true financial 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
situation or past personal conduct.2 He knowingly and deliberately chose not to disclose 
complete and accurate information regarding his financial history and personal conduct.  
 
In summary, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the 
Government’s information. In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guidelines F and E, I have reviewed the record 
before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has 
been gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is presumed to be a 
mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his 
financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for access 
to classified information. Similarly, Applicant was no neophyte to the security clearance 
process having held a security clearance since 1975. Protection of the national interest 
is the principal focus of these adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on an 
explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The formal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
      
                                                          
2The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
