 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 15-01668 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire  
Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Stephanie Mendez, Esquire 
 
 
March 13, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana approximately ten to twenty times between 2006 and 
2009, while holding a security clearance. In 2012, she unintentionally submitted false 
information on a Government questionnaire about her marijuana use. Since that time she 
has been truthful with the Government, and her life and career show successful 
mitigation. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her most recent Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on June 28, 2012. (Government Exhibit 1.) On December 18, 2015, 
the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on January 24, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on March 28, 2016. The case was assigned to me on April 4, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on May 4, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 29, 2016. The Government offered 
Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered 
Applicant Exhibits A through K, which were admitted without objection, and testified on 
her own behalf. Two additional witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. I granted 
Applicant’s request to leave the record open until July 15, 2016, to permit her to submit 
additional evidence. On July 12, 2016, she submitted Applicant Exhibit L, to which 
Department Counsel had no objection. The exhibit was admitted into the record, which 
closed as scheduled. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 8, 2016. 
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has a bachelor’s 
degree. Applicant is divorced with two children. She is employed as a deputy program 
manager, and is seeking to retain a security clearance previously granted in connection 
that employment. She received a security clearance in approximately 2001. 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because she has used illegal drugs. Applicant admitted the single allegation under this 
paragraph. 
 
Applicant was married from 2000 to 2011. Her husband was a chronic user of 
medical marijuana, to the point it had a serious impact on his physical health. Applicant, 
in what she acknowledges was a foolish attempt to save her marriage, which was in 
chaos, used marijuana with him on several occasions between 2006 and 2009. She was 
unable to give an exact figure, but stated it was probably about ten times, and no more 
than twenty. She held a security clearance during this entire period. Applicant’s husband 
refused to give up drug use and, in 2010, she made the difficult decision to divorce him. 
Applicant has minimal contact with him, and only in the context of his court-ordered 
visitation with their children. (Tr. 31-47, 52-57, 62-64; Government Exhibit 1 at Section 
23, Exhibit 2 at 3; Applicant Exhibit F.)  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has not used marijuana since 2009, and evinced a credible intent not to 
do so in the future. She is adamantly opposed to drug use, and particularly to the use of 
medical marijuana. Applicant credibly testified that marijuana no longer has any part in 
her life, and that she deeply regrets her past use. In addition to other documentary 
evidence, she submitted a signed statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. 
She agreed that such use could result in automatic revocation of her security clearance. 
(Tr. 47-49, 61; Government Exhibit 1 at Section 23; Applicant Exhibits J, K, and L.) 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E – Personal Conduct) 
 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because she has engaged in conduct that shows poor judgment, untrustworthiness or 
unreliability. Applicant denied subparagraph 2.a under this paragraph. She admitted 
subparagraph 2.b, which alleged that her drug use described under Paragraph 1, above, 
was cognizable under this guideline as well. 
 
Applicant filled out an e-QIP on June 28, 2012. (Government Exhibit 1.) Section 
23 of the questionnaire asks Applicant about her drug use history. She admitted using 
marijuana with her ex-husband stating that he had a “[p]rescription for medical marijuana, 
and I smoked a bit with him on several occasions.” She further stated, “Nature of use was 
in my home with my husband, use was infrequent. In June 2009, we smoked marijuana 
together before going to a concert.” Applicant also stated that the month and year of first 
use, and the month and year of last use, was June 2009. This was incorrect, as Applicant 
first used marijuana in 2006.  
 
Applicant was questioned by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management on October 18, 2012, four months later. At that point she corrected the date 
of first use, stating that she had actually used marijuana for two to three years before 
2009. This would correspond with first use being in 2006. Applicant testified that the 
incorrect answer on the questionnaire was not a deliberate omission, stating, “I think I just 
made a mistake in the - - in the entry of the information.” (Tr. 50-52, 62-68; Government 
Exhibit 2 at 3.)  
 
Mitigation 
 
 Two co-workers testified on Applicant’s behalf. The first one has worked with 
Applicant since 2005, both as a subordinate and peer. The witness has knowledge of the 
allegations in the SOR. She finds Applicant to be a caring and trustworthy person, worthy 
of a security clearance. (Tr. 10-20.)  
 
 The second witness has also worked with Applicant as a subordinate and peer. 
She has known Applicant since 2011. This witness also has knowledge of the allegations 
in the SOR. The witness finds Applicant to be honest, responsible and trustworthy. (Tr. 
20-26.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant submitted evidence showing that she is a highly respected and 
successful person and employee. She has a demanding job with her employer, being a 
supervisor of over 40 people and in charge of a multi-million dollar budget. She submitted 
evaluations from 2002 through 2015 showing that she is consistently recognized as a top 
performer. (Tr. 58-60; Applicant Exhibit G.)  
 
 Letters of recommendation were submitted for Applicant from people who know 
her personally and professionally. All of her co-workers, including her current supervisor, 
recommend her for a position of trust, and also indicated their understanding of security 
clearance requirements. (Applicant Exhibits A, B, C, D, E, H, and I.)    
 
 
Policies 
 
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an 
applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions (DCs) and 
mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in evaluating an applicant=s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG & 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG && 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, 
the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own common sense, as well as 
knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in making a reasoned 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.@ In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, AThe applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.@ Section 7 
 
 
5 
 
 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: AAny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.@ 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement) 
 
 The security concern relating to Drug Involvement is set forth in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially 
considered the following: 
 
 (a) any drug use; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 apply to the facts of this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; 
 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant’s very minor marijuana use was in the distant past and related to her 
tumultuous and chaotic marriage to a habitual drug abuser. Her use ended in 2009, and 
she divorced her ex-husband in 2011. She has very limited contact with him, and that is 
only in relation to his court-ordered visitation rights with their children. Applicant submitted 
a signed statement of intent, and her testimony and written statements show that she is 
adamantly against drug use of any type. She has successfully mitigated the security 
significance of her drug use. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E – Personal Conduct) 
 
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 and especially 
considered the following:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 apply to the facts of this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
 
7 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or facts that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Turning first to the alleged falsification. On its face it appears that Applicant made 
a false statement on the questionnaire by stating that she started and stopped using 
marijuana in the same month. However, her answers to other parts of the same question 
indicate that Applicant was talking about a period of time involving more than a month of 
using marijuana. Add to that the fact that four months later, when she was shown the 
questionnaire by an investigator, she immediately corrected the mistake. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 
17(c) apply.  
 
 Her seven years of abstinence, along with Applicant’s conduct and testimony, 
show a credible intent not to use marijuana, or any other drugs, in the future. Applicant’s 
conduct since 2009 has been exemplary. Rehabilitation from her conduct when married 
to a habitual drug abuser has been shown by years of hard work without any recurrence 
of drug use. AG ¶¶ 17(b) and 17(c) apply. Paragraph 2 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated her 
occasional marijuana use that ended at least seven years ago, and did not intentionally 
 
 
8 
 
 
falsify a questionnaire. She is a law abiding, trustworthy, and responsible person and 
employee. Overall, the record evidence does not create doubt as to Applicant=s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
