 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]   )  ISCR Case No. 15-08612 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 30, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 15, 
2016. The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2016.  On November 9, 2016, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for December 6, 2016. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered six 
exhibits, which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 6.  Applicant testified 
and offered one exhibit, which was admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The transcript 
(Tr.) was received on December 14, 2016. The record was held open until December 
20, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submiited 
documents which were marked and admitted as AEs B and C. Based upon a review of 
 
2 
 
 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his responses to the SOR, Applicant admits all SOR allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a DOD contractor seeking a security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since September 2012. He held a 
security clearance previously while serving on active duty in the United States Navy 
from June 2001 to June 17, 2011. He has some college credit. He is divorced and has 
two children, ages 11 and 12, who live with his ex-wife. (Tr. 16-18, 20-24; Gov 1)   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that he has a history of financial 
problems. His financial problems include: a $7,054 charged-off home equity loan (SOR 
¶ 1.a: Gov 5 at 13; Gov 6 at 1); a $36,834 charged-off mortgage account (SOR ¶ 1.b: 
Gov 5 at 10; Gov 6 at 2); a charged-off $12,586 debt-consolidation loan (SOR ¶ 1.c: 
Gov 5 at 8); a $1,144 cell phone account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 
5 at 11; Gov 6 at 2); a $122 charged-off account owed to a credit union (SOR ¶ 1.e: 
Gov 5 at 11, 13; Gov 6 at 2); a $124 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 5 at 8); a $201 
medical account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 5 at 13); and a $1,851 judgment 
filed against Applicant in 2011 on behalf of an apartment. (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 5 at 3). The 
total amount of the delinquent debt is $59,916. 
 
Applicant testified that he was discharged from the military after receiving 
nonjudicial punishment for violating Article 92 of the UCMJ, for Failing to Obey a Lawful 
General Order; Article 93, Cruelty and Maltreatment; Article 117, Provoking Speeches 
and Gestures; and Article 134, Indecent Language.  Applicant was an instructor. 
Several of his students alleged he maltreated them, made inappropriate comments, and 
fraternized with several students. Applicant was found guilty and punished. He was 
subsequently discharged from the United States Navy with a general under honorable 
conditions discharge in 2011. (Tr. 18-19, AE C). The SOR did not allege this 
information. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board 
listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered 
stating: 
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to 
consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
(d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis under 
Directive Section 6.3.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-
0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)).  Applicant’s misconduct that was not alleged in the 
SOR will not be considered for disqualification purposes, and consideration will be 
limited to the five circumstances outlined by the appeal board.  
 
Applicant experienced financial difficulties after his discharge from active duty. 
He encountered periods of unemployment and underemployment and was unable to 
pay his bills.  He got behind on his child support payments, but has caught up on his 
child support deficiency. He and his wife separated in 2009 and divorced in 2012. They 
owned a home together. In the property settlement agreement, Applicant initially took 
responsibility for the mortgage. The agreement was later amended to have his wife be 
responsible for the mortgage and to have possession of the premises. Upon sale of the 
property Applicant was to get half the proceeds. Applicant’s ex-wife did not pay the 
mortgage payments and the mortgage went to foreclosure in December 2011. (Tr. 30 -
31; AE A)  
 
As of the hearing, Applicant testified that he was making $50 monthly payments 
towards the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He provided proof that he has been making 
monthly payments since September 2015. (Tr. 36; AE B at 1 - 4) After the hearing, he 
provided proof that he paid the $122 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. (AE B at 5) He did not 
recognize the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g. He did not make any effort to 
identify the debts. He has not attempted to make payments towards the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.h since 2011. At one time, he had an agreement with a credit 
repair firm to assist him with contesting debts on his credit report. He discontinued the 
agreement because he thought it was a waste of money. (Tr. 34 – 41)  
 
Applicant’s monthly take home pay is about $2,500. His monthly expenses 
consist of rent: $900, car payment $200, insurance $205, cell phone $220, 
internet/cable $135, electricity $52, gas for automobile $220, and child support $896. 
The monthly expenses as provided by Applicant during the hearing total $2,828, which 
leave him with a negative balance of $328. Applicant testified that he has between $150 
to $200 left over each paycheck. Applicant mentioned he has another delinquent credit 
card account with a military exchange that was not alleged in the SOR. They take his 
tax refunds each year. (Tr. 41 - 46)  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
It was also alleged that Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving While 
Intoxicated on January 1, 2014. In March 2014, he was convicted. Applicant was fined, 
referred to an impaired driver care management program and his license was 
suspended for nine months. (Gov 3; Gov 4) Applicant testified that he went out drinking 
with friends. He decided to sleep in his car rather than drive home. The keys were in the 
ignition because he kept the car running so he could run the heater. A policeman 
approached his car around 2 am. Applicant subsequently failed a field sobriety test and  
was arrested. His blood alcohol content was .11. Applicant testified that he resolved all 
 
4 
 
 
of the requirements of his sentence. He has not had an alcohol-related incident since 
his arrest. (Tr. 47 - 50; Gov 3; Gov 4)  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following disqualifying conditions apply: 
 
AG &19(a):  an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
AG &19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has several unresolved delinquent accounts that have been delinquent 
since 2011. The total approximate balance of the unresolved delinquent debt is 
$59,916.  He has a history of not meeting financial obligations either because of inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy his debts.  
  
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
  
AG & 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG & 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
  
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG & 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and   
 
AG & 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
I find AG & 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial issues remain 
ongoing and therefore are current. AG & 20(b) partially applies because certain 
circumstances beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his financial problems. 
Applicant’s marital separation, divorce and discharge from active duty were factors 
beyond his control. For years, he struggled with low-paying jobs. However this 
mitigating condition is given less weight because Applicant did not begin to resolve his 
delinquent accounts once he found suitable employment in 2012. I cannot conclude he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant provided no proof that he attended financial counseling. Most of his 
delinquent accounts remain unresolved. AG & 20(c) does not apply. Applicant resolved 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e after the hearing. He provided proof that he was paying  
$50 a month towards the debt alleged in 1.a. He is given credit under AG & 20(d) for 
making a good-faith effort to resolve these two debts.  Although he did not recognize the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h, he made no attempt to formally dispute 
them. As such, AG & 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under Financial 
Considerations.   
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
  
The security concern for Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, is set out in AG & 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 AG & 31 lists disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern. The 
following apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG & 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
AG & 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
The above disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant was arrested on 
January 1, 2014 and convicted of Driving While Intoxicated.  
 
 AG & 32 lists the conditions that could mitigate security concerns under criminal 
conduct. The following mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
AG & 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG & 32(d): There is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but 
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant has no additional arrests since January 2014. He completed the terms 
of his sentence. More than three years have passed without incident. Applicant has 
demonstrated evidence of successful rehabilitation. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply 
Security concerns under Criminal Conduct are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant’s 
divorce, mortgage issues, and his difficulty finding employment after leaving active duty 
had an adverse impact on his finances. I considered his honesty when revealing the  
reason for his discharge from active duty. He appears to have learned from the 
experience. Criminal conduct concerns are mitigated because Applicant has maintained 
a clean record since January 2014. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
While Applicant resolved some of his debt, too much of his debt remains unresolved 
and Applicant does not have a plan to resolve his delinquent accounts. Security 
concerns under financial considerations are not mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d and 1.f - !.h:  Against Applicant   
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
