                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-00950
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
History of Case
On August 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security  clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order  (Exec. Or.) 10865,Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 15, 2016, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on April 5, 2016, and did not respond with any post-FORM
information. The case was assigned to me on February 6, 2017. Based upon a review
of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief
in September 2011 (discharged in October 2014) and (b) later accumulated three
delinquent debts (inclusive of mortgage, student loan, and car loan debts) exceeding
$407,000 in the aggregate. Allegedly, these incurred debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the listed debts with
explanations, denying only the allegations covered by SOR ¶ 1.d. He claimed the house 
debt covered by SOR ¶ 1.b was part of his Chapter 13 petition, and his house was
subsequently foreclosed and auctioned. He claimed his student loans are currently
being paid back bi-monthly through payroll deduction. And he claimed his car loan was
included in his chapter 13 petition and paid off at case closure, with the car being sold
and title released. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old network planning engineer for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in December 1999 and has two children from this marriage,
ages 13 and 11. (Item 3) He earned his bachelor’s degree in August 1996 from a
recognized university and his master’s degree in March 2006 from another university. 
(Items 3 and 8) Applicant served five years of active military duty as an Army officer
between August 1996 and September 2001. (Item 3) He received an honorable
discharge in September 2001. 
Applicant has worked for his current employer as a network engineer since
August 2006. Between January 2003 and August 2006, he worked as a network
engineer. And between February 2002 and January 2003 he worked as a network
engineer for other firms. (Items 3 and 8)  
Finances
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 2011 and self-reported
his bankruptcy filing to his facility security officer (FSO) in October 2011. (Item 4) His
Chapter 13 bankruptcy was discharged in October 2014. (Items 2, 5, and 8) The
trustee’s final report and account revealed total assets of $31,308 and net payments to
2
scheduled creditors of $33,489. (Item 5) Trustee compensation totaled $3,489. (Item 5)
His scheduled debts had become delinquent in 2011, and he chose to file for Chapter
13 relief on the advice of his attorney. (Item 5) His petition did not include his student
loans.
 Of the three debts included in the SOR, Applicant claimed that two of them
(SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d) were included in his Chapter 13 bankruptcy and paid off.
(Item 2) He provided no documentary proof that the debts were scheduled and paid
despite afforded opportunities to do so. Nor did he provide any proof of bi-weekly
payroll deductions covering his SOR creditor ¶ 1.c student loan debt.
To date, Applicant has not addressed any of his listed debts covered by SOR
debts ¶¶ 1.b-1.d that he can substantiate, and they remain outstanding. (Items 5-8) 
Detailed explanations of the circumstances of how his listed debts with creditors 1.b-1.d
arose, and his home mortgage ended in foreclosure and public sale of the property are
also missing from Applicant’s September 2012 interview with an agent of the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM), and from his answer. 
Applicant provided no evidence of budgeting, financial counseling, or proof of
community and civic contributions. Character references and performance evaluations
were not provided either.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
3
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
4
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a network planning engineer for a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of delinquent debts (including a mortgage debt and student
loan debt) that he has not substantively addressed. After being discharged from his
Chapter 13 bankruptcy, the three listed debts listed in his credit report continue to be
reported as delinquent and outstanding.  Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts
and his failure to address these debts warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the debts covered in the SOR negate the
need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). 
Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his latest credit reports and
provide ample corroboration of his debts.
Judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s unexplained delinquencies
and his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in addressing his listed debts with
the resources available to him with his full-time employment since 2006. See ISCR
Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). Not only are his listed debt
delinquencies ongoing, but he has failed to address them in any tangible way. 
Extenuation and mitigation credit are not available to Applicant based on the evidence
developed in this record.         
                                          
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts and failure to
address them with any documented proof and detailed explanations of the
circumstances surrounding the accrual of his debts and the foreclosure of his home
mortgage. Resolution of his delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to his
regaining control of his  finances.
5
Evidence of budgeting, financial counseling, endorsements, performance
evaluations, and civic contributions might have been helpful in making a whole-person
assessment of his overall clearance eligibility, but were not provided. Overall,
clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited amount of
information available for consideration in this record does not enable him to establish
judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of his
accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, his lack of sufficient explanations for his debt
accruals, and his failure to provide any proof of  corrective actions taken to address
his old debts, it is still soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability
to repay his debts and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with the
minimum requirements for holding a security clearance. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d. Favorable
conclusions are warranted regarding the allegations covered by SOR ¶ 1.a.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
 Subpara. 1.a:     For Applicant
            Subparas. 1.b through 1.d:                Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
6
  
7
