 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02320 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant’s financial 
problems were not caused by irresponsible or reckless behavior, he failed to produce 
sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns. Accordingly, his eligibility to 
occupy a positon of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust 
position. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On June 23, 2016, 
I issued a pre-hearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses. Department 
Counsel submitted documents by the July 6, 2016 deadline. At the hearing, which 
proceeded as scheduled on July 12, 2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5 and Hearing Exhibits I – IV, without objection. After the hearing, the record 
remained open until August 31, 2016. Applicant did not submit any documents. The 
Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) received the transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 
2016.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
SOR Amendments 
 
At hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to add three 
allegations under the financial considerations guideline, specifically: ¶ 1.r, that Applicant 
is indebted to a veterinarian for $196; ¶ 1.s, that Applicant has a delinquent medical 
account for $168; and 1.t, that Applicant owes an $18,855 child-support arrearage to 
State 1. Applicant received notice of the proposed amendment in March 2016, he 
responded to each allegation, denying ¶ 1.r and admitting ¶¶ 1.s and 1.t. I granted 
Department Counsel’s motions and amended the SOR without objection from Applicant. 
His answers are incorporated into the record.2  
 
At the conclusion of Applicant’s testimony, Department Counsel moved to amend 
SOR ¶ 1.a regarding Applicant’s failure to file his 2010 and 2011 federal income tax 
returns as required. The proposed amendment would have expanded the allegation to 
include Applicant’s failure to file his state and federal income tax returns from 2010 to 
2012. Given the conflicting information in the record about Applicant’s returns, I denied 
the motion.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked for a federal contractor since September 2012. His position 
requires access to personally identifiable information (PII), and requires him to obtain 
eligibility to occupy a public trust position. Based on the disclosures in his October 2012 
eligibility application, his January 2013 subject interview, and the credit reports in the 
record, the SOR alleges that Applicant owes $36,000 in delinquent accounts; including 
an $18,855 child-support arrearage and that he failed to file federal income tax returns 
for 2010 and 2011.4 
                                                          
2 Tr. 10-11; HE III. 
 
3 Tr. 68-69. 
 
4 GE 3, 5-6. 
 
3 
 
Applicant incurred the child-support arrearage during periods of unemployment 
over the years. Although he was not always able to pay his court-order child-support 
obligation, he would give his child’s mother cash as he was able. The arrearage is being 
resolved through wage garnishment. Applicant also admits failing to file his 2010 and 
2011 federal income tax returns (SOR ¶ 1.a). He blames his ex-wife, with whom he lived 
from 2007 to 2012 for mismanaging the couple’s finances, including their tax obligation. 
He also admits having an outstanding federal tax liability, which is not alleged.  Although 
Applicant has not entered into a payment plan with the IRS, he has increased the 
amount of federal taxes being withheld from his pay. In doing so, he overpays his 
federal tax liability, causing a refund that is captured by the IRS and applied to his 
outstanding balance. The record is unclear regarding Applicant’s standing with the IRS. 
He did not provide any documentation to clarify the conflicting information about his 
federal tax record.5  
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that he has not been in a position to pay his 
delinquent accounts. Despite this, Applicant has made attempts to resolve his 
delinquent accounts and rehabilitate his finances.  In 2013, he consulted a tax preparer 
for assistance; however, he was unable to afford the service. In January 2016, Applicant 
decided to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. The petition was dismissed a 
month later because Applicant could not afford the plan payments. Applicant contacted 
his employer’s employee assistance program (EAP) to seek financial counseling. He 
was scheduled to attend his first session in the weeks after the hearing. Despite being 
given the opportunity to do so, Applicant did not provide any documentation regarding 
the status of the alleged debts. All of the accounts appear to be unresolved.6 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”7 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”8 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to 
the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.9 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 26-44, 53-56 
 
6 Tr. 23-25, 38, 60-61, 69-71. 
 
7 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
8 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
9 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”10  
 
The record establishes a prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not 
meeting his financial obligations and that he has demonstrated an inability to do so.11 
He admits that he failed to timely file his federal income tax returns in 2010 and 2011 as 
required.12 Applicant did not produce sufficient evidence to mitigate the concerns raised 
in the SOR. While Applicant’s efforts to engage a tax preparation service, to repay his 
creditors through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy payment plan, and to obtain financial 
counseling through his employer’s EAP, shows a willingness to repay his creditors and 
rehabilitate his finances, it is not enough to mitigate the concerns. With the exception of 
the child-support arrearage, which is being resolved through garnishment, the 
remainder of the alleged debts remain unresolved and Applicant’s status with the IRS 
remains unclear. Accordingly, Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and remain a 
concern. 
 
  After reviewing the record, it is not appropriate to grant Applicant access to 
sensitive information based on his current financial situation. In reaching this 
conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s 
financial problems do not appear to be caused by irresponsible for reckless behavior. 
                                                          
10  AG ¶ 18. 
 
11 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
12  AG ¶ 19 (g). 
 
5 
 
However, Applicant failed to demonstrate a record of financial reform or rehabilitation. 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will 
not attain the type of financial stability necessary to justify the granting of a public trust 
position in the future. The award of eligibility is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is 
based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence 
presented. Applicant may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his eligibility to 
occupy a position of trust in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.t:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. Applicant’s eligibility 
to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
