 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06243 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on March 10, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 15, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
September 20, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on October 25, 
2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. The Government’s discovery letter and exhibit index were 
marked as hearing exhibits (HE) I and II. Applicant testified, and offered exhibits (AE) A 
and B, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant 
to submit additional information, but he failed to offer any additional evidence (AE A and 
B were admitted at hearing, but since these were originals, Applicant submitted copies 
of the documents post-hearing. He did not submit any additional documents). DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 2, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He denied ¶¶ 1.c through 1.f. 
These admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings 
and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
this employer since May 2015. He has a bachelor’s degree. He served in the Army for 
over 30 years in an active duty and reserve capacity. He retired as a major. He is 
married and has an adult son.1  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts in the approximate amount of $26,027. 
The debts were listed in credit reports from June 2014 and July 2015.2  
 
 Applicant testified that his tax lien came about after he sold a house in 2012. He 
purchased the house for approximately $590,000 in 2008 and sold it for approximately 
$660,000 in 2012. He claimed improvements and expenses associated with the house 
as deductions on his taxes. Those were disallowed by the IRS, resulting in tax liability of 
over $18,000. When Applicant failed to pay the amount owed, a federal tax lien was 
filed in April 2014. Applicant claims he made a $4,000 payment upon notification of the 
tax lien in 2014. He failed to provide documentation of this payment. He further stated 
that over the years he made sporadic payments toward the amount owed on the 
underlying tax lien debt. Again, he did not supply documentation to support his claim. 
He satisfied his back taxes and the lien was released in April 2016 (the lien which was 
released on April 2014 was due to an error by the IRS and is not relevant to the issues 
in the SOR). Applicant admitted that he failed to satisfy the amount of the tax lien before 
April 2016 as his form of “civil disobedience” with the IRS. He had the financial 
resources available to pay this debt at any time before April 2016, but he chose not to 
do so. It was only after he received the SOR that he decided to pay the tax due and get 
the lien released in April 2016. As an example, he invested $100,000 in a small 
business venture rather than use those funds to pay the tax lien. He also owns three 
pieces of property, two of which are unencumbered. He refinanced his current 
residence to pay the amount of taxes due and release the lien. Applicant’s current 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 19; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2-3. 
 
 
3 
 
salary is approximately $186,000 per year and his wife’s is approximately $86,000. 
There is no evidence of financial counseling.3   
 
The status of the remaining SOR-related debts is as follows:4    
 
SOR ¶ 1.b (consumer debt $6,012): 
 
 In his Ans., Applicant acknowledged this debt but claimed it was settled. The 
most recent credit report shows that the most recent action on this charged-off account 
was in August 2009. Applicant testified that he paid this debt, but failed to supply 
supporting documentation of payment, establishment of a payment plan, or 
correspondence with the creditor. This debt is unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.f (medical and telecommunications accounts $384, $514, $275, 
$227): 
 
 Applicant claimed he was a victim of identity theft and he had no knowledge of 
these debts. He disputed them previously. None of these debts appear on his most 
recent credit report. These debts are resolved.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 28, 30, 32-34, 37-38, 40-44; GE 1-2; AE A-B. 
 
4 GE 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 45; Ans.; GE 3. 
 
6 AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had six delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
5 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple, and his deliberate failure to pay his tax 
debt shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. It was only when 
his security clearance was in jeopardy that he finally paid the tax debt. He failed to 
produce documentation supporting his claimed payment of the credit card debt. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s failed to present evidence that his financial difficulties were beyond 
his control. Quite the contrary is the case. He had the means to pay his tax obligation, 
but chose not to do so as a form of “civil disobedience.” Overall, the record evidence 
does not support that Applicant’s actions were responsible under the circumstances. AG 
¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
  
 Applicant has not sought financial counseling. Applicant finally paid the tax debt 
once his security clearance was threatened, but he did not present documentation 
showing payment of the credit card debt. Evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve 
the remaining debts is lacking. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) partially apply.  
 
 The latest credit report does not show SOR debts ¶¶ 1.c – 1.f, which 
corroborates Applicant’s claim that he successfully disputed these debts. AG ¶ 20(e) 
applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.f.  
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and the circumstances by which he 
became indebted. However, I also considered that he has made little effort to resolve 
his financial situation, even when he had the resources to do so. He has not established 
a meaningful track record of debt management, which causes me to question his ability 
to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.c – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
