 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 15-04359 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns 
under Guideline H, drug involvement, due to his marijuana use while holding a security 
clearance. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 15, 2016. He admitted both allegations and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing. On May 12, 
2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
 
2 
 
 
(FORM). The Government submitted documents identified as Items 1-3. The FORM 
was mailed to Applicant, who received it on June 13, 2016. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence. He did not reply to the FORM. 
The SOR and the Answer (combined as Item 1) are the pleadings in the case. FORM 
Items 2 and 3 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 13, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admits both SOR allegations and provides a narrative statement. His 
admissions and other comments are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 31 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in December 2009. He 
works as a senior engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for the same 
employer since February 2010. He was granted a security clearance in August 2012. 
He has never married and has no children.1 
 
 Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) in 
August 2014. In it, he disclosed that he smoked marijuana twice: once in about May 
2013 and once in about February 2014. He disclosed using drugs while possessing a 
security clearance.2  
 
 Applicant’s Answer includes the following statement:  
 
As explained during my investigation, I was struggling with situational 
depression, which impacted my good judgment. The occurrences of 
marijuana use was [sic] very infrequent (again, as explained during my 
investigation) to two (2) instances. The resolution of my usage was 
resolved by seeking help through a therapist and my primary care 
physician in addition to removing the cause of my situational depression 
(finding satisfying work and moving back to [City 1]). I have not used or 
acted in such a manner since the dates noted above and do not plan to 
fall back to such circumstances.3 
 
Applicant has offered no documentary evidence to corroborate or detail his medical 
treatment, or any prognosis. He has offered no character evidence. 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 2. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 1 at 2.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In May 2013, while Applicant was living in City 1, State 1, he was at a friend’s 
home, and the friend offered him marijuana in a pipe. Applicant took two puffs from it. In 
his interview, he referred to this person as his “then friend” but provided no details.4 In 
October 2013, Applicant moved to City 2, State 2, for his job. In February 2014, he went 
to a retail marijuana outlet in City 2 and purchased a marijuana-laced piece of chocolate 
candy for $20.00. He went home and ate it. Afterwards, he felt lethargic and light-
headed for about three hours.5   
 
 In his interview, he admitted knowing that his marijuana use was unlawful in City 
1, State 1, but he used marijuana anyway. Under the laws of State 2, marijuana use 
was legal, but Applicant acknowledged that he was aware that marijuana use was 
prohibited for persons holding a security clearance and was considered a security 
violation. He used marijuana anyway. He did not disclose his drug use to his employer 
or to DOD until he filled out his SCA. After becoming depressed about his move, 
Applicant saw a therapist from February to May 2014. He was also prescribed 
medication for depression by his primary care physician from April to September 2014. 
Applicant indicated in his SCA and in his interview that he did not intend to use 
marijuana or other controlled substances in the future.6   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
4 Item 3 at 5.  
 
5 Item 3.  
 
6 Items 1, 2, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) any drug abuse; 
 
 (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant used and possessed marijuana on two occasions.7 The second 
instance came after he purchased a marijuana-laced candy bar. Both occurred while he 
held a security clearance. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and  
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
The Directive does not define “recent” and the DOHA Appeal Board has declined 
to adopt a “bright-line” rule as to the recency of conduct raising security concerns. The 
extent to which security concerns are mitigated through the passage of time is a 
question that must be resolved based on the evidence as a whole.8   
 
Applicant used marijuana about three years ago, about two years before he 
answered the SOR. His use is not particularly recent. However, this is outweighed by 
the fact that Applicant knew on both occasions that marijuana use was against federal 
law, and that it was prohibited for those possessing a security clearance. His use of 
marijuana in 2014 also was the result of several conscious decisions: he sought out a 
marijuana retail outlet, went in and purchased the drug in candy form, and then went 
home and consumed it. Knowing what he was doing was wrong, he had several 
opportunities to alter his course, yet he did not do so. Considering these factors, 
Applicant’s marijuana use cannot be mitigated solely because it is three years old.   
 
Applicant’s marijuana use occurred when he was depressed. Though he sought 
counseling and medical assistance for a time, there is no evidence that any counseling 
                                                          
7 The language of SOR ¶ 1.a suggests that Applicant’s marijuana use “from May 2013 to February 2014” 
was more frequent. In fact, the record supports a finding that he used marijuana on two occasions nine 
months apart during this period. 
 
8 See ISCR 15-02479 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul 27, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-01847 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 
2015)).   
 
 
6 
 
 
has continued (or that it is no longer necessary). There is no evidence beyond 
Applicant’s own assertions that he will not find himself in similar circumstances again, 
or, if he does, that he now has the appropriate tools and insight for handling his 
depression more appropriately. Thus, there is insufficient evidence that his drug use 
occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. His use of marijuana while 
holding a clearance casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness and good 
judgment. Applicant has not set forth sufficient evidence that AG ¶ 26(a) applies.  
 
Applicant has not shown sufficient evidence that he no longer associates with the 
person with whom he used marijuana in fall of 2013. He has not shown sufficient 
evidence that he has changed or avoided the environment where drugs were used. 
Even though his last marijuana use was about three years ago, Applicant has not set 
forth sufficient evidence that AG ¶ 26(b) applies. 
 
Applicant sought counseling related to his depression, and was prescribed 
medication for it by his primary care physician. He provides few details, and no 
corroborating documentation, either about the circumstances of his treatment or of any 
prognosis. The evidence shows he twice succumbed to using marijuana, despite 
knowing that such use was illegal and prohibited while holding a security clearance. 
There is some evidence of mitigation under AG ¶ 26(d), but it is insufficient and does 
not outweigh the choices Applicant made in willingly violating state and federal law as 
well as the rules and regulations for those entrusted with access to classified 
information by twice using marijuana while holding a security clearance.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
7 
 
 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old. After being granted a security clearance in August 
2012, he chose to use marijuana twice over a nine-month period in 2013-2014, despite 
knowing it was illegal and prohibited for those possessing a clearance. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the drug involvement guideline.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
