 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00130 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, 
Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, Guideline E, personal conduct, 
and Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 11, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 5, 2017. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 13, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 2, 2017. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through C. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 10, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 3.a. He denied 
SOR ¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old. He is not married and has no children. He received a 
bachelor’s degree in 2012. He worked as an intern for a federal contractor while in 
college from 2008, during summer breaks and over holiday periods, until 2012. He 
completed a security clearance application (SCA) and was granted a security clearance 
in 2008, a requirement for his internship. After graduating from college, he worked for a 
different federal contractor. He was also self-employed , until May 2015, when he began 
working for his current employer, a federal contractor.1  
 
 As part of his present employment requirement, Applicant completed a security 
clearance application (SCA) in May 2015. In it, he disclosed that he had used marijuana 
about five times from September 2009 to October 2014. His use was recreational at 
social gatherings with friends. He further disclosed that he did not intend to use 
marijuana in the future and understood it was an illegal controlled substance.2 Applicant 
used marijuana after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant testified that he used marijuana four times during college and once two 
years later with a small gathering of friends. He was aware he held a security clearance 
when he used marijuana during his internship. He testified that he did not appreciate the 
significance of his actions at the time. He was aware of his employer’s anti-drug policy. 
He testified that he no longer associates with most people from college with whom he 
used marijuana. His girlfriend used it one time with him at the same social gathering, but 
he believed that was her only use. She does not use illegal drugs. Since October 2014 
when Applicant last used marijuana, he has had infrequent contact with one other 
person with whom he used marijuana. That contact has been mostly through electronic 
media.3  
 
 Applicant was required to take a drug test for his current job and acknowledged 
his employer’s anti-drug policy. He also receives annual drug training. He testified that 
after graduating from college, he had a better appreciation for the significance of illegal 
                                                          
1 Tr. 16-22. 
 
2 GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 22, 26-36, 44-45. 
 
3 
 
 
drug use. He testified he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. He intends to 
respect the law. Applicant disclosed his prior drug use to his security manager and 
some of the security staff. He testified that he takes full responsibility for his actions. He 
disclosed his illegal drug use on his SCA because he believed it was important to be 
honest about it, as a matter of integrity.4  
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from his mother. She describes her son as a 
person who has overcome limitations of opportunities to advance his goals in life. He 
follows rules and was a good student. He is smart, dependable, thoughtful, honest, 
reliable and ethical. He willingly helps others, and he has a good work ethic.5  
 
 Applicant provided performance evaluations where he is described as an 
exceptional team member who willingly takes on extra work and is able to work on tasks 
at any level of complexity. His supervisor noted that he is fully accountable for every 
choice he makes and never seeks to avoid or shift responsibility to someone else. He 
can be trusted to act decisively, follow through on his commitments, and quickly correct 
any problems.6  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
4 Tr. 37-46. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
6 AE B and C. 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) any drug abuse;  
 
 (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana five times from about September 2009 to 
October 2014 after being granted a security clearance. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
 
5 
 
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
Applicant voluntarily disclosed his marijuana use on his 2015 SCA. He admitted 
he used it five times from September 2009 to October 2014. He was granted a security 
clearance as a college student while working for a federal contractor during the summer 
and on holiday breaks. He credibly testified that as a young college student, he did not 
fully appreciate the significance of his actions. He does not intend to use illegal drugs in 
the future. He understands the seriousness of his conduct while holding a security 
clearance and that use of illegal drugs is a violation of his employer’s drug policy. He no 
longer associates with most of those with whom he previously used marijuana. He used 
it with his girlfriend, but he believed she only used marijuana once. He has infrequent 
contact with one other person with whom he used marijuana. Applicant is remorseful for 
his conduct and understands its significance. It has been almost two and half years 
since his last use of marijuana. I find a sufficient period of time has elapsed, the conduct 
was infrequent, and it is unlikely to recur. Applicant has demonstrated his intention not 
to abuse any drugs in the future. I find AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(e) personal conduct, concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
 
6 
 
 
as engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant used marijuana after he was granted a security clearance. AG ¶ 16(e) 
applies to Applicant’s conduct. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
 The same analyses under the drug involvement mitigating conditions apply under 
the personal conduct mitigating conditions. A sufficient period has elapsed since his last 
marijuana use. Applicant reported his actions, has matured, and understands the 
significance of his conduct. He is committed to not using illegal drugs in the future. 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence of successful rehabilitation, and future criminal 
conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under criminal conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s drug involvement was cross-alleged under the criminal conduct 
guideline. Applicant illegally used marijuana five times from about September 2009 to 
October 2014. The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
The same analyses of facts under the drug involvement mitigating conditions 
apply under the criminal conduct mitigating conditions. In particular, a sufficient period 
has elapsed since Applicant’s last marijuana use, and he provided sufficient evidence of 
successful rehabilitation, such that future criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 
32(a) and 32(b) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines H, E, and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 27 years old. He voluntarily reported his marijuana use on his 2015 
SCA. I found his testimony credible and forthright. He was granted a security clearance 
 
8 
 
 
while he was a college student. He readily admitted he did not appreciate the 
significance of illegal drug use when he was in college and after being granted a 
clearance. Since then he has matured, takes full responsibility for his conduct, and 
understands his obligations for holding a security clearance. He does not intend to use 
illegal drugs in the future. It has been almost two and a half years since his last use. He 
is remorseful and regrets his conduct. I have given considerable weight to Applicant’s 
age at the time of the use and the fact he self-reported his conduct. I am confident that 
he will not abuse illegal drugs in the future. I find Applicant has met his burden of 
persuasion. I do not have questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the drug involvement, personal conduct, and criminal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
