 
1 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 16-01948 
  ) 
Applicant for a Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Tovah Minster, Esq. 
 
For Appellant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 Decision  
______________ 
 
CURRY, Marc, Administrative Judge: 
 
Appellant fell behind on his child support and student loan payments during a 
lengthy period of unemployment  between August 2013 and June 2014. Since regaining 
full-time work he has contacted his creditors and organized payment plans, to which he 
has been adhering. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
 On August 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was unable 
to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility 
for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 18, 2016, admitting the allegations, and 
requesting a hearing, whereupon the case was assigned to me on February 13, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on March 2, 2017, 
scheduling the case for March 20, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. I considered 
three Government exhibits (GE 1 – GE 3), and four Applicant exhibits (AE A – AE D), 
together with Applicant’s testimony. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 
27, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Appellant is a 42-year-old married man with three children ranging in age from nine 
to sixteen. The two older children are from an earlier relationship. He lives with his wife 
and his youngest child, and shares custody of the older children. Applicant has a Bachelor 
of Science degree in science and consumer studies. Applicant works for a defense 
contractor in the field of acquisitions and project management. (Tr. 14) He has been in 
this line of work for 17 years, and held a security clearance from 2001 to 2010. (Tr. 15) 
 
 Applicant has been working for his current employer for two years. He is highly 
respected on the job. According to his employer, Applicant “almost single-handedly 
ensures [the] office effectively initiates and maintains extensive engagement with some 
of the information technology industry’s largest . . . companies.” (AE A at 1-2) Moreover, 
per his supervisor, “to say [Applicant] is a critical member of our team would be an 
understatement.” (AE A at 1) Applicant was recently promoted to team leader. 
 
 In August 2013, Applicant was laid off from his previous job. (Tr. 16) He was 
subsequently unemployed for the next nine months. He tried to make ends meet with a 
combination of freelance contracting jobs, and other part-time work, but gradually began 
falling behind on his debts. By the time he obtained another full-time job in June 2014, he 
had exhausted his savings, totaling $3,000. He also had incurred approximately $15,000 
of delinquent child support debt (subparagraph 1.a) and $24,000 of delinquent student 
loan debt (subparagraphs 1.b – 1.c). (Tr. 28)  
 
 Once Applicant regained full-time employment in June 2014, he contacted his 
creditors, and initiated payment plans. Under his child support plan, he pays $1,000 
monthly, one-third of which is applied to the delinquency. As of the hearing date, he had 
paid $3,100 in 2017, and, in sum, had reduced the delinquency by $4,000 (AE C; Tr. 26)  
 
 Applicant resumed his student loan payments in August 2016. Since then, he has 
paid the creditor $196 per month. (AE D) He has reduced the balance by approximately 
$2,000. 
 
 Applicant never had financial problems before the 2013 layoff. He and his wife 
completed a financial management course between 2011 and 2012. (Tr. 28) He earns 
$70,000 annually, approximately $40,000 less than he earned before being laid off in 
2013.  
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 Every recommended personnel security decision must be a commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The decision 
must be arrived at by applying the standard that the grant or continuance of a security 
clearance or access to classified information is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.  
 
 The adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in 
considering the “whole-person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by 
the totality of his or her acts, omissions, motivations, and other variables. Each case must 
be judged on its own merits. No unfavorable personnel security clearance or access 
determination may be made without granting the individual concerned the procedural 
benefits set forth in the Regulation.   
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration. Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information is resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this 
recommended decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information” (AG ¶ 
18).  Appellant history of delinquent debt triggers the applicability of AG ¶ 19(a), “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”   
  
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
 
4 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems did not occur because of irresponsible spending. 
Instead, they occurred after he lost his job in 2013 and was subsequently unemployed or 
underemployed for nine months. Since regaining full-time employment, Applicant has 
contacted his creditors and has steadily been repaying his debts, consistent with payment 
plans. He has done so despite earning less than two-thirds of what he earned before the 
2013 layoff. Under these circumstances, all of the mitigating conditions, as referenced 
above, apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
appellant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Appellant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
In reaching my conclusion, I considered Applicant’s stellar work record, the cause of his 
financial delinquencies, and his current financial stability. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1: Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                    
_________________ 
MARC E. CURRY 
Administrative Judge 
 
