 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01729 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), J (Criminal Conduct), and G (Alcohol Consumption). Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns under Guidelines J and G, but she did not mitigate the 
concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 3, 2015, seeking to 
continue a clearance she has held since January 2002. (Tr. 28.) On August 17, 2016, 
the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) sent her a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines F, J, and G. 
The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, 
Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 16, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
20, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on November 18, 2015. On the same day, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing 
was scheduled for December 8, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which were 
admitted without objection. I kept the record open until January 6, 2017, to enable her to 
submit additional evidence. She timely submitted AX E through I, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 16, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h, 
1.j, and 2.a. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.k, 2.b, and 3.b. She neither denied nor admitted 
SOR ¶ 3.a, which cross-alleges SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. Her admissions in her answer and 
at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old systems engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since December 2001. She received an associate’s degree in computer systems and 
networking from a community college in November 2001.  
 
 Applicant is divorced and has no children. She testified that she began excessive 
drinking in 2008, when she met her ex-boyfriend, and they went to bars six days a week 
and consumed 10 to 12 beers each time. She estimated that she spent between $2,000 
and $2,500 per month on alcohol during 2008 through 2012. (Tr. 56-57.) 
 
 In August 2009, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence (DUI). 
She pleaded guilty, was placed on probation for one year, and required to attend a 
victim-impact panel. 
 
 In October 2012, Applicant was charged with felony DUI and illegal drug 
possession. She denied that the drugs in her car were hers. In November and 
December 2009, she underwent a chemical assessment by a licensed alcohol and drug 
counselor. The counselor noted that she was being treated with prescription drugs for 
anxiety, mild depression, and narcolepsy, and he advised her to abstain from alcohol 
due to the potential combined effects of alcohol and drugs. He cited the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR) and 
found “episodic, indiscriminate, and legally problematic alcohol use,” but he did not 
specify any of the listed alcohol-related diagnoses in DSM-IV-TR. He recommended 
drug and alcohol education. (AX H.)  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
In April 2014, Applicant was evaluated by a licensed alcohol and drug counselor, 
who diagnosed her with drug abuse, which is specifically listed in DSM-IV-TR. He also 
recommended alcohol and drug abuse education. (AX D.) 
  
Applicant’s trial for the October 2012 DUI and drug charges was delayed by plea 
negotiations and issues about the lawfulness of the drug seizure. In May 2014, she 
pleaded guilty to misdemeanor DUI, and adjudication of the drug offense was deferred. 
She was placed on supervised probation until May 2017. Due to a job transfer in 
October 2012, her probation was transferred to another state. She attended a victim-
impact panel in March 2015. She started a 12-hour outpatient substance abuse 
treatment program in March 2015 and completed it April 2015. (GX 5; AX C; 54-55.) In 
May 2015, she was released from probation and the drug charge was dismissed. (GX 4; 
AX A; AX B.)  
 
Applicant last consumed alcohol on May 12, 2014. (Tr. 55.) Her relationship with 
the ex-boyfriend has ended. She no longer lives in the state where her excessive 
drinking occurred. She testified that her alcohol-abuse treatment helped her realize how 
much more enjoyable her life could be. Instead of spending her time sitting at a bar, she 
exercises on a regularly, explores new activities, and has made new friends. (Tr. 56.) 
 
 Applicant’s excessive spending on alcohol caused her financial problems, 
resulting in the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.a-1.k and reflected in credit bureau 
reports (CBRs) from June 2015 and March 2016. (GX 2; GX 3; Tr. 33.)  
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h and 1.j were credit-card 
accounts that became delinquent in 2011 and 2012. The total credit-card debt alleged is 
about $31,700. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f was forgiven, and Applicant received an IRS 
Form 1099-A, but the record does not reflect the reason for the creditor’s decision to 
forgive the debt. Applicant has not contacted any of the creditors about resolving the 
debts, but she testified that she intends to use a credit-counseling agency to resolve 
them. (Tr. 33-36, 41.)  
 
 Applicant denied owing the $388 medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i and the $470 
utility bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. She testified at the hearing that she had not contacted 
these creditors or disputed the debts with the credit reporting bureau. (Tr. 41.) She 
testified that the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.k provided electricity for the marital home before 
she divorced and moved out, but her ex-husband did not take her name off the account. 
(Tr. 25-26.) The June 2015 CBR reflects that it was an individual account in her name. 
(GX 2 at 6.)  
 
 Applicant testified that she contacted a credit-counseling agency in June 2015 
but had not been able to meet with the agency because of her frequent work-related 
travel. (Tr. 35.) She was scheduled to meet with the agency shortly after the hearing. 
(Tr. 37.) She did not report any progress with the credit-counseling agency in her post-
hearing submission. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant earns about $4,500 per month. Her monthly expenses are about 
$3,189, leaving a net monthly remainder of about $1,311. (AX E.) She presented 
evidence that loss of her security clearance would reduce her monthly income to about 
$3,295, leaving a net monthly remainder of about $121. (AX F.) However, the financial 
consequences of the loss of a security clearance “are not a relevant consideration in an 
adjudication of an applicant’s security eligibility.” ISCR Case No. 02-09220 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 28, 2004.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
5 
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by her CBRs, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant’s divorce in 2011 was a condition 
beyond her control, but her excessive spending on alcohol with a boyfriend began in 
2008, and it was the primary cause of her financial problems. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Although Applicant has contacted a credit-
counseling agency, she presented no evidence that any counseling has taken place, 
and her financial situation is not under control. 
 
 AG 20(d) is not established. Applicant presented no evidence of payments on the 
debts alleged in the SOR. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f was cancelled, but there is no 
evidence that the cancellation was preceded by good-faith efforts to resolve it. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.k. 
In her post-hearing submission, she claimed that she disputed the medical debt in SOR 
¶ 1.i online, but she submitted no documentation of the dispute.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at 
the hearing establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 31(a) (“a 
single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses”) and AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted, or convicted”).  
 
7 
 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 32(a) focuses on whether the criminal conduct was 
recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The 
determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are established. Applicant’s last criminal conduct was in 
October 2012, more than four years ago. She is remorseful and determined to not 
repeat past mistakes. There has been no further criminal conduct, and she successfully 
completed her period of probation.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are 
potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(e): evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program; and 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 22(f): relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 The allegation in SOR ¶ 3.b that Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol 
dependence is not supported by substantial evidence. The 2009 chemical assessment 
did not specifically find alcohol dependence, and the April 2014 diagnosis was alcohol 
abuse, not alcohol dependence.  
 
 Applicant’s two DUI convictions establish AG ¶ 22(a). Her admission of six years 
of binge drinking with a boyfriend establishes AG ¶ 22(c).2 Her diagnosis of alcohol 
abuse in April 2014 establishes AG ¶ 22(e).3 However, AG ¶ 22(f) is not established by 
Applicant’s relapse after the chemical assessment in 2009, because she did not 
undergo an alcohol rehabilitation program.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and  
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
                                                          
2 The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism defines “binge drinking” as “a pattern of drinking 
that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 0.08 percent or above,” which typically occurs 
when a man has five or more drinks or a woman has four or more drinks within a two-hour period. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fact Sheets – Binge Drinking, www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-
sheets/binge-drinking.htm.  
 
3 The diagnosis was by a licensed alcohol and drug counselor and not by a licensed clinical social worker. 
However, AG ¶ 22(e) is not limited to the specific credentials that are enumerated. Instead, it 
“contemplate[s] a broad range of providers who, by education and by position, are qualified to diagnose 
and treat alcohol dependence and other substance abuse disorders.” ISCR Case No. 07-00558 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 7, 2008). 
 
 
9 
 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) are established by the passage of time, Applicant’s 
acknowledgment of her alcohol abuse, her completion of the outpatient treatment 
program, and her established pattern of abstinence. AG ¶ 23(d) is not fully established, 
because there is no evidence of a favorable prognosis. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F, J, and G in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid and sincere at the hearing. She has held a clearance for 15 
years, apparently without incident. She appears to have put her alcohol abuse behind 
her, but she has not been proactive in putting her financial house in order. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
Applicant does not yet have a plan, and she has not taken any significant steps to 
resolve her financial problems. She testified that she intends to resolve her delinquent 
debts, but promises to pay delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute for a track 
 
10 
 
record of paying debts in a timely manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 
19, 2008).  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F, J, 
and G, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by her criminal conduct and 
alcohol consumption, but she has not mitigated the security concerns raised by her 
history of delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue her eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
