 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00163 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On June 4, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F.  The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance 
should be granted or denied. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On June 24, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On August 1, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 4, 2016, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On October 19, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for  
November 30, 2016. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
8, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, did not call 
any witnesses, and did not offer any exhibits. On December 8, 2016, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except for SOR ¶ 1.i, which he 
denied.  After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 71-year-old senior design checker previously employed by a 
defense contractor. At the time of his hearing, he was in a “dormant stage” seeking a 
security clearance to enhance his employment potential (Tr. 15-18, 22-25; GE 1) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1963. After high school, he attended 
community college and earned approximately 30 credit hours, but did not graduate. (Tr. 
18-19; GE 1)  Applicant was married from 1967 to 1984, and that marriage ended by 
divorce. He remarried in 2001. Applicant has five adult children and one stepchild. 
Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. (Tr. 19-21; GE 1) 
 
Financial Considerations   
 
Applicant’s SOR contains 14 allegations consisting of 10 itemized debts totaling 
$98,678, three mortgage foreclosures – two that occurred in 2010 and one that 
occurred in 2012, and a charged-off credit card account for an undisclosed amount. 
These allegations are documented in Applicant’s May 2011 and March 2015 SF-86s, 
June 2011 and August 2015 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interviews (OPM PSI), and May 2011, April 2015, December 2015, and July 2016 credit 
reports. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – n; GE 1 – 8; Tr. 28-36) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to buying homes for his children when 
the housing market was at its peak. However, when the housing market crashed, the 
properties “were worth less than half of what we owed and our children bailed on the 
properties and we were stuck with mortgage payments and no rental income. We tried 
renting the properties and couldn’t rent for what our mortgage payments were.” (SOR 
answer) 
 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
When Applicant was in his “early 60s,” approximately ten years ago, he bought 
three homes and a mobile home at the peak of the housing market. He bought those 
homes with the belief “the market would continue to go up,” adding “I didn’t buy them 
with the intention of losing money.” As noted, he bought these homes to help his 
children, but they moved out and Applicant attempted to replace them with renters. He 
was unable to charge enough rent to cover the mortgages and used credit cards to 
upgrade the properties and cover rental expenses. (Tr. 26-36, 53-55)  
 
Applicant received correspondence from several credit card companies offering 
to reduce the amounts owed, but he was unable to repay the requested amounts. The 
last time Applicant received any communication with any creditor was “a couple two, 
three years” ago. He received a Form 1099 from one of his creditors writing off a debt, 
but he could not offer specific details about the debt. (Tr. 36-38) Applicant considered 
filing bankruptcy, but decided against doing so because of his age and not all debts 
were eligible for discharge as well as concern about jeopardizing his clearance 
eligibility. (Tr. 38-40) He has not made any payments on his credit cards since “around 
2011.” (Tr. 63-64) 
 
Applicant and his wife live in a senior citizen gated community, own three cars, 
valued at “about $80,000,” and are able to live comfortably on his monthly retirement 
income of $14,000 net a month. (Tr. 40-42, 46-48)  Applicant does not believe that he is 
irresponsible and maintains that he has re-established his credit that was “previously 
destroyed because of these foreclosures and credit card debts.” (Tr. 43) He does not 
use his money to pay off his outstanding debts because his wife cannot work and he 
wants to provide for her in the event something should happen to him. (Tr. 43) Applicant 
asked that his clearance be granted so he could continue to work. He maintains that he 
is trustworthy and has a long history of following security procedures. (Tr. 44-46) 
 
The record lacks any evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, or otherwise resolved any of the delinquent SOR accounts. He did not 
describe financial counseling or present a budget. (Tr. 55) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the 
SOR. The facts established raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG 
¶ 18 as follows: 
  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations). In response to the Government’s information, it 
was incumbent on Applicant to produce information sufficient to refute or mitigate the 
facts established against him. He did not submit any documents in response to the SOR 
that demonstrated he paid or otherwise resolved any of his debts or financial concerns 
raised.  
 
In summary, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by the 
Government’s information. In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before 
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has been 
gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is presumed to be a mature, 
responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information suggesting his financial 
problems are being addressed, doubts remain about his suitability for access to 
classified information. Protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these 
adjudications. Accordingly, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.n:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
