 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01318 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Applicant’s Husband, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 16, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
14, 2016. The case was assigned to me on November 7, 2016.  On November 10, 
2016, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for December 8, 2016. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered four 
exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 4.  Applicant and 
Applicant’s husband, who also served as her personal representative, testified and 
offered two exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – B. The 
transcript (Tr.) was received on December 16, 2016. The record was held open until 
 
2 
 
 
December 22, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely 
submitted additional documents which were admitted without objection as AE C – AE H. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 During the hearing, it was discovered that Applicant and her husband owed the 
federal government approximately $70,000 in federal income taxes for tax years 2012, 
2013, and 2014.  Department Counsel motioned to amend the SOR pursuant to 
paragraph E3.1.17 of the Directive to conform with the evidence as follows: 
 
1.e  You are indebted to the Federal Government for delinquent taxes for 
tax years 2012, 2013, and 2014 in the approximate amount of $70,000. As 
of the date of the Statement of Reasons, the taxes remain unpaid. 
 
 There being no objection, the motion to amend the SOR was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.d, but indicates the balance of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is incorrect. She denies the 
allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a.   
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to maintain a security clearance. She has worked for her current employer 
since September 2016. She has worked for various defense contractors for 33 years. 
She has held a Secret clearance since 1984.  She has a bachelor’s degree. She is 
married and has a 27-year-old daughter.  (Tr. 17 – 21; Gov 1)  
 
On January 13, 2015, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP) during a periodic background reinvestigation. A 
subsequent security clearance background investigation revealed the following 
delinquent debts:  a charged-off credit card account in the amount of $9,869 (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Gov 2 at 4; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2); a charged-off credit card account in the amount 
of $9,454 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 4; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2); a charged-off credit card 
account in the amount of $7,559 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 2 at 12; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 2); and  
a student loan that was at least 120 days past due in the amount of $15,000. (SOR ¶ 
1.d: Gov 4 at 2). 
 
Applicant and her husband have suffered a 60 percent loss of family income 
since 2012. In 2012, her husband lost his salaried position of $165,000 a year. 
Applicant’s salary was also reduced by 15 percent as a result of a transitioning to a new 
onsite contractor who won the competitive award. They were advised by an attorney to 
pay secured debt first with the funds that they have available. They focused on paying 
 
3 
 
 
their mortgage and car payment. They intend to satisfy all delinquencies once they have 
available income. (Tr. 25 – 27, 54; Answer to SOR) 
 
In 2012, Applicant and her husband’s combined gross income was approximately 
$240,000. In 2015, their combined gross income was $170,000.  Applicant’s husband 
testified that his annual income for consulting in 2016 will be approximately $50,000.  
Applicant’s annual salary is $81,000. The household combined income will be $131,000 
for 2016. (Tr. 21, 41-42, 51)   
 
In 2015, Applicant’s husband was an employee of a government contractor. He 
worked on a special project for them. The work ended in October 2015, and the 
Applicant’s husband stopped receiving a salary in November 2015. He remains a 
director of the company, but he is not compensated. Since 2013, Applicant’s husband 
has been working with the company and a local university to establish an aviation 
center at a local base. He agreed to work without compensation. Once the aviation 
center is established, he would be compensated at a salary of $200,000 annually. He 
does not have a written contract. It is a verbal agreement. After the hearing, he provided 
a letter from the executive vice president of international programs at the company, who 
confirmed that Applicant’s husband will be rehired with an annual salary of $200,000 
once they obtain funds. He anticipates the funds will be available in February 2017. (Tr. 
52-53; AE B, AE H)  
 
The current status of the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR are as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: $9,869 charged-off credit card account: No payments have been 
made toward this account. No arrangements have been made to enter into a payment 
plan towards this account. (Tr. 27, 53) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $9,454 charged-off credit card account: No payments have been 
made toward this account. No arrangements have been made to enter into a payment 
plan towards this account. (Tr. 28, 53) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $7,559 charged-off credit card account: No payments have been 
made toward this account. No arrangements have been made to enter into a payment 
plan towards this account. (Tr. 29, 53) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: $15,000 student loan account, delinquent over 120 days:  This is a 
student loan for Applicant’s daughter’s college education. Applicant disputes the 
balance on the account. The current balance on the account is $8,213.  In August 2016, 
Applicant entered into a student loan rehabilitation agreement with a student loan 
collection agency.  She agreed to pay $5.00 per month for 9 months in order to 
rehabilitate this defaulted student loan account. The payment is being deducted 
automatically from her debit card. Once the loan is rehabilitated, Applicant and her 
husband will be required to pay a new monthly loan payment. (Tr. 30-31; AE C) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s husband handles all of the financial affairs. She testified that they 
currently do not earn enough to pay off the bills. They pay what they can. Applicant’s 
husband testified in more detail about the family finances. Applicant and her husband 
are responsible for $80,000 of their daughter’s student loans. The loan alleged in the 
SOR is in rehabilitation. Another student loan is in forbearance. The loan has been in 
forbearance on several occasions since December 2014. The current forbearance 
period ends soon and they will need to work out a payment plan. Their daughter does 
not help with the student loans. She is paying for graduate school. (Tr. 46-47, 61)  
 
During the hearing, Applicant’s husband was asked whether they were current on 
federal and state income taxes. He testified that they owe the IRS approximately 
$70,000 in back taxes for tax years 2012, 2013, and 2014. They are speaking with an 
IRS employee to work out a repayment agreement. They also owe taxes to the state. In 
June 2016, Applicant’s husband entered into a repayment agreement with the state to 
pay $245 a month towards the state tax debt. They owe $3,178.82 for tax year 2011 
and $1,702.06 for tax year 2013. (Tr. 58-59, 69-70; AE E)  
 
After the hearing, Applicant submitted more detailed information about the 
household budget. Their total monthly income is $10,150.  Their monthly living 
expenses total $10,147.  They have $3.00 left over each month after expenses. (AE D) 
They also provided the name and number of the IRS employee that they were working 
with to resolve the federal tax debt. There was no repayment agreement in effect at the 
close of the record. (AE D; HE III)  
 
Applicant and her husband are both over 62.  They are able to protect their home 
under their state’s homestead law. The law prevents creditors from placing a lien on 
their home. The law also protects up to $15,000 in the value of a car used for personal 
transportation from creditors who hold a judgment and seek a levy on execution. 
(Answer to SOR; AE F; AE G)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Under personal conduct, the SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified her 
security clearance application, dated January 13, 2015, by answering “no” to the 
question in section 26, “Other than previously listed, have any of the following happened 
to you? In the past seven years, have you been over 120 days or more delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which you were the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosigner or guarantor. It is alleged 
Applicant falsified the answer to this question because she did not list the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, a student loan that was not alleged in the SOR that was 120 
days overdue, and a 120-day past-due delinquent credit union account that was not 
alleged in the SOR. (Gov 1; section 26) 
 
Applicant says that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c were not 120 days 
past due at the time she completed her security clearance application. She had 
completed a ten-month rehabilitation program for the student loan account. She was 
 
5 
 
 
advised the student loan would be removed for her credit report at the completion of the 
plan. The plan was completed in November 2014. This was before she completed the e-
QIP and she believed the account was current because it was in forbearance at the time 
she completed the e-QIP in January 2015.  Finally, the credit union loan became 120 
days delinquent the month she completed her application. This account is now current. 
(Answer to SOR) 
 
Applicant relied on the information that her husband provided her when 
completing the e-QIP application. She was aware that they were behind on some of the 
bills, but not more than 90 days behind. She followed her husband’s recommendations 
because he pays all of the bills. (Tr. 33-38) During the hearing, it was clear that 
Applicant did not have a firm grasp on the family finances. Particularly telling, was when 
her husband testified that they owed over $70,000 in federal taxes. She was clearly 
surprised by this information.  
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
Applicant has had a long successful career as a government contractor. She 
provided copies of several awards and letters of appreciation received during her 
career. (AE A)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
6 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations), apply. Applicant has three delinquent 
credit card accounts with a total balance of $26,882.  She and her husband also owe 
the IRS approximately $70,000 for tax years 2012, 2013 and 2014.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
 
7 
 
 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
With regard to Applicant’s tax debts for tax years 2012, 2013, and 2014, the 
recent emphasis of the DOHA Appeal Board on security concerns arising from tax 
cases is instructive. See ISCR Case No. 14-05794 at 7 (App. Bd. July 7, 2016) 
(reversing grant of security clearance and stating, “His delay in taking action to resolve 
his tax deficiency for years and then taking action only after his security clearance was 
in jeopardy undercuts a determination that Applicant has rehabilitated himself and does 
not reflect the voluntary compliance of rules and regulations expected of someone 
entrusted with the nation’s secrets.”); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Aug. 
18, 2015) (reversing grant of a security clearance and emphasizing the applicant’s 
failure to timely file and pay taxes); ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 
2014) (reversing grant of a security clearance, noting not all tax returns filed). See also 
ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3, 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (reversing grant of a security 
clearance, and stating “A security clearance represents an obligation to the Federal 
Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other 
obligations to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”).  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
 AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems are continuing. There is no indication that the delinquent 
debt will be resolved in the near future.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies with respect to Applicant’s 
husband’s reduction in income in 2013.  However, it does not justify the $70,000 federal 
tax debt for tax years 2012, 2013, and 2014. While Applicant was unaware of the tax 
situation, she should been aware of it.   
 
8 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply.  While Applicant has resolved some debt, she has not taken steps to 
resolve most of the debts alleged in the SOR. The promise of her husband’s future 
salary is not sufficient to conclude the financial problems will be resolved. A promise to 
pay in the future does not mitigate the financial concern. The DOHA Appeal Board has 
indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute for a 
track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the student loan account alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant is currently in a rehabilitation program regarding this loan. A 
question remains as to whether Applicant will be able make payments towards the loan 
once the rehabilitation period is complete and the lender wants to negotiate a higher 
payment. The three credit card debts and the $70,000 tax debt remain unresolved. I 
cannot conclude Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to resolve these debts. As such, 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply with respect to these debts.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good 
faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim 
the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 
2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
9 
 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The following disqualifying condition potentially applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
  
 I cannot conclude Applicant deliberately omitted her delinquent accounts in 
response to section 26 on her e-QIP application dated January 13, 2015.  She relied on 
the answers provided by her husband when completing the questions regarding their 
finances because he handles the household finances. She did not intentionally falsify 
her response to section 26 of her security clearance application. She cooperated fully 
with the government once she learned of the delinquent accounts. The personal 
conduct concern is found for Applicant.  
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
awards and her over 30 years of service holding a security clearance and working for a 
federal contractor. I considered that she had no control over her husband’s employment 
situation.  I also considered that Applicant, as a security clearance holder, should have 
been aware of her duty to be financially responsible. Ignoring her financial situation 
 
10 
 
 
does not make her any less responsible for the delinquent debts and the tax debts.  
Those debts remain unresolved and there is no indication that they will be resolved in 
the near future.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.c, 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant  
     
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
