 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00886 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 29, 2016, and requested a hearing. I was 
assigned the case on October 7, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
 
October 26, 2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which I admitted into 
evidence without objection. The Government’s discovery letter and exhibit list were 
marked as hearing exhibits (HE) I and II. Applicant testified, but did not offer any 
exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 2, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the allegations in the SOR (with some 
explanations). I adopt those admissions as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. He is single, never been married, and has no children. 
He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since June 2012. He is a 
high school graduate.1   
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant: (1) used marijuana, with varying frequency, from 
approximately June 2009 to approximately October 2014; (2) purchased marijuana from 
approximately September 2009 to approximately October 2014; and (3) continues to 
associate with people who use marijuana. 
  
 Applicant began using marijuana when he was 18 years old. He started using it 
socially with friends. He felt it was better than abusing alcohol. He used anywhere from 
about once a month to sometimes once every three months. He still associates with 
some of the friends with whom he used to smoke marijuana. In particular, he lives with 
his sister-in-law who smokes weekly. She uses marijuana when Applicant is present in 
the house. He also works with a friend with whom he used marijuana. He purchased 
marijuana sometimes once a month, sometimes less frequently. He bought one ounce 
each time. He bought marijuana from dealers until it became legal in his state in 
January 2014, and then he bought from dispensaries. He knew marijuana use was 
against federal law and, up until January 2014, against state law when he was using it. 
Applicant has strong feelings that marijuana use should be legal based upon its 
medicinal value and its significance to some cultures.2 
 
 As stated above, Applicant began working for his current employer in June 2012. 
He was using marijuana at the time he became employed. His employer has a drug 
policy and does pre-employment drug testing. He knew when he was going to be tested 
and stopped using marijuana long enough to produce a negative result. Upon his hiring, 
he resumed using marijuana until about October 2014. He stopped using at this time 
because he was now working in an area where he was eligible to support a DOD 
account, which required a security clearance. He reported his drug use on his security 
clearance application and during his background interview. He claims to not have used 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5, 6, 22; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 17, 26, 28-29, 31-32, 34-35, 38-39; GE 1-2; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
 
marijuana since then. He further claims he will not use marijuana in the future, despite 
his personal views, because he wants to protect his job and provide for his family. He 
conceded that he would probably still be using marijuana if it was allowed while holding 
a security clearance. He stated that he intends to leave his job in March 2017 to do 
volunteer work in a foreign country for about six months. Upon return, he hopes to get 
his job back. He has never received drug counseling or treatment.3  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
3 Tr. 22-25, 29-30, 33-34, 37-38. 
 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 Applicant used and purchased marijuana on multiple occasions between 2009 
and 2014. Applicant has strong personal feelings that marijuana use should be 
legalized. Based upon his testimony, his demeanor while testifying, his continued 
association (by living in the same house) with a regular marijuana user, and his written 
remarks in his answer, I find that he failed to clearly and convincingly establish that he 
intends to discontinue his marijuana use. I further find that all the above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the drug involvement 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a regular basis between 2009 and October 2014. 
Some of these uses were after being hired by his current employer with a drug policy. 
He has strong personal feelings for the legal use of marijuana. He still lives with his 
sister-in-law, with whom he used to smoke marijuana, and she continues to use it on a 
weekly basis, at times while he is present. He claims he stopped using marijuana in 
October 2014. Given these circumstances, Applicant failed to establish that his use of 
marijuana is sufficiently remote, infrequent, or otherwise does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Given his personal feelings 
about marijuana use and his lack of drug counseling, under these circumstances, his 
claimed abstinence since October 2014 is insufficient to establish his intent not to use in 
the future. Likewise, his continued association with frequent marijuana users also does 
not further his stated intent not to use marijuana in the future. He did not provide a 
signed letter of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. AG ¶¶ 
26(a) and 26(b) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered how forthcoming 
Applicant was in his security clearance application and during his background interview 
about his marijuana use. However, I also considered that he used marijuana on multiple 
occasions after gaining employment with a company that has a drug policy, lives with a 
 
6 
 
 
frequent marijuana user, and has strong personal feelings about the legalization of 
marijuana. Applicant provided insufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
