 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-01486 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
Tuider, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate Guidelines E (personal conduct) and F (financial 
considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
  
On February 17, 2015, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On July 2, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.   
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. Specifically, the SOR set 
forth security concerns arising under Guidelines E and F.  
 
On July 18, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On August 15, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On September 26, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me. On November 7, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
2 
                                         
 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for November 17, 2016. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 7 exhibits; Applicant offered 12 
exhibits; and all exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. (Transcript (Tr.) 
12-14; GE 1-7; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-L) On November 29, 2016, DOHA received a 
copy of the transcript of the hearing.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.b through 
1.w. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked as 
a field engineer for his current employer since October 2016. (Tr. 14-16; GE 1) In 1981, 
Applicant graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) In 1983, he received an associate’s degree 
in computer technology. (AE B) He has worked on an Air Force Base for various DOD 
contractors and held a security clearance for 28 years. (Tr. 15-16)  
 
In 1983, Applicant married, and in 1993, he divorced. (Tr. 17) In 1998, he married, 
and in 2010, he divorced. (Tr. 17) He has been living with a partner for the last three or 
four years. (Tr. 18) He has a 28-year-old daughter. (Tr. 18) He never served in the U.S. 
Armed Forces. (Tr. 19)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he committed the traffic violations and criminal 
offenses alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.w as further described below. (SOR response) 
He said he timely paid his fines. (SOR response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant was arrested in January 1982 and charged with felony 
grand theft. The charge was nolle prosequi and the case was dismissed. Applicant had 
no recollection of the facts relating to this arrest. (Tr. 40) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.k, and 1.o allege Applicant was cited for speeding in May 1994, 
July 1994, December 1996, and December 1999.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges Applicant was charged with battery and resist or obstruct officer 
without violence in October 1994. (GE 4) The case was nolle prosequi, and he received 
pretrial diversion. (GE 4) Applicant had a dispute with his domestic partner. (Tr. 42) He 
denied that he committed a battery. (Tr. 43)  
 
The SOR alleges Applicant was cited for the following traffic violations: ¶ 1.e for 
failure to stop/yield at intersection in February 1995; ¶ 1.f for a seatbelt violation in July 
1995; ¶ 1.g for unlawful speed and careless driving in January 1996; ¶ 1.h for seatbelt 
violation and careless driving in March 1996; ¶ 1.j for improper parking-ridge, tunnel, 
 
3 
                                         
 
crosswalk in June 1996; ¶ 1.l for careless driving, financial responsibility violation, and 
misrepresentation of insurance; ¶ 1.m for careless driving in April 1997; ¶ 1.p for running 
a stop sign in May 2000; ¶ 1.r for an unspecified traffic infraction in July 2004; ¶ 1.u for 
unlawful speed and expired registration 1st offense in January 2011; . 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges Applicant was charged with and found guilty of battery. 
Adjudication was withheld pending completion of court-ordered conditions. Applicant 
denied that he committed battery on his domestic partner. (Tr. 43) He completed anger-
management counseling, and the charge was dismissed. (Tr. 43-44) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n alleges Applicant was charged with driving under the influence of 
alcohol or drugs (DUI) and reckless driving. The DUI charge was nolle prosequi and 
adjudication was withheld on the reckless driving charge. (Tr. 44, 58) Applicant was in an 
accident and he said, “somebody had to be charged.” (Tr. 44)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.q alleges Applicant was charged with DUI, impeding traffic, failure to 
maintain lane, and reckless driving in July 2001. All of the charges were nolle prosequi, 
except he pleaded guilty to reckless driving in December 2005. (Tr. 45, 58) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.s alleges Applicant was charged with boating under the influence 1st 
offense, and restricted area violation in August 2006. He was convicted of reckless 
operation of a vessel in November 2006. (Tr. 45-46, 58) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.t alleges Applicant was convicted of DUI 1st Offense in November 2008. 
Applicant was drinking alcohol before driving his motorcycle; however, he believed there 
was insufficient evidence to prove his guilt. (Tr. 47-48, 59) He contested the charge; 
however, he was convicted of DUI. (Tr. 47-48)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.v alleges Applicant was charged with reckless driving, DUI 2nd offense, 
DUI damage to property or person, and .015 or higher 1st offense in March 2014. (Tr. 49-
50) In October 2013, Applicant had an accident on his motorcycle, and he was injured. 
(Tr. 49-51, 59) Applicant was convicted of DUI 2nd Offense and reckless driving in 
December 2014. He received 20 hours of alcohol classes; he attended alcohol 
counseling; he paid his fine; and he successfully completed one year of probation. (Tr. 
52-53, 66) In 2016, he received a business-purpose driver’s license. (Tr. 54)    
 
SOR ¶ 1.w alleges Applicant was convicted of driving while license suspended 1st 
offense in May 2014. (Tr. 60) 
 
Applicant had five alcohol-related interactions with the police. (Tr. 56-60) He has 
two alcohol-related convictions, both DUIs. He attends alcohol-related counseling once a 
month and Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or other substance abuse meetings once a week. 
(Tr. 62-63) He stated that he has not consumed alcohol since October 2013. (Tr. 55, 60) 
He has an alcohol-interlock device installed in his vehicle. (Tr. 62) He said he is a more 
responsible driver now. (Tr. 61) 
 
   
 
4 
                                         
 
Financial Considerations 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges a charged-off home-equity bank debt for $50,513. (Tr. 23) The 
debt was charged off in 2012. (SOR response) Applicant received a loan modification on 
his mortgage in January 2015 under the Home Affordable Modification Program or HAMP. 
(Tr. 21, 24, 26) The delinquent interest and home equity loan were added into the principal 
of the loan. (Tr. 21, 24) His new mortgage is $275,000 and the new monthly payment is 
$400 less than before the loan modification. (Tr. 21)  
 
SOR ¶ 2.b alleges a bank-collection debt for $46,846. Applicant admitted the debt, 
and said he did not pay it. (Tr. 27) This debt was charged off in 2009. (SOR response) 
The debt was based on a line of credit, and was charged off and then dropped from his 
credit report.  (Tr. 27, 33)   
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.f allege two delinquent medical debts for $14,051 and $390. 
Applicant disputed his responsibility for the medical debts. (Tr. 20) The $14,051 debt 
resulted from a motorcycle accident. (Tr. 27) An insurance company may have paid the 
$14,051 medical debt, or it could have been charged off and dropped from his credit 
report. (Tr. 22, 27-28) The $390 debt is unresolved; however, Applicant is communicating 
with the creditor and his medical insurance company. (Tr. 30) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 2.e allege two charged-off bank debts for $12,163 and $12,119 
owed to the same bank. The creditor charged off the two debts in 2010. (SOR response) 
Applicant did not pay the two debts. (Tr. 29) The two debts no longer appear on 
Applicant’s credit report. (Tr. 28-29) 
 
SOR ¶ 2.g alleges a bank-collection debt for $10,452. In 2012, the debt was 
charged off. (Tr. 31; SOR response) 
 
Around August 2009, his divorce began, and in September 2010, his divorce was 
final. (Tr. 20) His financial problems began in August 2009. (Tr. 25) When Applicant 
realized he could not afford to keep the SOR debts in current status, he contacted the 
creditors and requested payment plans. (Tr. 19; SOR response) In 2011, Applicant took 
a two-week vacation to Europe. (Tr. 69) In 2014, Applicant received a civil settlement from 
an accident in December 2010. (GE 2 at 10) It is unclear how much of the civil settlement 
was required to resolve medical bills from the accident. All of the SOR creditors refused 
to renegotiate payments while the debts were current. (Tr. 19) His rental property went to 
foreclosure. (Tr. 20, 38) He was not aware of whether there was a deficiency on the 
foreclosure; however, he believed there was sufficient equity for the mortgage company 
to recover the mortgage. (Tr. 39) 
 
Applicant employed a financial attorney to resolve his debts. (Tr. 32) He could not 
explain what the attorney did to resolve his debts. (Tr. 36) He ended his relationship with 
the financial attorney around March 2015. (Tr. 38) He said all of his non-SOR debts are 
current. (Tr. 20) He provided a budget. (Tr. 21) He has a positive monthly remainder of 
$311. (AE E) His budget did not include any of the SOR debts in his list of debts. (AE E) 
 
5 
                                         
 
His credit score ranges from 717 to 793, which is good to excellent. (Tr. 22; AE C) He has 
paid all of his federal taxes, and he is a resident of a state with no income tax. (Tr. 56)  
 
Applicant’s employee performance evaluations showed excellent work, 
professionalism, and contributions to the mission of his employer. (AE F-AE J) In 2014, 
his employer lauded Applicant’s 25 years of experience working at the Air Force base 
and described him as an “integral part of the team” and a “key participant” in the mission. 
(AE L) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
6 
                                         
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Two personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable. Those two disqualifying conditions provide:   
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of . . . or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing.  .  .  .   
 
AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) apply. Applicant violated rules when he committed more 
than 20 traffic offenses from 1982 to 2014. Two traffic offenses were misdemeanor DUIs. 
 
7 
                                         
 
Five offenses involving the police were alcohol related. When Applicant committed 
criminal offenses, he engaged in conduct which adversely affects his personal, 
professional, and community standing. Further analysis concerning applicability of 
mitigating conditions is required.    
 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
In ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013), the Appeal Board 
concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the applicability of mitigating 
conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
AG ¶ 17(e) provides some mitigation because Applicant has fully disclosed his 
offenses. Law enforcement, the courts, and security officials are well aware of his 
offenses, and he is not vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress because of his 
offenses. Applicant is credited with mitigating SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d.  He denied the conduct 
alleged; he did not enter a guilty plea or no contest plea; and he was not found guilty or 
the charge was dismissed.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. He has more than 20 traffic violations.  
In some instances, the police cited him for multiple violations in a single traffic stop. See 
 
8 
                                         
 
e.g., SOR ¶ 1.l.  Some traffic offenses are minor, and some are serious. He has two DUI 
convictions. Each time he exceeded the speed limit, did not wear his seatbelt, drove 
recklessly, or violated driver’s license restrictions, and committed a DUI, he engaged in 
rule violations under the personal conduct guidelines. Those rule violations show 
Applicant’s questionable judgment, is untrustworthy and unreliable, and may not properly 
safeguard protected information. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SOR response, and hearing record. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
 
9 
                                         
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,1 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant presented some important mitigating information. His divorce damaged 
his finances and constituted a circumstance beyond his control. He did not provide 
enough specifics about how these circumstances adversely affected his finances, and he 
did not show that he acted responsibly to address his delinquent SOR debts during the 
previous four years. Applicant currently has very good to excellent credit scores. He is 
credited with mitigating the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a for $50,513. This debt, including his 
delinquent interest, was included in his HAMP refinanced mortgage. 
 
                                            
1A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
10 
                                         
 
Applicant relies upon the absence of delinquent debts from his current credit report 
to mitigate security concerns. “[T]hat some debts have dropped off his credit report is not 
meaningful evidence of debt resolution.” ISCR Case No. 14-05803 at 3 (App. Bd. July 7, 
2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015)). The Fair Credit 
Reporting Act requires removal of most negative financial items from a credit report seven 
years from the first date of delinquency or the debt becoming collection barred because 
of a state statute of limitations, whichever is longer.3 Debts may be dropped from a credit 
report upon dispute when creditors believe the debt is not going to be paid or when the 
debt has been charged off.  
 
Applicant did not provide enough details about what he did to address his SOR 
debts over the last five years. He did not provide sufficient documentation relating to six 
of his SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, 
photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any 
payments to the creditors; (2) correspondence to or from the creditors to establish 
maintenance of contact;4 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was 
responsible for the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to 
negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was 
attempting to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide 
documented proof to substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
In sum, Applicant is not credited with mitigating six SOR debts totaling $96,021. 
The six SOR debts are not resolved because he did not provide sufficient documentation 
showing progress paying the debts, a reasonable dispute of any debts, or an inability to 
make monthly payments on address any of the six SOR debts. There is insufficient 
assurance that his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not 
recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish mitigation of 
financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
                                            
3Title 15 U.S.C. § 1681c. See Federal Trade Commission website, Summary of Fair Credit 
Reporting Act Updates at Section 605, https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0111-fair-credit-reporting-
act.pdf.  
 
4“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
11 
                                         
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has worked as 
a field engineer for his current employer since October 2016. In 1983, he received an 
associate’s degree in computer technology. He has worked on an Air Force Base for 
various DOD contractors and held a security clearance for 28 years. There is no evidence 
of security violations.   
 
Applicant’s employee performance evaluations showed excellent work, 
professionalism, and contributions to the mission of his employer. In 2014, his employer 
lauded Applicant’s 25 years of experience working at the Air Force base and described 
him as an “integral part of the team” and a “key participant” in the mission.  
 
Applicant provided some important positive financial information. His divorce in 
2010 adversely affected his finances. His divorce is a circumstance beyond his control. 
He received financial assistance from an attorney, and he generated a budget. His current 
credit score is very good to excellent.   
 
The negative financial information is more persuasive. Applicant provided 
insufficient corroborating or substantiating documentary evidence of payments and 
established payment plans for his SOR debts. After crediting Applicant with mitigating the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.a through HAMP refinancing, six delinquent debts totaling $96,021 
remain to be resolved. He did not provide any evidence of any payments to address the 
six SOR debts. His actions show lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raise 
unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts, 
financial history, and especially documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate 
security concerns.  
 
The personal conduct factors weighing against continuation of his security 
clearance are more substantial than the mitigating circumstances. From 1982 to 2014, 
Applicant committed more than 20 traffic offenses, including two DUIs, which are 
misdemeanor-level criminal offenses. Although he completed alcohol-related classes and 
counseling, he still has an alcohol-interlock device on his vehicle. 
 
12 
                                         
 
  It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). 
Unmitigated security concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With a track record of behavior consistent with 
his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. Personal 
conduct and financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. It is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to reinstate Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j through 1.w:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.b through 2.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider  
Administrative Judge 
