                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  16-00695           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On June 10, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865 (Exec. Or.), Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DoD
on September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 26, 2016, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on August 12, 2016, and was scheduled for hearing on October
25, 2016. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of five exhibits (GEs 1-5).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on November 7, 2016.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of a student loan
consolidation agreement and supporting payments. For good cause shown, Applicant
was granted 14 days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded three
days to respond. Applicant did not supplement the record with any documented evidence.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy
relief in March 1992 and was discharged in July 1992; (b) petitioned for Chapter 7
bankruptcy relief in April 2013 and was discharged in September 2013; and (c)
accumulated two delinquent student loan debts exceeding $30,000. Allegedly, these
debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed his first bankruptcy petition in 1992 resulted from his divorce
and financial issues with his ex-wife. He claimed his second bankruptcy petition was
based on advice from his attorney. Further, he claimed he attempted to settle his student
loan debts with payment offers refused by the lender. And he claimed he is working with a
hearing advocate again to settle his student loan debts.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 56-year-old tech support engineer for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in November 1986 and divorced his spouse in February 1999.
(GE 1) He has three adult children from this marriage. Currently, he is in a cohabitation
relationship with his girlfriend who contributes to his household expenses. (GE 1; Tr. 36,
43) Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in September 2007. (GE 1; Tr. 30, 39) 
Applicant enlisted in the Air Force (AF) in April 1980, served four and a half years
of active duty, and received his honorable discharge in October 1984. (GE 1) Between
May 1985 and October 2003, he served in the active AF Reserve and received an
honorable discharge in October 2003. (GE 1) 
2
Applicant has worked for his current employer since August 2006 as a tech
support engineer. (GE 1) He was unemployed between June 2005 and August 2006.
Between August 1997 and May 2005, he worked as an aircraft mechanic for another
employer. (GE 1; Tr. 29)
Applicant’s finances
Between 1986 and 1992, while married, Applicant accumulated a number of
delinquent debts. When he could no longer service the debts, he petitioned for Chapter 7
bankruptcy relief in March 1992. He received his bankruptcy discharge in July 1992.
(GEs 1 and 2)
In 2005, Applicant enrolled in on-line college classes and financed his education
with two student loans. (GEs 5-8; Tr. 34) For the first six months of his employment with
his current employer (even after receiving a promotion), he earned less than $30,000 a
year and fell behind with his debts. After assuming care responsibility for his mother, 
diagnosed with Alziemers and Dementia, and his girlfriend’s mother who underwent
double knee repairs, his bills continued to escalate out of control. (Tr. 26) 
Based on the advice of a lawyer in late 2012, Applicant ceased paying on his
student loans. (Tr. 30, 40-41) When he petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in 2013,
he included his student loans in his bankruptcy petition. (GE 4) However, the loans were
not dischargeable and remain personal obligations of Applicant. (GEs 3-4; Tr. 41) 
Applicant scheduled $292,000 in assets in his 2013 bankruptcy petition, $195,327
in secured claims, and $102,176 in unsecured, non-priority claims (inclusive of his two
student loans with an aggregate balance of $25,853). (GE 4) His bankruptcy discharge
relieved him of about $28,000 in consumer debt. (GE 4; Tr. 37-38, 49) 
Between July 2016 and October 2016, Applicant’s student loan lender (SOR ¶¶
1.c and 1.d) garnished Applicant’s earnings for two months and recovered $1,800 worth
of student loan indebtedness. (Tr. 42) After receiving Applicant’s personal financial
statement, the lender ceased further garnishment initiatives. (Tr. 32, 42) Applicant
remains in default on his two student loans. (GEs 5-8) He has not made any further
payments on his loans since 2012. (GEs 5-6 and 8) 
In an interview with an investigator of the Office of Personnel management (OPM)
in October 2015, Applicant was asked about his debts. (GE 8) Once he was confronted
by the investigator with the specifics, he told the investigator about his individual
delinquent debts. (GE 8) 
Applicant has since been in verbal discussion with his student loan lender in his
attempt to consolidate the loans and establish payment arrangements on them. (Tr. 44-
45)  Reportedly, the lender declined to accept monthly payments from Applicant on the
3
loan balance. (Tr. 30, 44)  Beyond his reported contact with the lender Applicant has1
provided no documentary evidence of his addressing his student loan debts with either
loan payments or a forbearance application since the discharge of his Chapter 7
bankruptcy petition in 2013. (GEs 5-6 and 8; Tr. 33) Nor did he provide any evidence of
financial counseling or budgeting.
Character references
Applicant is well-regarded by friends who have known him for many years. They
credit Applicant with honesty, trustworthiness, good ethical behavior, and strong moral
character. (AE A) 
    P   o  l i c  i e  s     
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
 It is not clear how the loan balance rose from Applicant’s scheduled  $25,853 aggregate balance in his1
2013 Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition to the $53,000 aggregate balance he currently reports to be owing on
the two loans.  Presumably, the increased balance is attributable to compounded interest. Without
documentation from the lender, though, accurate estimates cannot be made.
4
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
5
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of Chapter 7 bankruptcy
petitions (one in 1992 and another in 2013) and accumulation of defaulted student
loans.  Since he was discharged in bankruptcy in 2013, he has taken no documented
steps to address his student loans, and they remain in default.
Applicant’s two bankruptcy discharge and accumulated student loan defaults in
issue warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the financial
consideration guideline.  DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC
¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s extended unemployment in 2005-2006 and assumption of care
responsibilities for his mother and girlfriend’s mother account for some of his financial
difficulties, enough to merit limited application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Because
he provided no evidence of his addressing his identified debts after he returned to
gainful employment in August 2006, he cannot satisfy the second prong of MC ¶ 20(b)
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.
Without more documented information about his delinquent debts and corrective
steps he has taken to mitigate the Government’s financial concerns, Applicant cannot
demonstrate the level of financial progress required to meet the criteria established by
the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial
condition with responsible efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No.
08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s lack of documented repayment
actions of his own with the resources available to him prevent him from meeting the
Appeal Board’s requirements for demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan.
12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No.
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
6
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant has provided no evidence of
demonstrated efforts to date to address and resolve his student loan defaults. Based on
the information provided, a whole-person assessment of Applicant’s strong character
references from friends who know him and vouch for his honesty and trustworthiness
are not enough to overcome concerns raised by his history of difficulties in managing
his finances.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s history of
bankruptcies and uncured student loan defaults, Applicant’s actions in addressing his
delinquent debts are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the
guideline governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to
the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d. of Guideline F. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.d:                      Against Applicant
Conclusions                                 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
8
