 
1 
 
                                                               
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00713 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts 
and failure to file his federal and state income tax returns. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 30, 2016, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
 
2 
 
was submitted on September 22, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on October 6, 2016. Applicant did not respond to the Government’s 
FORM. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 5 are admitted in 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old senior technician employed by a defense contractor 
since May 2010. He obtained a high-school diploma in 1998 and attended college from 
1998 to 2002, but did not earn a degree. He honorably served in the U.S. military from 
February 2004 to February 2010, during which time he was deployed to Iraq from 
January 2007 to March 2008. He previously worked for a defense contractor from 
January 2010 to May 2010, and was deployed to Kuwait for 10 days in February 2010 
and to Afghanistan from February to May 2010. He has held a DOD security clearance 
since February 2003. As of his March 2014 Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(SF 86), he was not married and he did not have any children.2     
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2011 and 2012, as required. It also alleges six delinquent debts 
totaling $3,718. Applicant admitted all of the allegations in his response to the SOR.  
 
 Applicant listed on his March 2014 Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86), and discussed during his April 2014 interview with an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator, his failure to file his 2011 and 2012 federal income tax 
returns. He acknowledged during his April 2014 interview that he had not formally filed 
his taxes for tax years 2011 and 2012. A credit report from March 2014 also verifies 
Applicant’s delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b to 1.d and 1.f to 1.g. 
  
 Applicant failed to file his tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012 because he 
missed the deadline and then forgot about them. He realized he had not filed his tax 
returns when he received a letter from the IRS in October 2013, notifying him that he 
owed $350 in taxes for tax year 2011, and that he had to submit a completed IRS 1040 
form with his payment. He had not done so as of his April 2014 interview, but indicated 
that he intended to file his 2011 and 2012 tax returns when he filed his 2013 tax returns 
in 2014. Applicant has not provided documentation to show that he has taken action to 
file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2011 and 2012.3  
 
 Applicant indicated during his April 2014 interview that he was unaware of the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b to 1.d and 1.f to 1.g. He intended to pull his credit report, contact 
the creditors, and immediately pay the debts if they were his. In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant stated: 
 
                                                          
2 Items 3, 5. 
 
3 Items 1-5. 
 
3 
 
The debts listed here total $3,718. This amount is less than 1 month’s pay 
and would not be a financial burden to immediately pay these debts. 
These debts to not leave me financially overextended. 
 
Applicant failed to provide documentary evidence of actions he may have taken to 
resolve the SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.b to 1.g.4  
 
 Applicant indicated during his April 2014 interview that his debts are isolated and 
not part of a pattern. He described his current financial status as good and indicated 
that he timely paid all his debts. He also indicated that he has no intention to repeat or 
continue his financial delinquencies.5  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
4 Items 1-5. 
 
5 Item 5. 
 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has six delinquent debts totaling $3,718. He was made aware of these 
delinquent debts during his April 2014 interview. He indicated then that he intended to 
pull his credit report, contact the creditors, and immediately pay the debts if they were 
 
5 
 
his. He also stated that it would not be a financial burden to him to pay these debts. He 
failed to provide documentary evidence of actions he may have taken to resolve the 
SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.b to 1.g.  
 
In addition, Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax 
years 2011 and 2012, as required. He failed to do so because he missed the deadline 
and then forgot about them. He was reminded in October 2013, when he received a 
letter from the IRS. However, he has not provided documentation to show that he has 
taken action to file his relevant tax returns. There is sufficient evidence to support the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2011 
and 2012, as required, because he missed the deadline and then forgot about them. He 
has not provided documentation to show that he has taken action to file his relevant tax 
returns, or that he has resolved his delinquent debts. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur, and they continue to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Circumstances 
beyond his control did not contribute to his financial problems. He has not received 
financial counseling. His financial problems are not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 
20(c), 20(d), and 20(g) do not apply. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant honorably served in the U.S. military from February 2004 to February 
2010, and he was deployed to Iraq from January 2007 to March 2008. When he 
previously worked for a defense contractor from January 2010 to May 2010, he was 
deployed to Kuwait for 10 days in February 2010 and to Afghanistan from February to 
May 2010. He has held a DOD security clearance since February 2003. 
 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies, though minimal, remain unresolved. In 
addition, he has not provided proof that he has filed his 2011 and 2012 tax returns. His 
finances remain a security concern. He failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
  
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
