 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00687 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
March 8, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has a history of 
financial indebtedness demonstrated by numerous delinquencies. She has fully 
resolved 9 of the 15 debts listed on the Statement of Reasons (SOR). She has entered 
into a rehabilitation agreement on the remaining six debts, all student loans, and 
credibly avers that she will make payments on these debts until they are repaid. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 12, 2016, the Department of Defense issued an SOR to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 31, 2016. (Answer). The case was 
assigned to me on October 17, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 2, 2016, scheduling the hearing for 
November 28, 2016. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
her own behalf, but offered no exhibits. The record was left open for receipt of 
documents. On January 3, 2017, Applicant presented AE A through AE P. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE A through AE P and they were admitted. The record 
then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 6, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is unmarried 
and has a two-year-old son. She has worked for her employer since July 2015. (Tr. 18-
20  
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 15 debts in the 
total amount of $29,174.1 Her debts are identified in the credit reports entered into 
evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial delinquencies to losing track of her accounts 
and bills after she moved. She testified that, since learning of her delinquent accounts 
during the security clearance investigation, she has been in contact with all of her 
creditors and is working to resolve all delinquencies as her funds allow. (Tr. 43.)  
 
Applicant is indebted on six delinquent student loan accounts in the approximate 
amount of $27,048, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f. Applicant used these student 
loans to finance her college education. She graduated in 2011, and applied to have 
repayment of the loans deferred after graduation. She was granted deferments through 
May 2013. However, she incorrectly believed that the student loans continued to be 
deferred until she met with the security clearance investigator, who questioned her 
about the student loans being placed for collection. Immediately after that interview, she 
contacted the collection agent. She entered into a rehabilitation agreement with that 
creditor to pay $5 monthly for a year, to “get them out of collections.” In January 2017 
the payments were to increase to $200 per month. She provided a copy of the 
rehabilitation loan agreement with the collection agent that holds these accounts. 
Applicant is resolving these debts. (AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E; AE F; Tr. 21-29, 
42.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $120, as stated 
in SOR ¶ 1.g. She provided a letter from this creditor, dated January 3, 2017, which 
reflected this debt has been paid in full. It is resolved. (AE G; AE P; Tr. 30-32.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s debts are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.m, 1.o, and 1.p. There is no SOR ¶ 1.n. 
 
3 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the amount of $777, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant presented an undated receipt showing $777.90 was paid to the 
original creditor. This debt is resolved. (AE H; Tr. 32-34, 39.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the amount of $54, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.i. She presented a letter from the collection agent, dated November 28, 2016, 
which reflects this debt is paid in full. It is resolved. (AE I; Tr. 34-35.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the amount of $258, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.j. She presented a letter from the collection agent, dated November 28, 2016, 
which reflects this debt is paid in full. It is resolved. (AE J; AE P; Tr. 35-36.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the amount of $35, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.k. This was for the same underlying delinquency as the $194 debt stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.l. She presented a letter from the collection agent with both account numbers 
on it, dated September 2, 2016, which reflects this debt is paid in full. It is resolved. (AE 
K; AE L; AE P; Tr. 36-37.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the amount of $162, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.m. She presented a statement, which shows she made a $162.80 payment on 
December 30, 2016. This debt is resolved. (AE M; AE P; Tr. 37-38.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the amount of $261, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.o. Applicant presented a letter, dated November 25, 2016, which reflects this 
debt was paid in full. It is resolved. (AE N; Tr. 38-39.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent in the amount of $265, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.p. Applicant presented a transaction history, which reflects this debt was paid 
in full on November 7, 2016. It is resolved. (AE O; Tr. 38.) 
 
Applicant testified that after paying her monthly expenses, she has $200 to $300 
left over at the end of the month. (Tr. 41.) She planned to use that money to pay her 
student loans when her payments increased. (Tr. 42.) She decreased her spending by 
not “going out.” (Tr. 42.) 
 
Applicant presented three letters of recommendation. Her task leader stated that 
Applicant is a “quick learner” with a “solid reputation.” A coworker reflected that 
Applicant is “diligent, responsible, and a go getter.” A former coworker noted that 
Applicant is devoted and takes initiative. (AE P.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had a history of financial indebtedness and inability to satisfy her debts, 
demonstrated by the six delinquent student loans and nine delinquent collection 
accounts identified on her August 2015, July 2016, and October 2016 credit reports. 
The evidence raises the above two security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. Three apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has resolved nine formerly 
delinquent accounts. She has a rehabilitation agreement with the collection agent that 
holds her student loans and has made the required payments, albeit minimal, for a year. 
She has matured and understands the importance of maintaining accounts in good 
standing. She has decreased her spending in order to pay her bills on her income. She 
credibly testified that she will continue to pay her student loans until they are resolved. 
Her past financial irresponsibility is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) offers mitigation. 
Similarly, Applicant made a good-faith effort to address all of her debts, and all of her 
delinquent financial obligations are under control. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) has been fully established. 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
respected by her present and former colleagues and performs well at work. She has 
worked hard to address her delinquencies. She has demonstrated reasonable and 
responsible actions with respect to her debts by either resolving them or rehabilitating 
student loan accounts to the satisfaction of her creditors. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns. After listening to her testimony and observing her 
demeanor, I find no reason to conclude that she will not continue making payments on 
her student loans.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
7 
 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
