 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ADP Case No. 16-01251 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence of her efforts to resolve nine 
delinquent statement of reasons (SOR) debts totaling $25,481. Financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated, and eligibility to occupy a public trust 
position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 6, 2015, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for National 
Security Position (SF 86). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On July 20, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, 
and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 
1987, as amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF 
was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position, which entails 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
access to sensitive information. (HE 2)1 The DOD CAF recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether her access to sensitive information should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2)  
 
Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR allegations, and she 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On September 20, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed. On October 13, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On December 21, 2016, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a hearing notice setting the hearing 
for January 17, 2017. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, the 
Government provided five exhibits; Applicant offered three exhibits; and all exhibits 
were admitted into evidence without objection. (Tr. 16-18; GE 1-5; Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A-C) On January 24, 2017, I received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.).    
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 
and 1.o. She also provided explanations and mitigating information. (HE 2) Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a contractor, and she has been employed 
by the same contractor in health care services for 10 years. (Tr. 5, 7-8, 19; GE 1) In 
2003, she graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) She attended a vocational college for 18 
months. (Tr. 6) In 2007, she married, and in 2016, her divorce was final. (Tr. 6-7) Her 
child is seven years old. (Tr. 7) She has not served in the U.S. Armed Forces. (Tr. 7) 
There is no evidence that she violated trustworthiness rules, committed any crimes, 
abused alcohol, or used illegal drugs.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are documented in her credit reports, SCA, OPM 
PSI, and SOR response. The status of the 17 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is as 
follows. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a debt arising from a repossessed vehicle for $11,196. 
Applicant admitted her responsibility for this debt. (Tr. 21-23; SOR response) Applicant 
was unsure when the vehicle was purchased and when it was repossessed. (Tr. 21-23) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a student loan debt for $7,192 delinquent in the amount of 
$296. Applicant has one student loan. (Tr. 25-28) On January 16, 2017, the creditor 
indicated Applicant applied for forbearance on her student loan. (Tr. 25-28; AE C)  
                                            
1The amount “$1,1565” in SOR ¶ 1.m was amended without objection to read “$1,156.” (Tr. 13-
14) 
 
2The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups, or locations in order to protect Applicant and her family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a charged-off debt arising from a repossessed vehicle for 
$5,818. Applicant admitted her responsibility for this debt. (Tr. 28-29; SOR response) In 
2016, the vehicle was voluntarily repossessed because she was behind on her 
payments. (Tr. 29) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a collection debt for $4,807. Applicant denied responsibility for 
this debt. She did not see the debt on the report from the credit repair company, and 
she did not research the debt. (Tr. 30-31) The debt is not listed on her September 20, 
2016 Equifax credit report. (GE 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a utility collection debt for $918. Applicant did not believe the 
debt was valid because she did not have an account with the utility company. (Tr. 31) 
The debt is not listed on her September 20, 2016 Equifax credit report. (GE 5)  
 
  SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a charged-off debt for $490. Applicant purchased items from a 
catalog for her home. (Tr. 32) She admitted responsibility for this debt. (Tr. 32; SOR 
response) She said she believed her husband was helping to pay for this debt. (Tr. 32)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a collection debt for $420. Applicant said she did not know the 
basis for the debt. (Tr. 32-33) The debt is listed on her September 20, 2016 Equifax 
credit report. (GE 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a charged-off debt for $258. Applicant purchased items from a 
catalog for her home. (Tr. 33) She admitted responsibility for the debt. (Tr. 33) She said 
she believed her husband was helping to pay for this debt. (Tr. 33) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a telecommunications-collection debt for $128. Applicant said 
she had an account with the telecommunications company; however, she did not 
believe it went to collections. (Tr. 34) She has not contacted the creditor. (Tr. 34)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.j alleges a collection debt for $77. She admitted responsibility for this 
debt; however, she has not paid it. (Tr. 35) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m, allege three student loans placed for collection for 
$995, $3,010, and $1,156. Applicant said the student loans were combined and 
transferred. (Tr. 35-36) SOR ¶ 1.b is a duplication of these three debts. (Tr. 36) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n alleges an apartment-collection debt for $4,457. Applicant said her 
husband stayed in the apartment after she left “and just let it go.” (Tr. 37) Her husband 
was living there without paying rent. (Tr. 37) She said her credit repair was able to get 
the account removed from her credit report. (Tr. 37) She did not explain why she 
believed she was not liable or responsible for the debt. (Tr. 37) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o alleges a collection debt for $2,547. Applicant borrowed $2,600 to 
enable her husband to purchase a vehicle. (Tr. 38) He sold the vehicle and did not pay 
the loan. (Tr. 38) 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q allege two insurance-collection debts owed to the same 
creditor for $59 and $60. Applicant denied responsibility for these two debts because 
she was unfamiliar with the insurance company collecting the debt. (Tr. 39) These two 
debts are not listed on her September 20, 2016 Equifax credit report. (GE 5) 
 
Applicant did not take any action to contact the creditors on the SOR or resolve 
the SOR debts before February 2016. (Tr. 41) In February 2016, Applicant hired a credit 
repair company. (Tr. 40) Applicant wanted to wait to see if credit repair was successful 
at having the debts removed or had “fallen off” of her credit report. (Tr. 23, 34; AE A) If 
the debts were verified, she intends to arrange payment plans and pay them. (Tr. 24, 
39) She checks with the credit repair company every six months for the status of her 
accounts and credit. (Tr. 24) She wanted to wait and see which debts were left on her 
credit report after one year. (Tr. 34) She did not make any payments to any SOR 
creditors. (Tr. 48) In a few months, she plans to start making payments to any SOR 
creditors that remain on her credit report. (Tr. 47) 
 
Applicant’s accounts became delinquent after her separation in 2011 or 2012 and 
divorce from her husband. (Tr. 41, 46) She and her husband separated and reconciled 
several times before their divorce was final. (Tr. 46) Applicant’s divorce documentation 
did not allocate responsibility for the family debts. (Tr. 20) She was unable to obtain 
child support from her former husband because he is unemployed. (Tr. 49) She did not 
receive financial counseling. (Tr. 41-42) She plans to marry in April 2017. (Tr. 42) She is 
current on one credit card. (Tr. 45) She has $43,000 in her 401(k) account. (Tr. 46) She 
received some performance and attendance awards from her employer. (Tr. 50) Overall 
she has received good performance evaluations. (Tr. 50-51)   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a [public trust position].” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.2, and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met 
for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. See ISCR 
Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
The protection of national security and sensitive records is paramount. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations trustworthiness concern as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s [eligibility for a public trust position].  
 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) (citation omitted). 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SOR 
response, SCA, credit reports, and hearing record establish the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions.  
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s eligibility [for a public trust 
position], there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a [public trust position]. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising [trustworthiness] concerns, the burden shifts to 
the applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
The standard applicable in [public trust position] decisions is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of 
the national security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
No mitigating conditions fully apply; however, Applicant presented some positive 
financial information. Her separation and divorce are circumstances beyond her control 
that adversely affected her finances. Applicant is credited with mitigating the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m because she contacted the student loan creditor and 
asked for a forbearance. She is credited with mitigating SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.p, and 1.q 
because she denied responsibility for those four debts, and they are not listed on the 
most recent credit report of record, her September 20, 2016 Equifax credit report.   
 
Applicant did not establish her good faith in the resolution of her SOR debts.3  
Applicant relied on a credit repair company to dispute the negative entries on her credit 
report. The Appeal Board’s position is “that some debts have dropped off his credit 
report is not meaningful evidence of debt resolution.” ISCR Case No. 14-05803 at 3 
(App. Bd. July 7, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015)). 
Applicant admitted responsibility for nine delinquent SOR debts and having them 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
dropped from her credit report through the actions of a credit repair company does not 
mitigate those debts under Guideline F.   
         
There is no documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, 
compromised, or otherwise resolved several delinquent SOR accounts. She did not 
describe financial counseling or present a budget. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for her financial 
problems and other mitigating information. There is insufficient evidence about why 
Applicant was unable to make greater documented progress resolving nine SOR debts. 
She did not make a sufficient effort to settle or investigate the status of nine SOR debts. 
There is not enough assurance that her financial problems are being resolved, are 
under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, she failed to 
establish that financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a contractor, and she has been employed 
by the same contractor in health care services for 10 years. She attended a vocational 
college for 18 months. In 2007, she married, and in 2016, her divorce was final. Her 
child is seven years old. There is no evidence that she violated trustworthiness rules, 
committed any crimes, abused alcohol, or used illegal drugs.  
 
Applicant presented some positive financial information. Her separation and 
divorce are circumstances beyond her control that adversely affected her finances. She 
mitigated the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.p, and 1.q.   
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The negative financial information is more significant. The primary problem here 
is that Applicant owes nine delinquent SOR debts totaling $25,481. She did not remain 
in contact with the nine creditors. She received notice of the trustworthiness concerns 
when she received the SOR and should have contacted the creditors to obtain a 
definitive status of the debts and possibly take action to settle them. She did not provide 
any evidence that she contacted these SOR creditors. She did not provide enough 
evidence of efforts to clarify the status, resolve, settle, or mitigate nine SOR debts.      
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s eligibility for 
a public trust position, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of 
access to sensitive information. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated at this time. This decision 
should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the 
state of reform necessary for award of a public trust position in the future. With a track 
record of behavior consistent with her obligations, she may well be able to demonstrate 
persuasive evidence of her worthiness for a public trust position.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations trustworthiness concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f through 1.j:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n and 1.o:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.p and 1.q:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey  
Administrative Judge 
