 
 
 
 
1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ADP Case No: 16-01026 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position                ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised under the guideline for 
financial considerations, related to delinquent debts and unfiled state tax returns. 
Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on September 27, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On October 27, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On that same date, 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for November 17, 2016. The case 
was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4 into evidence. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A, and 1 
through 7 into evidence. All exhibits were admitted. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on November 29, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, and denied the 
facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.g, on the basis that he paid or resolved those 
debts. All admissions are incorporated herein. (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and unmarried. He attended college, but did not finish a 
degree. He started with his employer, a defense contractor, in November 2015. His 
supervisor is aware of this hearing and the financial issues underlying it. From 2006 to 
2015, Applicant worked for a national delivery service. While attending school, he 
worked there part-time. (Tr. 13-16; GE 2.) 
 
 In September 2015, Applicant completed an application for a position of trust 
(SF-85P). In it, he disclosed that he had failed to file state income tax returns for 2009, 
2010, 2011, and 2012. He stated, “I procrastinated in filing and was worried about doing 
so later.” (GE 1.) While testifying, he said that from 2009 to 2012 he was suffering from 
depression and feeling overwhelmed with his life. He was in college and had to go 
home every weekend because his mother was experiencing serious medical and 
emotional issues. His grandmother died at one point during this period. He admitted he 
was also consuming too much alcohol. He was 24 years old when these problems 
arose. (Tr. 19; GE 1.) Applicant said that these personal problems contributed to his 
financial difficulties, including his failure to file state income tax returns. (Tr. 22.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from October 2015 and October 2016, and 
information from Applicant’s SF 85P, the SOR alleged that he failed to timely file state 
income tax returns for four years and had three delinquent debts. (GE 1, GE 3, and GE 
4.) The allegations arose between 2009 and 2012. A summary of the status of each 
debt is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: Applicant filed his 2009 state income tax return on September 28, 
2016 and included a payment of $262. It is resolved. (Tr. 19; AE A, AE 4.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: Applicant filed his 2010 state income tax return on September 28, 
2016, and included a payment of $238. It is resolved. (Tr. 19; AE A, AE 5.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: Applicant filed his 2011 state income tax return on September 28, 
2016, and included a payment of $238. It is resolved. (Tr. 19; AE A, AE 6.)  
 
 
 
 
3 
SOR ¶ 1.d: Applicant filed his 2012 state income tax return on September 28, 
2016, and included a payment of $206. It is resolved. (Tr. 19; AE A, AE 7.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: The 2010 judgment for $377 arose from an unpaid medical debt, 
which was not covered by insurance. Applicant paid the creditor $457 in August 
2016. It is resolved. (Tr. 18; AE 3.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: The $86 utility bill was paid in October 2015. Applicant was unaware 
of it until he had a background interview in 2015. It is resolved. (Tr. 18; AE 2.)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: The $49 cable bill was paid in October 2015. Applicant was unaware 
of it until he had a background interview in 2015. It is resolved. (Tr. 18; AE 1.)   
 
 Applicant said that he timely filed his state income tax returns for 2013, 2014, 
and 2015. He did not owe any money for those years. He timely filed his Federal 
income tax returns for 2009 through 2015. He does not owe any money to the Internal 
Revenue Service. (Tr. 20-21.)  
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $50,000. He does not have a budget but uses an 
excel spreadsheet for bills. He recently started making contributions to a 401(k) and has 
$6,000 in it. He has also saved about $15,000. (Tr. 16-17.) 
 
 Applicant testified remorsefully and credibly. He took responsibility for his 
mistakes. He clearly understands the importance of timely filing tax returns and does 
not intend to let a similar situation occur in the future. Although Applicant acknowledged 
a previous gap in treatment for his depression, he continues to consistently address it 
with medical assistance. (Tr. 22-23; GE 2.) He wants to achieve financial stability. (Tr. 
26.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who seeks a position of public trust enters into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants a public trust 
position. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes three disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise 
trustworthiness concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
As documented by CBRs and his admissions, Applicant began experiencing 
financial problems between 2009 and 2012 that he had been unable or unwilling to 
resolve, including failing to file state income tax returns. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those three disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the trustworthiness concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could potentially 
mitigate the financial trustworthiness concerns in this case: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
Although all of the SOR allegations are resolved, Applicant’s tax problems were 
not fully resolved until mid-2016. Hence, the evidence does not establish full mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s financial problems are attributable to personal issues he 
encountered for several years while attending college. They included his mother’s 
medical and emotional conditions, his grandmother’s death, and Applicant’s depression. 
Those factors were circumstances beyond his control. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that he attempted to responsibly manage his debts or tax obligations during 
the years that they arose. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) has only partial application.  
 
Applicant provided evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(c). Although 
he has not participated in credit or financial counseling, there are clear indications that 
Applicant’s financial and tax issues are under control, as all matters alleged in the SOR 
are resolved and he uses a spreadsheet to manage his bills. He paid the three 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR prior to the issuance of the SOR, exhibiting a good-
faith effort to resolve those debts and establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the 
following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible and honest 31-
year-old man, who has worked for a defense contractor since 2015. Between 2009 and 
2012, he encountered serious personal problems that interfered with his ability to fulfill 
his legal obligation to file state income tax returns. He disclosed those omissions in the 
SF-85P that he submitted. Without hesitation, Applicant took responsibility for his past 
conduct and expressed his intention not to allow a similar situation to recur. Although he 
failed to file state tax returns for four years, he timely filed all Federal income tax returns 
from 2009 through 2015, and all state returns from 2013 through 2015. Applicant’s 
financial situation is stable and he has savings for unexpected exigencies. Applicant 
demonstrated that he has matured and understands his legal responsibility to file state 
tax returns. He is aware that further financial problems could jeopardize his position of 
trust and employment. The evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public position of trust. For these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:                  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
                                               
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
