 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00126 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations, personal conduct, and criminal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance 
and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On May 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications 
and other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated November 6, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), E 
(Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct) and detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 22, 2016. On August 12, 2016, he responded 
to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on September 6, 2016. The case was 
assigned to me on October 26, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on November 8, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 7, 2016. 
 
 During the hearing, three Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3, one 
administrative exhibit, and six Applicant exhibits (AE) A through AE F, were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
December 16, 2016. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. He took 
advantage of that opportunity and timely submitted additional documents, which were 
marked and admitted as AE G through AE N, without objection. The record closed on 
January 4, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.), the factual allegations 
pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 2.b. and 2.c.), and the sole allegation pertaining to 
criminal conduct (¶ 3.a.) of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions and comments are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant was born in Vietnam and immigrated to the United States when he was 
a few months old. He is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a 
desktop support analyst with the company since February 2011. He previously held an 
identical position with another company from March 2009 until February 2011. He also 
held a part-time position as a waiter from September 1999 until June 2009. He is a high 
school graduate. He received a bachelor’s degree in 2005. He has never served in the 
U.S. military. He has never held a security clearance. Applicant has never been married. 
He has no children. 
 
 
 
  
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations2 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until sometime during the 
period 2010 through 2014 when a number of unspecified factors apparently contributed 
to some degree of financial stress. His 2014 credit report indicated that one account was 
placed for collection in 2010 and another in 2011, and other accounts were placed for 
collection in 2014. Applicant acknowledged that he was evicted from his apartment, 
without identifying the timeframe for the activity, and that he did not have sufficient funds 
“to pay anything at that point.”3 
The SOR identified five purportedly delinquent debts that had been placed for 
collection, as reflected by his December 2014 credit report4 or his May 2016 credit report.5 
Those debts, totaling approximately $12,345, and their respective current status, 
according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by the Government and 
Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, are described below: 
SOR ¶ 1.a. refers to an Internet account with an unpaid and past-due balance of 
$659 that was placed for collection in 2011.6 Applicant claimed that his failure to pay the 
account was an oversight, and that he was saving money to pay it off.7 Applicant and the 
collection agent eventually agreed to a reduced amount, and Applicant paid that 
unspecified amount in January 2017.8 The account has been resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.b. refers to a cellular phone account with an unpaid and past-due balance 
of $268 that was placed for collection in 2014.9 Applicant claimed that his failure to pay 
the account was a lapse in judgment caused by his erroneous belief that the account had 
been set up for autopay when, in fact, it had not. In September 2016 – four months after 
the SOR was issued – Applicant paid the collection agent $277.80. The account is now 
considered by that collection agent to have been paid in full.10 The account has been 
resolved. 
                                                          
2 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: GE 2 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated December 10, 2014); GE 3 (Equifax 
Credit Report, dated May 2, 2016); Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 12, 2016. More recent information 
can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
3 GE 2, supra note 2; Tr. at 22-23. 
 
4 GE 2, supra note 2. 
 
5 GE 3, supra note 2. 
 
6 GE 2, supra note 2, at 5; Tr. at 23. 
 
7 Tr. at 23, 29-30. 
 
8 AE H (Letter, dated January 3, 2017). 
 
9 GE 2, supra note 2, at 6; GE 3, supra note 2, at 1; Tr. at 23. 
 
10 AE I (Letter, dated December 28, 2016); AE F (Changed Accounts, dated December 2, 2016), at 2. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
SOR ¶ 1.c. refers to an automobile insurance account with an unpaid balance of 
$206 that was placed for collection in 2010.11 Applicant claimed that after he signed for 
the insurance coverage he found cheaper coverage so he simply did not pay this account. 
He claimed that the account had been sold by the original creditor and they had no contact 
information regarding the debt purchaser.12 He said he was saving money to pay off the 
account, and as of the hearing, he had saved $103.13 Nevertheless, he has taken no 
further action in an effort to identify or locate the debt purchaser. The account is not listed 
in Applicant’s 2016 credit report, and it is unclear if the removal was associated with the 
statute of limitations. The account has not been resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.d. refers to an automobile dealer services account for a 2006 car that 
Applicant purchased in 2006. Applicant could not recall how long he had made monthly 
payments before he purportedly voluntarily surrended the vehicle.14 After the 
repossession, Applicant offered to pay $2,000 to retrieve the vehicle, but the lender 
wanted the entire unpaid balance.15 Applicant described his relationship with the creditor 
as follows: “They have been intransigent and will not be flexible with this so that I can pay 
it off. I am attempting to work with them but we are far apart in coming to terms.”16 After 
the vehicle was sold at auction, the remaining deficiency was $9,205.17 Applicant 
acknowledged having received written notification, but he simply “ignored it because [the 
vehicle] was no longer in [Applicant’s] possession.”18 Applicant has had no contact with 
the creditor since he received the SOR. The account is not listed in Applicant’s 2016 credit 
report. The account has not been resolved. 
SOR ¶ 1.e. refers to three Stafford subsidized student loans with a combined total 
of $11,625 that became $434 past due when Applicant stopped making payments in 
December 2014, leaving an unpaid balance of $2,009.19 Applicant claimed that the 
student loans went into a “delayed default” status.20 The accuracy of the term is unclear 
for it appears to be somewhat similar to forbearance or deferment. Applicant explained 
that he thought he had set up an automatic payment, but it did not occur. In his Answer 
to the SOR, Applicant said he would call the state lender to sort out everything.21 During 
                                                          
11 GE 2, supra note 2, at 6; Tr. at 24. 
 
12 Tr. at 25-26. 
 
13 Tr. at 32. 
 
14 Tr. at 26-27. 
 
15 Tr. at 33. 
 
16 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2. 
 
17 GE 2, supra note 2, at 8. 
 
18 Tr. at 34. 
 
19 GE 3, supra note 2, at 2-3; AE J (Letter and Report, dated December 28, 2016). 
 
20 Tr. at 35. 
 
21 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
the hearing, Applicant contended he had paid the state lender by e-check and the 
accounts were paid off.22 He offered a document indicating that, as of November 2016, 
there was a zero balance for the loans,23 but he offered no documentation to support his 
contention that he had paid the loans as stated. A September 2016 credit report reflects 
the loans as still past due.24  
A December 2016 letter from the state lender clearly states that the three student 
loans were “paid in full by claim,”25 a term which indicates that the borrower defaulted on 
a federal student loan that was guaranteed, or insured, by the government, and the lender 
filed a claim with the government to recover the amount due. That status means the 
account was paid and closed, but that the government paid off the student loan and not 
the borrower. It does not mean that the borrower has been released from the student 
loan. Accordingly, in the absence of documentation supporting Applicant’s contention that 
he had paid the loans by e-check, I conclude that the student loans have not been 
resolved. 
At the time of the hearing, Applicant had not received any financial counseling.26 
However, after the hearing, Applicant indicated that he had signed up for credit counseling 
and was taking steps to improve his finances by sticking to a strict budget; increasing his 
payments for debt already in place; and increasing monthly savings.27 Applicant’s current 
annual salary is $58,979.28 He submitted a Personal Financial Statement reflecting 
$74,793 in assets, including $1,289 in checking, $800 in savings, and $67,424 in a 401(k) 
retirement account.29 He also submitted a monthly budget indicating a net monthly income 
of $2,990.60; monthly expenses of $2,287; and a monthly remainder of $703.60 available 
for saving or spending.30 Because of the uncertainty of the unspecified factors that 
apparently contributed to Applicant’s initial financial stress, it remains unclear how his 
financial environment may have improved over time. Applicant has been steadily 
employed, without reported periods of unemployment, and he has never revealed the true 
factors that may have caused his financial issues. Of the five SOR-related debts, since 
2014, Applicant clearly resolved only two of the modest ones, totaling $927. He claimed, 
but not persuasively, that he had resolved his student loans. He has taken no recent 
                                                          
22 Tr. at 27-28, 35. It should be noted that the SOR alleged, in part, in ¶ 2.a., that Applicant’s wages were 
garnished for non-payment of his student loans in 2014, an allegation that Applicant denied. Neither the Government 
nor Applicant discussed that portion of the allegation, and there I found no evidence of a garnishment. 
 
23 AE F, supra note 10, at 1. 
 
24 AE E (Credit Report, dated September 29, 2016), at 1. 
 
25 AE J, supra note 19. 
 
26 Tr. at 42. 
 
27 AE G (Letter, undated). 
 
28 AE M (Paycheck Print, dated January 4, 2017). 
 
29 AE K (Personal Financial Statement, dated December 10, 2016). 
 
30 AE L (Budget, undated). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
actions to resolve two other debts, totaling $9,411. It appears that while Applicant’s 
financial status may be slightly improved, even in the absence of new delinquent debts, 
it is difficult to conclude that his financial problems are under control.  
Personal Conduct 
 (SOR ¶¶ 2.b. and 3.a.): In approximately September 2007, when he was about 24 
years old, Applicant was fired by an employer after he took a laptop tablet device that 
belonged to his employer from a storage locker and pawned it. He took the device 
because he needed the money to pay the rent and repair his vehicle. He received $200 
for the device. About one month later, the police called him. He was subsequently charged 
with obtaining property under false pretenses and receipt of stolen goods. He was 
remanded for pretrial intervention. Applicant was ordered to perform community service, 
which he completed. The record was eventually expunged.31 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.c.): In approximately January 2009, Applicant was terminated from 
employment, or as Applicant stated, his contract was not renewed, after downloading 
pornography using company assets. He explained that he downloaded the pornography 
onto a thumb drive to take it home because he did not have Internet and he enjoyed 
pornography. He did not think anyone would mind what he did.32 
  
 (SOR ¶ 2.a.): On November 6, 2014, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, some 
questions in Section 26 – Financial Record (Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts) 
asked if, in the past seven years, he had any possessions or property voluntarily or 
involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed; defaulted on any type of loan; had any bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency; had his wages, benefits, or assets garnished or 
attached for any reason; and been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously 
entered. Applicant answered “no” to all of those questions. He certified that the response 
was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the response 
to those questions was, in fact, false for Applicant had concealed multiple accounts that 
came within those parameters, including accounts in collection, defaulted student loans, 
and repossession of a vehicle.33 He subsequently admitted having accounts that would 
have required a positive response, but denied that he had deliberately omitted the 
information or that he knowingly falsified anything to gain an advantage.34 He explained 
that he had been working on the e-QIP for hours, was almost done, and he was tired, so 
he did not read the question carefully and failed to proof read his answers. He 
characterized the omission as an oversight.35 He also added that when he was 
                                                          
31 Tr. at 52-56, 58-61; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2. 
 
32 Tr. at 56-58; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2. 
 
33 As I noted above, I found no evidence of a 2014 garnishment of wages associated with defaulted student 
loans. 
 
34 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2; Tr. at 50. 
 
35 Tr. at 50-51. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
subsequently interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), he was very upfront about “it.”36 
Work Performance and Character References 
 The site manager, software engineering lead, and several coworkers, are all 
supportive of Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. They generally characterize 
Applicant with terms such as highly professional, trustworthy, respectful of privacy, 
responsible, knowledgeable, conscientious, and highly ethical. Some also noted that his 
personal ethics have never been in question, and two references indicated that, to their 
knowledge, Applicant has never broken any laws.37 Applicant was given two company 
performance awards for his commitment to excellence in 2013.38 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”39 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”40   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
36 Tr. at 50. 
 
37 AE A (Character Reference, dated December 7, 2016); AE B (Character Reference, undated); AE C 
(Character Reference, undated); AE D (Character Reference, dated December 5, 2016). 
 
38 AE N (Certificates, undated). 
 
39 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
40 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”41 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.42  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”43 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”44 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
41 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
42 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
43 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
44 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant had accounts placed for collection in 2010, 2011, and 2014, 
and he acknowledged that he was evicted from his apartment, without identifying the 
timeframe for the activity. The SOR identified five purportedly delinquent debts that had 
been placed for collection, totaling approximately $12,345. A vehicle was repossessed. 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the person 
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG 
¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated 
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”45  
                                                          
45 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
10 
                                      
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) minimally apply.  AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply. 
Because of the nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial 
difficulties, I am unable to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” 
It is unclear what unspecified factors contributed to, or caused, Applicant’s financial 
problems, or if they were largely beyond Applicant’s control. As noted above, because of 
the uncertainty of the unspecified factors, it remains difficult to determine if his financial 
environment has improved over time. Applicant’s apparent inaction in attempting to 
resolve his delinquent debts over a multi-year period, although he was fully employed, 
does not support a conclusion that he made timely, repeated efforts to resolve his debts. 
The evidence supports the conclusion that he finally resolved one 2011 debt for $659 in 
January 2017, and one 2014 debt for $268 in September 2016.  He claims he resolved 
his student loan balance of $2,009, that was unpaid since 2014, but the documentary 
evidence supports the conclusion that the government paid the state lender, not 
Applicant. Two other debts, one for $206 and the other for $9,205, remain unresolved 
largely due to Applicant’s lack of effort to resolve them – one because the creditor refused 
to be more flexible in reducing the unpaid balance, and the other because Applicant could 
not locate the collection agent. 
Applicant claims he received financial counseling. With an annual salary of 
$58,979 and a monthly remainder of $703.60 available for saving or spending, it appears 
that Applicant should have sufficient means to resolve his remaining debts. However, 
even in the absence of new delinquent debts, it is difficult to conclude that his financial 
problems are under control. Applicant’s actions, under the circumstances, cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.46 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
                                                          
 
46 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
In addition, “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, 
or other official government representative” may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 
16(b). 
It is also potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(c), if there is: 
 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.  
 
 In September 2007 Applicant was fired from his employment when he stole and 
pawned a laptop tablet device, and he was subsequently charged with obtaining property 
under false pretenses and receipt of stolen goods. He was remanded for pretrial 
intervention. Applicant was ordered to perform community service, which he completed. 
The record was eventually expunged. In approximately January 2009, Applicant was 
terminated from employment after downloading pornography using company assets. He 
did not think anyone would mind what he did. It is the repeated and improper, and possibly 
criminal violations that constituted a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations, and evidence 
of significant misuse of an employer’s resources. AG ¶ 16(c) has been established. 
 
 On November 6, 2014, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he denied that in the 
past seven years, he had any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily 
repossessed or foreclosed; defaulted on any type of loan; had any bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency; had his wages, benefits, or assets garnished or attached for 
any reason; and been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered. He 
certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge 
and belief, but the response to those questions was, in fact, false, for Applicant had 
concealed multiple accounts that came within those parameters, including accounts in 
collection, defaulted student loans, and repossession of a vehicle. He denied that he had 
deliberately omitted the information or that he knowingly falsified anything to gain an 
advantage. He explained that he had been working on the e-QIP for hours, was almost 
done, and he was tired, so he did not read the question carefully and failed to proof read 
his answers. He characterized the omission as an oversight. He also added that when he 
was subsequently interviewed by an OPM investigator he was upfront. His position is 
unreasonable and not credible. AG ¶ 16(a) has been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct.  AG ¶ 17(a) may apply if “the individual made 
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before 
being confronted with the facts.” Similarly, AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if “the offense is so 
 
12 
                                      
 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, if “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur,” AG ¶ 17(d) may apply. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(c), and 17(d) do not apply. Applicant stole and pawned a laptop 
tablet device, the property of his employer, in September 2007 – over nine years ago, 
and two years later he misused another employer’s resources when he downloaded 
pornography from a company computer in January 2009 – eight years ago. Those actions 
were not minor, and the circumstances were not unique. Under normal circumstances, if 
there had been no additional similar issues without any recurrence of similar conduct or 
behavior, with additional maturity, it would be unlikely that there would be any such 
recurrence. However, while Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment for such 
previous actions might no longer be in question, his more recent lack of candor pertaining 
to his responses on his e-QIP, and the open issues regarding his finances, have reopened 
the question of his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Other than Applicant’s self-
serving comment that he made a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification on his e-QIP, there is no evidence to support his contention. 
Likewise, there is little, if any, evidence to reflect that Applicant has acknowledged his 
behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the factors that caused his behavior. 
Applicant’s actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 
30: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially disqualifying. In 
approximately September 2007, Applicant took a laptop tablet device that belonged to his 
employer and pawned it. He was subsequently charged with obtaining property under 
false pretenses and receipt of stolen goods. He was remanded for pretrial intervention. 
Applicant was ordered to perform community service, which he completed. The record 
was eventually expunged. AG ¶ 31(a) has been established. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition may 
be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Similarly, 
where “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the 
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training 
 
13 
                                      
 
or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement,”  
AG ¶ 32(d) may apply. 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) minimally apply. Applicant stole and pawned the property 
of his employer. He was subsequently charged with obtaining property under false 
pretenses and receipt of stolen goods. He was remanded for pretrial intervention and 
ordered to perform community service. He completed his community service and the 
record was eventually expunged. He followed that criminal conduct with his 2009 misuse 
of his employer’s computer. There is some evidence of rehabilitation, but it has not lasted. 
There are some minor expressions of remorse and a good employment record. Because 
of his repeated misconduct, it appears that he has not learned from his experiences, and 
it is difficult to conclude that such behavior will not recur. Therefore, his conduct continues 
to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.47       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has 
established a good reputation with his employer. Applicant finally paid two of his 
delinquent debts.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. It 
is unclear what unspecified factors contributed to, or caused, Applicant’s financial 
problems, or if they were largely beyond his control. Applicant’s apparent inaction in 
attempting to resolve his delinquent debts over a multi-year period, although he was fully 
                                                          
47 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
employed, does not support a conclusion that he made timely, repeated efforts to resolve 
his debts. 48  The evidence supports the conclusion that he finally resolved one 2011 debt 
for $659 in January 2017, and one 2014 debt for $268 in September 2016.  He claims he 
resolved his student loan balance of $2,009, that was unpaid since 2014, but the 
documentary evidence supports the conclusion that the government paid the state lender, 
not Applicant. Two other debts, one for $206 and the other for $9,205, remain unresolved 
largely due to Applicant’s lack of effort to resolve them – one because the creditor refused 
to be more flexible in reducing the unpaid balance, and the other because Applicant could 
not locate the collection agent. It remains unclear how his financial environment may have 
improved over time. Applicant has been steadily employed, without reported periods of 
unemployment, and he has never revealed the true factors that may have caused his 
financial issues.   
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 49 
 
Applicant has not demonstrated a “meaningful track record” of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts. While he now keeps track of his expenses and maintains a budget, 
there is little evidence that he did so before the hearing. His inaction with respect to the 
majority of his delinquent debts over a multi-year period, and his refusal to address his 
largest debt because the creditor is not flexible or willing to reduce the unpaid balance 
are symptoms of an unwillingness to take timely positive action in resolving his debts. 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s security 
                                                          
48 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute 
for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially responsible manner. ISCR 
Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
49 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
worthiness. For all of these reasons, as well as his lack of candor regarding his delinquent 
debts, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations, personal conduct, and criminal conduct. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) 
through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c. through 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.c.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
