1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 16-02005 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan Nerney, Esq. 
March 8, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Applicant used cocaine infrequently from 1996 to 2014; helped a friend 
harvest marijuana in 2014; and used peyote in 2015. His peyote use was after 
submitting his electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On May 18, 2015, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. On September 2, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on September 29, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
November 1, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on November 2, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled 
on December 1, 2016. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant offered exhibits (AE), marked AE A through AE F. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE A through AE F, and they were admitted. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was left open for receipt of additional 
documents. On January 3, 2017, applicant presented AE G through AE J. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE G through AE J, and they were admitted. The record 
then closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 13, 2016.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a to change “1976” to “1996.” 
Applicant did not object to the amendment. The motion was granted. (Tr. 9.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under the guideline for Drug Involvement, the SOR alleged security concerns 
related to: Applicant’s cocaine use infrequently from 1996 to 2014; helping his friend 
harvest marijuana in 2014; and using peyote in 2015. His peyote use was after 
submitting his electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). SOR ¶ 
2.a alleged that the same conduct raised security concerns under the guideline for 
Personal Conduct. In his Answer and during his testimony, Applicant admitted all of the 
allegations. (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a government contractor. He applied for a 
security clearance in connection with his job offer from a defense contractor. He is not 
married and has no children. (GE 1; AE B; Tr. 17-18.) 
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.a alleged that Applicant used cocaine from 1996 to 2014 
with varying frequency. On his e-QIP, he reported that he used cocaine “less than five 
times.” He testified that he estimated his cocaine use to be closer to three-or-four times 
over the course of those same 18 years, and attributed his cocaine use to 
experimentation. He first tried it in high school. His last cocaine use occurred in January 
2014. He did not specifically recall any other usage. He believed that his use of alcohol 
in social settings contributed to his lack of judgment on the occasions that he chose to 
use cocaine. He pledged to never use an illegal substance again on both his e-QIP and 
at the hearing. Applicant was aware at the time of his 2014 cocaine use that all illegal 
drug use was in violation of his employer’s policies, but he was between contracts at 
that time. Applicant no longer associates with any cocaine users. (GE 1; Tr. 19-21, 32-
38.) 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.b alleged that Applicant helped a friend harvest marijuana 
in August 2014.1 Applicant truthfully disclosed this harvest on his e-QIP. Applicant had a 
friend that grew marijuana for his own personal medical use. State laws where Applicant 
resides permit the legal cultivation and use of marijuana for medicinal purposes. The 
friend paid Applicant to help him unearth the cannabis plants and hang them to dry. 
Applicant assisted his friend with this task once. He did not use any of the marijuana. 
He no longer associates in person with this friend. (AE J; Tr. 21-22, 38-42.) 
 
 SOR subparagraph 1.c alleged that Applicant used peyote in June 2015, and 
subparagraph 1.d alleged that this peyote use was after completing his e-QIP in May 
2015. Applicant testified that peyote is a succulent plant that grows in the desert. It is 
known to have psychoactive effects. He acknowledged it is a controlled substance in 
the United States. While on a trip to Mexico in June 2015, Applicant’s friend2 invited 
Applicant to participate in an indigenous pilgrimage to a sacred mountain upon which it 
was legal to consume peyote. Applicant attended out of curiosity, and consumed peyote 
during the pilgramage. Applicant disclosed his use of peyote during his security 
clearance interview in February 2016. (Tr. 23-27, 42-46.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he had no intent to use illegal substances again. (Tr. 28.) 
He signed a statement of intent to that effect. (AE F.) He introduced evidence that 
shows he is subject to random urinalysis. (AE I.) He produced copies of his “drug-free 
certification” dated August 2013; December 2014, April 2015; December 2015; May 2, 
2016; and November 14, 2016. (AE C.) 
 
 Applicant also provided a psychological evaluation from a clinical psychologist, 
who evaluated Applicant for substance dependency disorder. The substance abuse 
subtle screening inventory (SASSI) administered to Applicant reflected a “low probability 
of having a substance dependence disorder.” (AE G; AE H.)  
 
 Applicant is respected by those that know him personally and professionally. His 
co-workers indicate he is hardworking and an “outstanding American citizen.” His 
friends indicate he is a “confident and honorable man.” A merchant marine captain, 
under whom Applicant served indicated Applicant is “a disciplined, sober and reliable 
officer.” Applicant was lauded in many of the letters for saving the lives of two 
fishermen. (AE A; AE E.) His performance evaluation demonstrates he performs 
satisfactorily, above average, or outstanding in all criteria measured. (AE D.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
1 AE J reflects that date was October 2014, not August 2014. 
2 This is a different friend; not the individual for whom he harvested the marijuana. (Tr. 26-27.) 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following two are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the factual 
allegations under SOR subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d. regarding Applicant’s cocaine 
use, cultivation or processing of marijuana, and peyote use.  
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Only two years have passed since Applicant’s use of a controlled substance. He 
has signed a statement of intent, indicating he will “never use illegal drugs again.” A 
clinical psychologist found Applicant has a low propensity of having a substance 
dependence disorder. He no longer associates with known drug users. These are 
factors that weigh in Applicant’s favor.  
 
However, Applicant was a mature adult and had already applied for a security 
clearance when he consumed peyote in June 2015. He was the bearer of a “drug-free” 
credential at the time he chose to use it. Further, he chose to use peyote after explicitly 
stating, “I never intend on using a controlled substance again,” on the e-QIP that he 
 
6 
 
submitted one month prior to his peyote use. While the use of peyote may have been 
legal in that particular location, its use creates questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment and reliability. I cannot find that future use is unlikely to occur without the 
passage of more time. In this instance, an appropriate period of abstinence has not 
been demonstrated.  
 
The evidence does not support the full mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(a) or 26(b). 
Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof to overcome 
the concerns raised by his poor judgment related to his 19-year history of casual drug 
abuse. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant’s decision to use peyote after promising not to use controlled 
substances on his e-QIP, and his decisions to violate Federal law by using cocaine and 
harvesting marijuana, create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. His 
drug involvement, if known, could affect his professional standing. Additionally, his 
decision to engage in drug use in Mexico could serve as a basis for exploitation or 
pressure by foreign actors. The Government established sufficient evidence to raise 
security concerns under DC 16(e), and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, 
or mitigate those concerns. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
7 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 While Applicant deserves credit for being forthright with the government about 
his drug use and abstaining from drug use since 2015, his last drug use was recent and 
in violation of his promise on the e-QIP to avoid controlled substances. He has 
presented insufficient evidence to persuasively demonstrate that future drug use is 
unlikely. None of the mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶ 17 are fully supported by the 
record. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant stated that he has 
not used cocaine since 2014. He used peyote in 2015. He honestly divulged information 
about his drug use on his e-QIP, to the investigator, and at the hearing. He testified that 
he will not use illegal substances in the future. However, Applicant was a mature adult 
when he knowingly violated Federal laws and his employer’s policies regarding drug 
use. Not enough time has passed since Applicant’s drug use in 2015 to support a 
 
8 
 
finding that drug abuse is unlikely to recur. Although Applicant’s honest disclosure of his 
drug abuse makes this is a close case, the adjudicative guidelines require that any 
doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information must 
be resolved in favor of the national security. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
