 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00112 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Barbara T. Hanna, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct), D (Sexual Behavior), and M (Use of Information Technology Systems). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 1, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guidelines E, D, and M. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative 
guidelines are codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the 
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record. On a later date not reflected in the record, he requested a hearing before an 
 
2 
 
administrative judge. (Tr. 14.) Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
20, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on November, 10, 2016. On November 15, 
2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for December 7, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on December 16, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor, seeking a security 
clearance. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from March 1999 to May 2014 and 
held a security clearance during his Navy service. (AX 3; Tr. 49.) After he left the Navy, 
he was unemployed until October 2014, when he was hired by a private-sector 
employer. In March 2015, he was hired by his current employer, who is sponsoring him 
for a security clearance. (Tr. 75-76.) 
 
 Applicant’s biological father left him when he was six years old, and he was 
raised by his mother. His stepfather worked hard, drank alcohol heavily, and was not a 
father-figure. His older sisters were involved in gangs, violence, and alcohol. Applicant 
played sports in high school to escape his home environment. (Tr. 91-92.) He graduated 
from high school in June 1997, worked for a short time in a clothing store until his 
girlfriend, now his wife, became pregnant with their first child. Applicant then enlisted in 
the Navy. (Tr. 42-43.) He married in February 2000. He and his wife have five children, 
ages 18, 16, 12, 7, and 2. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant received nonjudicial punishment2 while stationed 
aboard a U.S Navy ship for fraternization, violation of orders by engaging in sexual 
relations and using a government computer for sexually-explicit email conversations, 
adultery, and obstruction of justice by soliciting a junior sailor to delete evidence of 
sexually-explicit email conversations.  
 
 The conduct alleged in the SOR occurred when Applicant was an information 
systems technician first class (IT1) serving aboard a U.S. Navy ship. He had been 
selected for promotion to chief petty officer (CPO). He was authorized to wear the 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
2 Article 15, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. ¶ 815, authorizes military commanders to 
utilize a nonjudicial procedure to impose punishment on members of their commands for criminal 
offenses proscribed in the UCMJ 
 
3 
 
uniform and insignia of a CPO; and he was given the duties, authority, and privileges of 
the higher rate, but not the increased pay. 
 
From February 2013 to October 2013, while his ship was deployed, he used his 
government computer to engage in sexually-explicit email conversations with several 
female sailors aboard the ship. (Tr. 86.) He knew that use of his government computer 
for sexually-explicit conversations was prohibited. (Tr. 102-03.)  
 
Starting in August 2013, Applicant engaged in an extramarital affair with a female 
lieutenant junior grade aboard the ship, and they had sexual intercourse three times. 
(Tr. 54, 84.) When he was questioned during an investigation of his conduct, he initially 
denied having sexual intercourse with the officer, but he later admitted it. (Tr. 57.) 
 
In November 2013, Applicant received nonjudicial punishment for fraternization, 
violating orders, and obstruction of justice. He was reduced from IT1 to IT2 (information 
systems technician second class), restricted to the ship, ordered to perform extra duty, 
and ordered to forfeit one-half of his basic pay for two months. All punishments except 
the reduction in rate were suspended. He was immediately flown home from the ship. 
As an IT2 with more than 14 years of service, he was ineligible to continue serving on 
active duty under the “high-year tenure” rules. (Tr. 60.) In May 2014, he was discharged 
from the Navy with an honorable discharge. (AX 3.) 
 
Applicant testified that when he received nonjudicial punishment, he admitted 
everything except the obstruction of justice. (Tr. 59) The record does not reflect whether 
the officer imposing punishment found him guilty of obstructing justice.  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant denied obstructing justice. He testified that he was 
prohibited from entering his work area aboard the ship while the investigation was being 
conducted, but he did not know he was prohibited from talking with his former 
subordinates until his master chief petty officer told him. He admitted contacting a petty 
officer second class who had worked for him and asking her to meet him in a chief petty 
officer’s office. He admitted meeting and talking to the petty officer second class, but he 
testified that he simply wanted to know how his former subordinates were doing. (Tr. 56, 
83.) The report of investigation on which the nonjudicial punishment was based is not in 
the record. There is no evidence in the record supporting the allegation that Applicant 
solicited a junior sailor to delete evidence, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 Before flying to the United States from the ship, Applicant contacted his wife and 
told her about his affair with the officer. After Applicant arrived in the United States, he 
stayed with a friend for a week and continued to communicate with his wife. When he 
arrived home, his wife told him that he needed to tell the children what happened, and 
he did so. (Tr. 64-65.) 
 
 After coming home, Applicant sought counseling. He was referred by a military 
referral service to a licensed clinical psychologist, and he attended six counseling 
sessions, starting on November 8, 2013. He requested and received six additional 
 
4 
 
sessions, which were completed on February 28, 2014. (GX 3.) The record does not 
contain any evaluation, analysis, or diagnosis from the psychologist. Applicant testified 
that the psychologist helped him to be a better husband and to understand his wife’s 
needs, but he felt that he needed to know more about what caused his conduct. (Tr. 66-
68.) 
 
 From January 14, 2016, to October 19, 2016, Applicant had six consultations 
with a licensed professional counselor, whom he continues to see about once a month. 
(Tr. 91, 95.) The counselor has diagnosed him with dysthymic disorder (F34.1) due to 
mild persistent anxiousness and depressive symptoms secondary to marital and family 
stressors.3 (AX 1.) Applicant has not been diagnosed with a sexual disorder. As a result 
of his counseling, Applicant realized that he enjoyed the feeling of being desired by 
other women, but that when he was home he was mentally focused on work and 
preoccupied with being promoted to chief petty officer. Instead of looking to his wife for 
attention, he looked to other women. (Tr. 69-70.)  
 
 Since September 2015, Applicant has been participating in Sexual Addicts 
Anonymous (SAA), an organization similar to Alcoholic Anonymous. He attends weekly 
meetings every Sunday. Although he does not believe he is a sexual addict, he has 
found SAA helpful because he can openly discuss his behavior, no one judges him, and 
he receives encouragement. (Tr. 71-75.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents, children, siblings, and in-laws are aware of his sexual 
misconduct in the Navy. His best friend and fellow sailor, with whom he stayed for a 
week after leaving the ship, knows about his affair. (Tr. 97-98.) Applicant’s current 
supervisor knows that he “got in trouble” in the Navy, but he does not know the specific 
details. He testified that if someone revealed the details of his misconduct to his 
supervisor, he would tell his supervisor what happened. (Tr. 103-04.)  
 
 Applicant had a previous extramarital affair in 2006 or 2007 with a married 
woman in his civilian neighborhood. The affair started with social-media contact and 
progressed to sexual activity. His partner in this affair had no connection to the military. 
He disclosed the affair to his wife.4 He received counseling for “a while,” and then he 
and his wife received marriage counseling about a year and a half later. (Tr. 87-90.) 
Applicant testified that the counseling he received after his most recent affair was 
different from previous counseling, because the recent counseling was the first time that 
                                                          
3 This disorder, also known as persistent depressive disorder, is recognized and described in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), at pp.168-71. 
 
4 The extramarital affair in 2006-2007 was not alleged in the SOR and may not be an independent basis 
for denying a security clearance. However, conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess 
an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has 
demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 
at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered unalleged affair for these limited purposes. 
 
5 
 
someone delved into his childhood, family background, upbringing, and the reasons for 
his behavior. (Tr. 91.)  
 
 Applicant’s wife testified that Applicant has been candid and open about his 
sexual misconduct aboard the ship. She testified that Applicant is a different person 
than he was three years ago. He is now an “open book,” has no social-media outlets, 
and communicates more with her. She has forgiven him, and she is convinced that he is 
sincere in his desire to continue the marriage. (Tr. 19-28.) 
 
 Before the incidents alleged in the SOR occurred, Applicant was regarded as a 
stellar sailor, a strong and effective leader, and a talented technician. He had 
outstanding evaluation reports. He was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps 
Achievement Medal five times, and he received numerous other commendations. He 
frequently was the “sailor of the quarter” for various commands. When he was assigned 
ashore, he was actively involved in his sons’ athletic events, coached baseball teams, 
and participated in food drives and “wheels on meals” for elderly persons confined to 
their homes. (AX 4 and 5; Tr. 47.) 
 
 The friend that Applicant stayed with for a week after leaving the ship is a retired 
senior chief petty officer. He and Applicant are co-workers and served together for many 
years in the Navy. Based on almost two years of daily contact, the friend believes that 
Applicant’s performance in his current job has been outstanding. Applicant has told him 
about the extramarital affair and what he is doing to work through his marital issues. He 
believes that Applicant is remorseful and trying correct his mistake. He considers 
Applicant very honest. He testified, “I’m assuming that everything is truthful that comes 
out of his mouth.” (Tr. 32-37.)   
 
 A sailor who served with Applicant aboard the ship on which the misconduct 
occurred regards him as an exemplary leader and one of the most reliable and 
trustworthy petty officers he has encountered. He believes that Applicant has 
acknowledged his faults and taken steps to better himself.  (AX 2.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
 
6 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The SOR alleges that Applicant received nonjudicial punishment, while stationed 
aboard a U.S. Navy ship, for fraternization, violation of orders, adultery, and obstruction 
of justice (SOR ¶ 1.a); and that he attempted to obstruct justice by soliciting a junior 
sailor to delete evidence related to an ongoing investigation (SOR ¶ 1.b). The SOR also 
 
7 
 
cross-alleges sexual misconduct alleged under Guideline D and misuse of a 
government computer for sexually-explicit conversations alleged under Guideline M 
(SOR ¶ 1.c). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. . . .”  
The SOR ¶ 1.a alleges the consequences of the same conduct alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same 
guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See 
ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3. Accordingly, I will resolve SOR 
¶ 1.a in Applicant’s favor. 
 The allegations under Guideline E in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c also duplicate the 
allegations under Guidelines D and M. However, this duplication does not require 
corrective action, because Guideline E contemplates that “specific behavior can have 
security significance under more than one guideline and . . . by focusing on the 
concepts of questionable judgment and irresponsibility, it contemplates that behavior 
will have independent security significance under Guideline E in a broad range of 
cases.” ISCR Case No. 06-20964, 2008 WL 2002589 at *5 (App. Bd. Apr. 10, 2008). 
 
 There is no evidence in the record supporting the allegation that Applicant 
attempted to obstruct justice, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Accordingly, I will resolve, SOR ¶ 
1.b in Applicant’s favor. 
Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and his testimony at the 
hearing, corroborated by the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing, establish 
the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and cross-alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 3.a. The conduct 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 2.a, and 3.a is sufficient to establish the following disqualifying 
conditions under Guideline E:  
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
 
8 
 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are fully established. Applicant’s sexual 
conduct aboard a deployed ship was a serious breach of discipline. It was frequent and 
did not occur under circumstances making it unlikely to recur. Applicant acknowledged 
his behavior and obtained counseling. While the counseling has given him insight into 
the reasons for his behavior, it is too soon to determine whether sufficient time has 
passed to mitigate his conduct. He is still receiving counseling. The record contains no 
medical or psychiatric evidence about the likelihood of recurrence. His misconduct 
aboard ship occurred about six years after his previous infidelity and counseling. In this 
context, the period of three and a half years since his most recent infidelity is insufficient 
to show that recurrence is unlikely. He is vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, because he has not disclosed his conduct to his current supervisors. 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant had sexual relations on multiple occasions 
with an officer while underway aboard a U.S. Navy ship. The security concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
 
9 
 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. . . . 
 
 The evidence establishes following disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 13(a): sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the 
individual has been prosecuted; 
 
AG ¶ 13(b): a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual 
behavior that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; and 
 
AG ¶ 13(c): sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, or duress.   
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 14(b): the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 14(c): the behavior no long serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
AG ¶ 14(d): the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and 
discreet. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(c) are not established, for the reasons set out in the above 
discussion under Guideline E. AG ¶ 14(d) is not established. While Applicant’s sexual 
affair with the officer and his email exchanges with enlisted sailors may have been 
consensual, they were not discreet. His email exchanges were not private, but were in a 
government email system subject to monitoring. 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 The SOR ¶ 3.a alleges that Applicant used a government computer to engage in 
sexually-explicit email conversations with multiple female sailors wile aboard a U.S. 
Navy ship. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 39:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
 
10 
 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
Applicant’s violation of the prohibition on use of a government email network for 
sexually-explicit conversations establishes the disqualifying condition in AG 40(e): 
“unauthorized use of a government or other information technology system.”  
The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 41(a) is relevant: “so much time has elapsed 
since the behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment.” However, this mitigating condition is not established for the reasons 
set out in the above discussion of Guideline E.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines E, D, and M in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was candid, sincere, and remorseful at the hearing. He realizes that he 
abruptly ended a brilliant and rewarding career in the Navy and jeopardized his 
relationships with his wife and children. His conduct while serving as a chief petty officer 
aboard a deployed ship was a serious breach of trust. He has taken steps in the right 
direction to reform his conduct, but insufficient time has passed to demonstrate that he 
is rehabilitated.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines E, D, 
and M, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his personal conduct, sexual 
 
11 
 
behavior, and misuse of an information technology system. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b;   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D (Sexual Behavior)  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline M (Use of IT Systems):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
