 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00406 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal 
conduct) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 25, 2015, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On June 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 
2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J and E.  The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
2 
 
On June 29, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR. On August 8, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On August 12, 2016, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On August 15, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for September 14, 
2016. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
did not call any witnesses, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were received into evidence without objection. On July 20, 2015, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.). I held the record open until October 28, 2016 to afford 
the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely 
submitted AE, which was received into evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. After a thorough 
review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old sales associate for a cell phone company. He has 
applied for a position as a test mechanic for a defense contractor and seeks a 
secret security clearance, which is a condition of employment. (GE 1; Tr. 11-13) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 2003. He has attended several 
colleges and earned approximately “55 or 60” college credit hours. Applicant has 
never married and has no dependents. He served in the U.S. Navy from December 
2004 to October 2009, and achieved the rank of machinist mate second class (pay 
grade E-5) (submarine service). He was discharged with an other than honorable 
(OTH) discharge, discussed below. (GE 1, GE 2: Tr. 13-20) 
 
Criminal Conduct/Personal Conduct 
 
 In March 2009, Applicant was involved in a horrific accident. On his 24th 
birthday, he and two shipmates went out to celebrate and engaged in heavy 
drinking. After leaving a nearby casino in the early morning hours, Applicant drove 
the wrong way on an interstate and was involved in a head-on collision with a van 
with nine passengers inside. One of the passengers, a female college student, was 
killed, and the remaining eight passengers received non-life threatening injures. 
Applicant sustained a broken ankle along with cuts and abrasions. (GE 1, GE 2, GE 
5; Tr. 20-21, 27, 29) 
 
 Applicant was taken into custody at the scene, given a breathalyzer at the 
police station that registered a blood alcohol content of .13, and was transported to 
a local hospital and treated for his injuries. After being treated, Applicant was taken 
to a local correctional facility and remained there until his trial in June 2010. At his 
 
3 
 
trial, Applicant pleaded guilty to misdemeanor driving while intoxicated (DWI), felony 
assault with a motor vehicle, two counts of felony reckless endangerment, felony 
vehicular manslaughter, and driving the wrong way on a highway. Applicant was 
sentenced to 22½ years, to be suspended after serving 75 months, 5 years of 
supervised probation to begin upon release from prison, and completion of an 
alcohol education and awareness class upon his release from prison. Applicant was 
released from prison 7 months early as a result of good time in September 2014, 
after having served 67 months. (GE 2; Tr. 21, 30-34) 
 
 Applicant was ordered to attend two Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) 
victim impact panels for each of the five years he is on probation. The judge also 
ordered him to serve 90 hours of community service each year – 10 hours for each 
of the accident victims – and to perform nine speaking engagements about the 
costs of drunken driving to college or high school students. Applicant’s sentence 
also prohibited him from driving a vehicle that is not equipped with an ignition 
interlock device, prohibited him from consuming or possessing alcohol, and required 
him to undergo drug and alcohol evaluations. Applicant will not be eligible for early 
termination of his probation. (GE 5; Tr. 22-23, 29) 
 
 Applicant has complied with or exceeded all terms of his probation. Although 
required to attend two MADD victim impact panels a year, in the 18 months 
following his release from prison, he had participated in over 35 events as well as 
serving as a general volunteer. (AE A; Tr. 23-25, 34) Applicant’s probation will not 
end until September 2019. (Tr. 25, 29) The victims of the accident ultimately sued 
the nightclub that overserved Applicant and received a $4.6 million settlement. (Tr. 
26-27, 29, 34-35) While Applicant was in prison, the Navy separated him with an 
OTH discharge as a result of misconduct in October 2009. (GE 4; Tr. 27-29) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted four reference letters: two from current work supervisors 
from his cell phone company, one from the local MADD program manager, and one 
from his probation officer. His work-related references describe Applicant in a very 
positive way and have no regrets about hiring him after his release from prison. 
Applicant’s MADD program manager described his participation in MADD-related 
programs and the positive impact he is making. His probation officer certified that he 
is current on all of the requirements of probation. (AE A – E) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or 
 
4 
 
his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only 
upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), 
as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting 
the criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. 
An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
with access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours 
and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail 
to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), § 3.1.  
 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have 
based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of 
Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions 
in the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the 
applicant from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government 
has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a 
preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 
(4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between 
proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security 
suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue her security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 
2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
5 
 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 articulates the security concern concerning criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
  
The Government established its case under Guideline J through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. A review of the evidence supports 
application of three criminal conduct disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 31(a) “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses”; AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted”; and AG ¶ 31(d) “individual is currently on parole or 
probation.”  
 
  Four criminal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable: 
   
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
  
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
  AG ¶ 32(d) is partially applicable. Applicant has done everything or exceeded all 
that could be expected since his release from prison except for completion of probation 
which will not occur until September 2019. Given the seriousness of Applicant’s 
conviction, none of the other mitigating conditions are fully applicable. Applicant 
demonstrated remorse during his hearing as well as by his actions. There is no doubt 
that if he could relive that night in March 2009, he would. Unfortunately, he cannot and 
is currently in the process of repaying his debt to society.   
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relation to the Guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
           The Government established its case under Guideline E through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented.  A review of the evidence supports application 
of AG ¶ 16 as a disqualifying condition that could raise a security concern: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of proprietary 
information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides three potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The discussion under criminal conduct is incorporated in this section. Personal 
conduct concerns were raised as a result of Applicant being given an OTH discharge 
from the Navy as a result of his conviction for offenses discussed. Partial application of  
AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) is warranted for reasons discussed under criminal conduct. 
However, full application is precluded as a result Applicant’s current probation status, 
and the seriousness of offense. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guidelines J and E is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further 
comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s positive employment recommendations and letters from his MADD 
program manager and probation officer weigh in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen, 
was a contributing member of the U.S. Navy until his 2009 arrest, and is doing 
everything within his ability to redeem himself from a most unfortunate and foolish 
decision that he recognizes and lives with every day of his life. 
  
 Security clearance adjudications are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Applicant’s 2009 felony arrest and subsequent 
conviction and current probationary status do not reflect favorably on Applicant. I 
recognize and applaud the efforts Applicant has made and encourage him to continue 
with his current course of action. However, further time is required to put the misconduct 
behind him, especially given the fact he is currently on probation. 
 
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:  
   
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
         Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
                   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
