                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
----------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 17-00712
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ryan Nurney, Esq.
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony. I conclude that
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.   
 
History of Case
On April 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant detailing why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals who
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to
hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that were
in effect for the issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 12, 2017, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on August 17, 2017, and was scheduled for hearing on
September 27, 2017. A hearing was held on the scheduled date. At the hearing, the
Government's case consisted of two exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself)
and nine exhibits. The transcript (Tr. ) was received on October 5, 2017.
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of four
documents and certain identified facts contained therein.  Administrative or official notice
is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case
No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 (App. Bd. October 12,
2006). Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that
are well known. See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  
For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the
above-named background reports referenced in the administrative notice request
addressing the geopolitical situation and security in Taiwan. (HE 1) Administrative notice
was extended to the documents themselves, consistent  with the provisions of Fed. R.
Evid. 201. This notice did not foreclose Applicant from challenging the accuracy and
reliability of the information contained in the reports addressing Taiwan’s current state.  
In addition to the above-described documents, I took official notice of  Background
Note: Taiwan, U.S. Department of State (September 2008) following the personal
appearance.  After receiving no objections from the parties (HE 2), I assigned this
document an official notice number of V. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly (a) has a wife who is a citizen of Taiwan
and maintains a bank account in Taiwan with an approximate value of $7,000 and (b)
has in-laws who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Allegedly, Applicant’s mother-in-
law is employed by a Taiwanese government entity.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed his wife intends to transition to green card status in 2018. He
claimed that neither his mother-in-law nor father-in-law work for a Taiwan government
entity. He also claimed that he has limited, casual contact with his wife’s parents, who do
not speak English.  He further claimed that he purchased a plane ticket for his wife to
return to Taiwan in May 2017 to close her bank account and eliminate the security
concern. 
2
Applicant claimed, too, that because of his deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the United States, which dictate his choosing in favor of the U.S interest
should a conflict ever arise, he does not believe that any of his behaviors pose a risk to
national security interests. And he claimed to fully understand the importance of
protecting classified information and stressed he has had no security violations since
receiving an interim clearance in 2015.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old systems engineer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant married in September 2015 and has no children from this marriage. 
(GEs 1-2; Tr. 31, 36) He earned a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in May
2011 and  a  master’s degree in mechanical engineering in December 2013. (GEs 1-2
and AEs G-H; Tr. 31-32) He expects to complete his graduate requirements in
mechanical engineering for his Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering in
August 2018. (GEs -2 and AE E) He currently holds an interim security clearance. (GE 1;
Tr. 33) 
Since 2015, Applicant has been employed by his current employer. (GEs 1-2 and
AEs E-F) Prior to joining his current firm, he held graduate assistant positions while
enrolled in his graduate engineering programs. (AE E)
Applicant met his wife in 2012 through a pen pal website. (Tr. 35, 54) Initially, they
exchanged messages with each other before moving on to using Skype transmission
technology for chatting on a daily basis. (Tr. 36) His wife is a Taiwan citizen who was
born and raised in Taiwan and immigrated to the United States in September 2015. (Tr.
38) Applicant sponsored his wife for permanent residence, and she received her
permanent residence  card in February 2016. (AE B; Tr. 34) She expects to transition to
10-year green card status in 2018.  Currently, she is unemployed and is looking for a job.
(Tr. 39) 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan.
They have no affiliations or contacts with the Taiwan government. (Tr. 46-47) His
mother-in-law works for a private hospital; while his father-in-law works in farming. (GE
2; Tr. 40-41, 44) Applicant maintains very limited, casual contact annually with his in-
laws who do not speak English. (Tr. 40-41, 44-45) The SOR allegations that Applicant’s
mother-in-law is employed by a Taiwanese government entity is unproven. 
Applicant last saw his in-laws in person in December 2016 in Taiwan and pledged
to continue to maintain minimal contact with them and other foreign nationals outside of
his official duties. (Tr. 42) While his wife has more contact with her parents than
3
Applicant (estimated by Applicant to be three to four times a year), her conversations
never mention Applicant. (Tr. 48)
Applicant’s wife has four sisters who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. (Tr. 50)
To the best of Applicant’s knowledge, none of her sisters work for the Taiwan
government, or have any affiliations or known ties to the Taiwan government. (Tr. 49-50) 
Applicant assured that he could never be coerced, pressured, or influenced by any of his
wife’s family members to divulge classified or sensitive information that could potentially
damage U.S. security interests. (Tr. 53) 
Before they were married, Applicant’s wife had a small bank account she
maintained in Taiwan. (GEs 1-2 and AE O) She documented closing the account in May
2017. (AE O; Tr. 38, 56) At the time of closing, the account had less than $1,000. (AE O
Currently, neither Applicant nor his wife have any bank accounts or other property
interests in Taiwan. (Tr. 32, 47) 
Applicant assured he has no foreign business, financial interest, or property
interest in Taiwan that could create conflicts, actual or potential, that he cannot resolve
favorably to his U.S. interests. Because of his deep and longstanding relationships and
loyalties in the United States, which dictate his choosing in favor of the U.S. interest
should a conflict ever arise, he could never be coerced, pressured, or influenced by
Taiwan government authorities to disclose classified or sensitive information to any
foreign source.
In a supplied written statement Applicant authored in September 2017, Applicant 
consented to automatic revocation of his clearance should he violate any of his
commitments made in his statement.  (AE J) Applicant indicated he has no immediate
plans to return to Taiwan. 
Character references and awards
Applicant’s program manager and supervisor, who have known and worked with
Applicant for several years, praised his engineering and research contributions and
commend him for his integrity and trustworthiness. (Tr. 13-15, 21-24) Colleagues, family
members, friends, and doctoral thesis advisor who have known Applicant for many years
characterize him as intelligent, reliable, trustworthy, and deeply devoted to his family and
protecting the security interests of the United States. (AEs L and P) 
During his two years of employment with his current contractor, Applicant has
earned a number of awards recognizing his contributions to the development of high
quality research systems and programs. (AE I) His documented awards include multiple
collaborative achievement commendations, certificates of completion, and awards of
academic excellence in research. (AE I) 
Applicant’s documented performance evaluations for 2016 and 2017 credit him
with consistent ratings of exceeds requirements. (AE K). Noted strengths include
dedication and honesty for what he is doing, acceptance of challenges, harmonious in
4
his working relationships, and demonstrated good intuition on approaches to problem
solving. (AE K)
Taiwan’s country status
Taiwan has a rich history that dates back 12 to 15 thousand years.  Dutch and
Spanish colonists claimed the island in the 16  and 17  centuries. See Backgroundth th
Note: Taiwan at 1-2, U.S. Department of State, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs
(September 2008) Migration from the Chinese mainland over time supplanted the 
aborigine peoples of Taiwan. Japan exerted considerable influence over Taiwan
following China’s ceding of Taiwan to Japan in 1895. (Id.)
Following the end of World War II in 1945, Taiwan reverted to Chinese rule.  Civil
war erupted soon after the reversion between Chiang Kai-Shek’s Kuomintang (KMT)
party and the increasingly influential Chinese Communist Party guided by Mao Zedong. 
When the civil war ended in 1949, two million refugees (predominantly nationalists) fled
to Taiwan, where Chiang Kai-Shek established a separate provisional KMT capital in
Taipei. See Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 3. Mao’s victorious Communist party, in
turn, established the People’ s Republic of China (PRC).
For the past half century, Taiwan has demonstrated steady economic
development and today is a major international trading power.  Its accession to the world
Trade Organization (WTO) in 2002 represented a significant achievement and
strengthened its standing in the expanding global economy. Taiwan has exhibited steady
political development as well since its establishment as an island government. Changes
reflect a continuing liberalizing process that culminated in the tightly contested election of
Chen Shui-bian in 2000. See Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 3-4.  Chen’s
Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won major parliamentary victories in 2000 and
again in 2004, enabling Chen to become the first opposition party candidate to win the
presidency. Chen was re-elected in 2004 on a platform that included a “defensive
referendum.” (Id., at 4)  Such referenda have been historically perceived to be closely
linked to the question of Taiwan’s independence. 
Legislative elections in January 2008 produced a decisive majority for the KMT
party over Chen’s DPP. (Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 4) In the presidential
election that was held one month later, Ma Ying-jeou prevailed, securing a united
government under KMT control for the first time. (Id.) The January 2012 presidential and
legislative elections were held concurrently for the first time (as the result of a
constitutional amendment) and resulted in the reelection of Ma Ying-jeou and renewed
KMT legislative control by the victorious KMT party. 
Today’s Taiwan political system can appropriately be described as a multi-party
democracy under a constitutional umbrella comprising five branches: executive,
legislative, judicial, control and examination.  By all accounts, Taiwan has a good human
rights record and has demonstrated respect for the rule of contract in its commercial
relations.
5
Taiwan’s PRC relations
The PRC does not recognize Taiwan’s independence, and insists that there is
only “one China” For earlier background on expanding cross-straight trade between
Taiwan and the PRC, see Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 4. Despite differences
over the PRC’s one China policy, Taiwan and the PRC have enjoyed increased contacts
over the past decade. (Id.) Over the past several years, Taiwan has relaxed restrictions
on unofficial contacts with the PRC. With Taiwan’s continued relaxation of its PRC policy
regarding unofficial contacts, cross-strait interactions have grown significantly. 
With increasing contacts between Taiwan and the PRC, cross-strait trade has
grown rapidly over the past 20 years. (Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 3-4) China is
Taiwan’s largest trading partner, and Taiwan is China’s seventh largest. (Id.)  In June
2010, following prolonged negotiations, the two sides signed an Economic Cooperation
Framework Agreement (ECFA), which was designed to liberalize cross-strait trade in
products and services, with the long-term goal of eventually creating and essentially free-
trade regime. The development of semi-official cross-strait relations between Taiwan and
the PRC hopefully will contribute to tension reductions and to an environment conducive
to an eventually peaceful resolution of outstanding differences between the two sides.  
The PRC’s military modernization is targeting countries (inclusive of the United
States) with the potential to degrade core U.S. military-technological advantages.
Administrative Notice, supra, at 3. See also Annual Report to Congress: Military and
Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017 at 75, U.S.
Department of defense 2017). These PRC operations use clandestine agents to collect
intelligence on Western consortia investing in the PRC who are suspected of
involvement in attempts to democratize the PRC, as well as other pro-democracy groups
thought to be engaging in anti-communist activities (Id.)
In the current political environment, it is still too early to predict the direction of
cross-strait negotiations between Taiwan and the PRC. Because of the PRC’s long
insistence on Taiwan’s acceptance of the “one China” principle as a requisite to any
jump-starting of negotiations over practical agreements in trade, cultural exchanges, and
other areas of mutual interest, future relations between the two sides remain cloudy at
best.
U.S.-Taiwan relations
In a joint communique with the PRC in January 1979, the U.S. announced its
recognition of the government of the PRC as the sole government of China and that
there is but one China, of which Taiwan is a part. See Administrative Notice, supra, and
Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 4) The Joint Communique stated that within this
context the people of the United States will maintain cultural, commercial, and other
unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan.
To implement the joint communique, Congress passed the Taiwan Relations Act
(TRA) in April 1979.  President Carter, in turn, signed the legislation into law on April 10,
6
1979.  Besides providing the legal basis for maintaining the U.S. unofficial relationship
with Taiwan, the TRA reinforced the U.S. commitment to providing defense assistance to
Taiwan. The TRA expressly provides for the continued sale of appropriate defensive
military equipment to Taiwan and declares that peace and stability in the area are in U.S.
interests. See Background Note, Taiwan, supra, at 4. And even though the United States
terminated its Mutual Defense Treaty with Taiwan following its de-recognition of the latter,
it has continued its sale of appropriate defensive military equipment to Taiwan. (Id.)
While ambiguously written, the U.S. commitment to Taiwan’s security against
cross-strait aggression by the PRC’s military forces is implicit in the TRA’s coverage of
U.S. responsibilities towards Taiwan. This implicit construction is oft-used to support
proponents of a “two China” policy.  To be sure, initial actions of the Bush Administration
in 2001 provided cause to conclude that President Bush abandoned longstanding U.S.
policy of “strategic ambiguity” in favor of a policy that placed a clearer emphasis on
Taiwan’s interests at the expense of the PRC. See Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 3-
4. More recent developments, though, reflect the smoothing of U.S.-PRC relations as a
part of the broader war on terrorism.  
The United States and Taiwan enjoy robust unofficial relationships Currently, the
United States does not support Taiwan independence and opposes unilateral steps by
either side to alter the status quo. See Administrative Notice; supra, and Fact Sheet: U.S.
Relations with Taiwan, U.S. Department of State, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs
(September 2016). For additional historical context, see Background Note: Taiwan, supra,
at 3-4.  For so long as Taiwan’s national security remains under threat (both veiled and
unveiled) from the PRC, Taiwan can be expected to pursue the development of its military
amidst expectations of military assistance from the United States. Stressing self-reliance,
Taiwan maintains a large military establishment (accounting for 2.9 per cent of its gross
domestic product). Its principal mission is to defend itself against the PRC, which has not
renounced the use of force against Taiwan. 
With its unchanged public policy of maintaining “strategic ambiguity” in its official
relations with Taiwan, the United States can be expected to continue its support of
Taiwan’s island security with the sale of defensive military equipment. Maintaining strong,
unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan is and has been a major U.S. goal. It 
provides the formal basis for pursuing its special relationship with Taiwan and legitimizes  
its commitment to assist Taiwan in furthering its defense capabilities. See Fact Sheet:
U.S. relations with Taiwan, supra, at 2. 
Taiwan’s economic collection practices
Based on past reports to Congress, Taiwan is considered one of the most active
collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information. In its 2011 Annual Report to
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, the
Counterintelligence Executive (CE) listed Taiwan as well as the PRC among the most
active collectors based on cited surveys. See Administrative Notice, supra, and Annual
Report  to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, Office of
National Counterintelligence Executive 2009-2011 at 5 (October 2011). Specific incidents
7
are cited in the CE’s report that identify offenders of proprietary information thefts and
attempts to acquire export-restricted products. See Annual Report to Congress: Military
and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China 2017, supra. 
Stress points between Taiwan, the PRC and the United States
In its Annual Reports to Congress in 2000, 2005, and 2008, and 2017, the National
Counterintelligence Executive described the PRC as a country intent on acquiring and
exploiting the knowledge developed by multiples of collection agents: legally, if possible,
and otherwise illegally by espionage. See Annual Report to Congress on Foreign
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, supra. Recent indictments of Chinese
citizens for espionage have served to highlight the PRC’s spying activities in the U.S. (Id.) 
Violating  its own 2004 U.S.-China agreement, the PRC oft-fails to schedule timely end-
use inspection visits of dual-use items licensed for export to the PRC. Better export
controls can be effective only if they are multilateral in scope. Multilateral export controls
and arms embargoes, however, do provide additional insurance against altering the
cross-strait military balance that has been long maintained. 
Without effective dual use export controls in place, the PRC can be expected to
acquire dual use technologies with military potential from the United States and Taiwan
through the United States and other source countries. Reported intelligence, though, is
lacking on any Taiwan use of its collection resources in the United States to supply the
PRC with needed military technology (alone or through technology with known dual use
capabilities).
Other stress points between the PRC and Taiwan are reflected in periodic PRC
military exercises in the Taiwan Straits.  More frequent U.S.-PRC high-level exchanges
have the potential to reduce cross-strait military tensions.  
Policies
The AGs for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (effective
June 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by administrative judges in the decision
making process covering DOHA cases. These Guidelines require the administrative judge
to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued or
denied. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
8
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: “Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to,
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in
divided allegiance. They may also be a security concern if they create circumstances in
which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts
and interests should consider th country in which the foreign contact or interest is located,
including, but not limited to, considerations such it is known to target U.S. citizens to
obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.”
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that
to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in
the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance
depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all
adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
9
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth who married a Taiwan national in September
2015. Security concerns arise over the status of Applicant’s in-laws who are citizens and
residents of Taiwan, a country  historically friendly to the United States, albeit, one with a
reported history of economic collection activities in the United States.
Foreign influence concerns
Department Counsel urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s mother-in-
law and father-in-law (citresiding in Taiwan, might be subject to undue foreign influence by
Taiwanese government authorities to access classified information in Applicant’s
possession or control. Because Applicant’s extended family members reside in Taiwan,
they present potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition  (DC)  ¶
7(a) of the AGs for foreign influence: “contact regardless of method, with a foreign family
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” The citizenship/residence status of
these extended family members in Taiwan pose some potential concerns for Applicant
because of the risks of undue foreign influence that could compromise classified or
sensitive information under Applicant's possession and/or control. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law works for a private hospital; while his father-in-law works
in private farming. Neither in-law is affiliated or associated any way with the Taiwan
government or military. Based on the information furnished by Applicant, his in-laws pose
no identifiable security risk to Applicant or the Government that could place Applicant at
risk to any form of coercion or pressure to divulge classified or sensitive information in his
possession. The same holds for Applicant’s spouse who now has permanent residence
status.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime
involved do matter. And the AGs do take into account the country’s demonstrated relations
with the United States as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular
relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk.
Taiwan, while reported to target the United States and its companies in the past for
economic and proprietary information, is still a country with no known recent history of
hostage taking or disposition for exerting undue influence against family members to
obtain either classified information, or unclassified economic and proprietary data. 
10
The special relationship that has existed between the United States and Taiwan
over the past half-century has been one marked by mutually reconcilable political and
economic interests. Reports of Taiwan intelligence gathering against U.S. companies are
counterbalanced by Taiwan’s history of friendship and partnership in a defense pact
formalized in 1979. The mutually supportive bonds that have linked Taiwan’s special
relationship with the United States have not been weakened by either the TRA, or the 
geopolitical forces that have shaped the U.S.’s evolving relationship with the PRC.  
Taiwan remains a friend of the United States and is a country whose democratic
institutions are not incompatible with our own traditions and respect for human rights and
the rule of law. Whatever potential heightened security risks arise as the result of
Applicant's having family members with citizenship and residency in Taiwan are mitigated.
As for security concerns associated with the presence of Applicant's mother-in-law
and father-in-law in Taiwan, any potential heightened risk of a hostage situation or undue
foreign influence brought in the hopes of eliciting either classified information or economic
or proprietary data out of Applicant through his extended family members residing in
Taiwan is minimal. For not only does Applicant have infrequent contact with his in-laws
residing in Taiwan, but neither he nor his spouse have any bank accounts or other
property or financial interests in Taiwan. Applicant pledged his loyalty and support to the
United States where he has lived all of his life as a U.S. citizen by birth. continuously since
immigrating to this country in 1969. During this time, he has amassed considerable close
family and community relationships. Applicant, accordingly, may take advantage of two
important mitigating conditions: 
MC ¶ 8(a), the nature of the relationships with foreign persons,
the country in which these persons are located, or the persons
or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to
choose between the interests of a foreign a foreign individual,
group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States, and
MC ¶ 8(b), there is no conflict of interest, either because the
individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person,
or allegiance to the group, government, or country is so
minima, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties to the United States that the
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in
favor of the U.S. interests.  
Raised security concerns over Applicant’s wife and in-laws having Taiwan
citizenship and financial interests in Taiwan that could create conflicts of interests that
could potentially place Applicant at risk to making choices that prioritize his personal
interests over the security interests of the United States are unlikely to materialize. 
11
Whole-person assessment
Whole person assessment also serves to minimize Applicant’s exposure to conflict
of interests with his Taiwan in-laws. Not only is a U.S. citizen by birth and earned multiple
degree in engineering from a respected U.S. university, but he has made every effort to
work and pursue his professional and financial interests exclusively in the United States.
Applicant is highly regarded and trusted by his company managers, colleagues, and close
friends, who are not aware of any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that Applicant’s
mother-in-law and father-i-law might be exposed to in Taiwan. Applicant’s professional and
academic awards and professional evaluations are superior and provide much promise of
success in his chosen field of engineering.
In Applicant’s case, any likelihood of coercion, pressure, or influence being brought
to bear on any of his extended family members residing in Taiwan would appear to be
minimal. By all reasonable accounts of the presented record, Applicant has no identifiable 
conflicts of interest with Taiwan citizens and residents or property interests in Taiwan that
could be at risk to exploitation or compromise by Taiwan authorities. Overall, any potential
security concerns attributable to Applicant's extended family members in Taiwan are
sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments concerning Applicant's ability to
withstand risks of undue influence attributable to his familial relationships in Taiwan.
Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline
B.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE):  FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.c:        For  APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance.  
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
12
13
