 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-07591 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). Security concerns under Guideline J are mitigated, 
but security concerns under Guideline E are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 7, 2010. On 
May 9, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines J and E. DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 27, 2013, and answered it on May 29, 2013. 
On June 12, 2013, he requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on December 23, 2013, and the case was assigned to 
 
2 
 
me on January 3, 2014. On January 13, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, scheduling it for February 4, 2014. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were admitted without objection. I held the record open 
until February 21, 2014, to enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. 
He timely submitted AX K through P. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 
19, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. He denied SOR ¶¶ 
1.f, 1.g, 2.a, and 2.b. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated 
in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old cyber security consultant employed by a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since December 1999. He has never 
held a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant was married in June 1989, but the marriage was annulled in January 
1993. He has not remarried, and he has no children. 
 
 Applicant completed four years of high school but did not receive a diploma 
because he lacked one credit. He received a general educational development (GED) 
diploma in 1991 or 1992. (Tr. 28-29.) 
 
 In March 1987, while still in high school, Applicant was charged with (1) robbery 
in the first degree, by forcible theft with a deadly weapon, a felony; (2) criminal 
possession of a weapon, a felony; (3) criminal possession of stolen property, a felony; 
and (4) criminal possession of stolen property, a misdemeanor. Applicant testified that 
he and a friend were “just hanging out” and they decided to rob someone. He did not 
know that his friend had a handgun until he brandished it during the robbery. They ran 
away but were apprehended on the same day. Applicant was released on his own 
recognizance and then skipped his court date. (GX 5 at 4; Tr. 30-35.) 
 
 In December 1987, Applicant was charged with (1) robbery in the first degree, 
causing serious injury, a felony; (2) criminal possession of stolen property, a felony; (3) 
assault with intent to cause physical injury, a misdemeanor; and (4) unlawful possession 
of noxious matter, a misdemeanor. Applicant testified that this incident arose during a 
shoplifting in which he stole a leather jacket. He was accused of striking a security 
guard in the store. He denied having any “noxious matter.” He was detained for a “few 
days,” arraigned, and released on his own recognizance. He skipped his court 
appearance. (GX 5 at 3; Tr. 35-37.) 
 
 In December 1987, seven days after the shoplifting incident, Applicant was 
charged with (1) assault with intent to cause physical injury to a police officer, a felony; 
 
3 
 
(2) grand larceny in the fourth degree, a felony; (3) resisting arrest, a misdemeanor; and 
(4) criminal possession of stolen property, a misdemeanor.1 He testified that this 
incident was a pickpocketing, and he was apprehended by the local transit police. He 
left the state to avoid prosecution. (GX 5 at 3; Tr. 37-38.) 
 
 In July 1988, shortly after Applicant moved to another state to avoid the pending 
criminal charges, he was charged with possession of cocaine with intent to distribute. 
He testified that he started selling drugs because he needed money. He testified that he 
sold cocaine about ten times before he was arrested. He spent 51 days in jail awaiting 
trial and then was released on bond. In October 1988, he was charged with selling 
cocaine, detained overnight, and released on his own recognizance.2 The June 1988 
charge was dismissed in late 1988. (GX 2 at 5-6; GX 5 at 3; Tr. 39-43.) 
 
 In January 1989, Applicant was charged with (1) attempt/conspiracy to distribute 
a Schedule II narcotic and (2) distribution of a Schedule II controlled substance. He 
testified that he was living with his then girlfriend and the police raided the house and 
found cocaine that was left behind by his girlfriend’s former boyfriend. (Tr. 49.) He 
testified that he did not know that the cocaine was in the house, but he decided to 
accept a plea agreement and pleaded guilty. As part of the plea agreement, the October 
1988 drug charge was dismissed. (Tr. 42-47.) He was sentenced to imprisonment for 24 
months and supervised probation for three years. (GX 3 at 3.)  
 
After serving about 21 months in prison, Applicant was extradited to be tried in 
another state for the two 1987 robberies. The charges for two 1987 robberies were 
consolidated, and he pleaded guilty to robbery in the first degree for both incidents. He 
received a combined sentence of imprisonment for three to nine years for both 
robberies.3 (GX 1 at 36-37; GX 5 at 4.) The record does not reflect the disposition of the 
1987 shoplifting charge alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. However, in his answer to the SOR, he 
admitted that he pleaded guilty to it in October 1990. He was released from prison in 
April 1992 and placed on parole. (Tr. 50.) 
 
 In June 1994 (alleged as September 1994 in the SOR), Applicant was charged 
with distribution of cocaine. He violated his parole by leaving the state to visit his 
girlfriend. At her apartment complex, the police searched several people, including 
Applicant, looking for drugs. Applicant testified that there were drugs “nearby,” but he 
denied being involved with them. (Tr. 49-52.) He was sentenced to prison for 12 to 18 
months for his parole violation, and he was released after serving 15 months. (GX 3 at 
4; Tr. 54.) There is no evidence that he was convicted of the cocaine charge. 
 
                                                          
1 The SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that use of a firearm was charged in this incident, but the court records do not 
reflect that a firearms offense was charged. (GX 5 at 3.) 
 
2 The October 1988 charge was not alleged in the SOR. 
 
3 The November 1990 charge, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, is the consolidation of the two 1987 robbery charges 
and did not involve a separate incident. 
 
4 
 
 In his PSI and during his testimony at the hearing, Applicant stated that he has 
never used controlled substances, even though he sold them. Since his last arrest, he 
has not knowingly associated with anyone involved with drugs. (GX 2 at 8; Tr. 25, 53-
54.) 
 
 Applicant received an associate’s degree in in computer science in December 
1998 and a bachelor’s degree in business administration in March 2006. (AX C; AX D.) 
In June 2007, he received his employer’s engineering excellence award. (AX A; AX E.) 
 
 When Applicant began working for his current employer, his annual salary was 
about $70,000. He now earns about $140,000. (Tr. 57.) He owns his personal residence 
and a rental property. (Tr. 24; AX F through J.) He testified that he has co-authored two 
books on web application security. (Tr. 24.) He is the chairperson of a diversity group at 
his place of employment, and he chairs an outreach program designed to interest high 
school students in information technology. (Tr. 61.) 
 
Applicant’s current supervisor, who has known him for almost ten years, is aware 
of his criminal record. He regards Applicant as “truly repentant” and “an excellent 
example of triumph over adversity.” (AX K.) Another coworker, who is aware of 
Applicant’s criminal past and has known him for 15 years, regards him as “a bit of an IT 
genius,” well organized, competent, a person of “tremendous personal character,” and 
proud of his clean and healthy life style. (AX L.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA (GX 1), Section 22 (Police Record) advised 
him, “For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your case has 
been sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from the court record, or the charge is 
dismissed.” He answered “Yes” to Question 22c, asking “Have you EVER4 been 
charged with any felony offense?” He disclosed that he was charged with possession of 
a controlled substance in December 1988, an attempted robbery in June 1987, and a 
robbery in January 1987.5 He did not disclose the felony charges alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.e, and 1.g, but he disclosed the drug offense alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e in response to 
Question 22e. He answered “No” to Question 22d, asking “Have you EVER been 
charged with a firearms or explosives offense?” He did not disclose the firearms offense 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. Finally, he answered “No” to Question 22e, asking, “Have you 
EVER been charged with any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?” Notwithstanding 
his negative answer to the question, he disclosed the drug-related charge alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e, but he did not disclose the drug-related charges alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.g.  
 
In the space for additional comments in Section 22 of the SCA, Applicant stated, 
“For the convictions above I served a total of three years. The term of 18 months (for 
                                                          
4 This word is capitalized in Questions 22c, 22d, and 22e of the SCA. 
 
5 The dates of the offenses disclosed by Applicant vary slightly from the dates alleged in the SOR, but the 
descriptions of the offenses and their disposition are substantially the same. 
 
5 
 
possession of cocaine) and 1 to 3 years (attempted robbery) were served concurrently. 
The term of 2 to 6 years (robbery) was served consecutive[ly] to the other sentences. I 
was released after serving 37 consecutive months.” He did not disclose the 15 
additional months he served for the 1994 parole violation.  
 
During a personal subject interview (PSI) in May 2010, Applicant told the 
investigator that he did not believe that he was convicted of the firearms offense alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a. He told the investigator that his co-defendant produced a handgun during 
the robbery, but he was unaware that his co-defendant had a handgun. He stated that 
he pleaded guilty to robbery but was not convicted of the firearms offense. (GX 2 at 4.) 
He told the investigator that he did not disclose the shoplifting incident because the 
charges were incorporated into the earlier robbery charges. (GX 2 at 5.) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant was able to answer questions about his criminal record 
in great detail. He admitted that his negative answer to Question 22e was wrong and 
that he should have answered it in the affirmative. He testified that he misinterpreted the 
questions and believed they asked only about convictions, and that he did not disclose 
his drug charges in July 1988, October 1988, and June 1994 because they were 
dismissed. He did not explain his failure to disclose the 1987 shoplifting charge, to 
which he admitted pleading guilty. He testified that he did not disclose the parole 
violation because it was not a conviction. He admitted that he understood the difference 
between being charged and being convicted. (Tr. 65-69.) He also testified that he knew 
that his affirmative answers to Questions 22c and 22d would trigger a check of his entire 
criminal record. (Tr. 81.) He admitted that his criminal record is a chapter in his life that 
he tries not to relive if it is not necessary. (Tr. 82.) 
 
Applicant testified that he did not disclose his felony convictions when he applied 
for his current job, because the job application asked only about the last seven years. 
He told his supervisor that he had “served time” but did not provide detailed information. 
(Tr. 79.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
 
6 
 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges a robbery charge in March 1987 that resulted in a conviction 
and a sentence of imprisonment for two to six years (SOR ¶ 1.a); a robbery charge in 
December 1987 that resulted in a conviction and a sentence of imprisonment for one to 
 
7 
 
two years (SOR ¶ 1.b); charges of assault on a police officer and grand larceny arising 
from a shoplifting incident in December 1987 that resulted in a conviction (SOR ¶ 1.c); a 
drug possession charge in July 1998 that was dismissed (SOR ¶ 1.d); a drug 
possession charge in January 1989 that resulted in a conviction and a sentence to 
imprisonment for 24 months and three years of supervised probation, which was later 
revoked, resulting in imprisonment for 18 months (SOR ¶ 1.e); a robbery charge in 
November 1990 that resulted in a conviction and a sentence to imprisonment for three 
to nine years (SOR ¶ 1.f); and a charge of distributing cocaine in June 1994, which was 
the basis for the revocation of supervised probation alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” Applicant’s long criminal record and time served in prison are 
established by his admissions and court records, and they establish the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
AG ¶ 31(c): allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted;  
AG ¶ 31(e): violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program; and 
AG ¶ 31(f): conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial 
of a crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 AG ¶ 31(f) originally was based on the Smith Amendment (10 U.S.C. § 986), 
which imposed a disqualification from holding a security clearance on anyone who was 
sentenced to and served imprisonment for at least one year. However, this section of 
the United States Code was repealed on January 28, 2008, when the President signed 
the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 into law. It was replaced by 
adding § 3002 to 50 U.S.C. § 435b (the Bond Amendment). This new provision 
continued the disqualification, absent a meritorious waiver, for persons who were 
sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and were imprisoned as a 
result of that sentence for not less than one year. However, this disqualification only 
applies to clearances that would provide access to special access programs (SAP), 
Restricted Data (RD), or any other information commonly referred to as “special 
compartmented information” (SCI). Thus, Applicant is not disqualified from holding a 
clearance by the Bond Amendment, but he is disqualified from holding SAP, RD, and 
SCI clearances, unless he is granted a waiver. The DOHA Director has authority to 
grant a waiver. 
 
 
8 
 
Two mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
 Both mitigating conditions are established. Almost 20 years have passed since 
Applicant’s last criminal conduct. He has worked for his current employer since 1999 
and enjoys an excellent reputation. He has earned a college degree. He is active in 
professional organizations at work and in an outreach program to attract high school 
students into careers in information technology.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA by intentionally failing to 
disclose several felony charges (SOR ¶ 2.a) and two firearms-related charges (SOR ¶ 
2.b). The SOR did not allege that Applicant intentionally falsified his response to 
Question 22e, that he failed to disclose his October 1988 drug charges, or that he 
intentionally understated the length of time he was incarcerated. Conduct not alleged in 
the SOR may not be an independent basis for denying his application for a security 
clearance. However, conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an 
applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; 
to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-
person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have 
considered Applicant’s negative answer to Question 22e, his failure to disclose his 
October 1988 drug charges, and his understatement of the time served in prison for 
these limited purposes. 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition under this guideline is AG ¶ 16(a):  
 
 
9 
 
[D]eliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and business experience are 
relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security 
clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 
2010). 
 
 An act of falsification has security significance independent of the underlying 
conduct. See ISCR Case No. 01-19278 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Apr. 22, 2003). The mitigation 
of the underlying conduct has little bearing on the security significance of the 
falsification, particularly where there are multiple falsifications. ISCR Case No. 08-11944 
at 3 (App. Bd. Aug 15, 2011). 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He has a reputation for high 
intelligence. He is familiar with the criminal justice system, and he admitted that he 
understands the difference between being charged and being convicted. He was able to 
describe his criminal record in great detail at the hearing. His explanation for answering 
“No” to Question 22e was plausible and credible, since he listed a drug-related offense 
on the next page of his SCA. However, his explanations for his failures to list the 
shoplifting charge, three of the four drug-related charges, and a firearms offense were 
not plausible or credible. He insisted at the hearing that he believed that the questions 
asked only about convictions. However, the instructions on the SCA clearly told him to 
list charges even if they were dismissed. His explanation also was inconsistent, in that 
he admitted in the SOR that he pleaded guilty to the shoplifting, but he testified that he 
did not disclose it because it was dismissed. His intentional understatement of the time 
he spent in prison, while not alleged in the SOR, indicates his intent to minimize the 
extent of his criminal conduct. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
 
10 
 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant did not disclose the full extent of his 
criminal record until he was confronted with the evidence during his PSI. He did not 
disclose the full duration of his time in prison until the hearing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. His falsification of an SCA was not minor, because 
it undermined the integrity of the security-clearance process. It did not occur under 
unique circumstances, and it raises doubt about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J and E* in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was sincere and remorseful at the hearing. His transformation from a 
habitual criminal to a well-educated, hardworking, and highly respected professional is 
impressive. Unfortunately, his extreme embarrassment about his past and his desire to 
further his career affected his candor during the security clearance process, raising 
serious doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on criminal conduct, but he has not 
mitigated the concerns raised by his lack of candor about his criminal record. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
 
11 
 
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
