 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09245 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mitchell J. Howie, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline E 
(personal conduct) and Guideline K (handling protected information). Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 4, 2010, Applicant certified an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 17, 2013, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed security 
concerns under Guidelines E and K that reflected why DOD CAF could not find under 
the Directive that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant’s security clearance. On June 24, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing.  
 
This case was initially assigned to another administrative judge. On August 20, 
2013, DOHA issued the Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for September 28, 
2013. On August 29, 2013, Applicant’s Counsel requested a continuance that was 
granted. The case was reassigned to me on September 25, 2013. On October 28, 2013, 
a second Notice of Hearing was issued, and the hearing was held as scheduled on 
November 21, 2013. At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and Applicant testified, called six witnesses, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 through 55. Objections to the exhibits are discussed below.  
 
After the hearing, the record of the proceeding was reopened twice to permit the 
parties to submit matters on the issue of reciprocity. In post-hearing submissions, the 
parties submitted documents that have been admitted into evidence as GE 5 through 8 
and AE 56 through 61. No evidentiary objections were raised regarding the post-hearing 
submissions. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on December 3, 2013. 
The record of the proceeding closed on February 19, 2014. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Matters 
 
Prior to the hearing, Department Counsel submitted a motion that asserted the 
doctrine of collateral estoppel precluded admission of evidence at the hearing that 
challenged the findings of an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) of the Merit Systems 
Protection Board (MSPB). Applicant’s Counsel responded in writing to that motion. In a 
written ruling, I set forth my rationale for concluding that the doctrine of collateral 
estoppel applied to the MSPB decision, but also noted that, consistent with the 
requirements of due process, Applicant would be provided a full opportunity to explain 
his conduct and offer evidence to extenuate and mitigate such conduct. Department 
Counsel’s motion, Applicant’s response, and my ruling have been marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) 1. At the hearing, Department Counsel objected to portions of Applicant’s 
Answer to the SOR and to Applicant’s exhibits that challenged the MSPB decision. I 
overruled Department Counsel’s objections to permit Applicant the opportunity to 
present such matters in extenuation and mitigation.1 
 
Department Counsel’s and Applicant’s lists of exhibits were marked as HE 2 and 
HE 3, respectively.2 
 
At the start of the hearing, Department Counsel made a motion to withdraw the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a under Guideline E. Applicant’s Counsel had no objections to 
that motion. The motion was granted. SOR ¶ 1.a was withdrawn.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 8-9, 11-14, 24-25. No evidence offered by Applicant at the hearing was excluded from 
admission into evidence under the doctrine of collateral estoppel. 
2 Tr. at 19, 24. 
 
3 
 
 
At the hearing, the issue of reciprocity under Section 2-204 of the National 
Security Industrial Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), DOD 5220.22-M, dated 
February 28, 2006, was implicitly raised. As noted above, the parties provided evidence 
and arguments in post-hearing submissions regarding the application of reciprocity. For 
the reasons set forth below, I concluded that reciprocity does not apply in this case. My 
post-hearing email communications with the parties have been marked as HE 4. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
for his current employer in September 2010. He served in the Army Reserve from 
November 1987 to May 1989, on active duty in the Army from May 1989 to January 
2001, and in the National Guard from August 2001 to July 2011. He retired in the grade 
of master sergeant (E-8). He is married and has two children, ages 12 and 15. Since 
about 1987, he has held a security clearance, including at the time of the hearing.4 
 
 Excluding the withdrawn allegation, the SOR alleged under Guideline E that, in 
 , Applicant was terminated from federal employment for violating security 
regulations that resulted in the compromise of restricted information, for misusing 
government equipment, and for failing to follow supervisory orders and instructions. 
Under Guideline K, the SOR alleged that, in about  , he intentionally removed 
classification markings without proper authorization from a compact disc (CD) 
containing classified material. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he was 
terminated from federal employment as alleged under Guideline E, but denied most of 
the underlying conduct that was the basis of that termination. He denied the Guideline K 
allegation.5 
 
MSPB Decision6 
 
In  , Applicant began a job as a federal civilian employee. He 
worked as an instructor at a military training command. His position required him to 
maintain a security clearance. In  , Applicant’s security clearance was 
suspended during government investigations into the propriety of him selling excess 
government material on eBay. The reports of investigations concluded that Applicant’s 
sale of the excess material was not illegal. The investigations, however, noted that 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
3 Tr. at 9-11. 
4 Tr. at 78-108, 164-165; GE 1; AE 3, 19, 20.   
5 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
6 GE 2 (MSPB ALJ’s decision, dated   ). 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant utilized a government computer to track the sales transactions on eBay and 
that pornographic material was discovered on Applicant’s government computer.  
 
In about  , several CDs were found at Applicant’s civilian job site 
that contained classified information but did not bear classification markings. An officer 
conducted a command investigation into this security issue. The investigation included 
affidavits from witnesses. The investigating officer concluded that Applicant had 
removed the classification markings from the classified material and improperly 
distributed the CDs containing said material. 
 
On   , an official in Applicant’s chain of command proposed 
that Applicant be removed from his position for violation of security regulations where 
restricted information was compromised, misuse of government equipment for other 
than official use, and repeated failure to follow supervisory orders and instructions. 
Applicant submitted a detailed written response to the agency’s proposed removal 
notice, but did not request an opportunity to make an oral response. 
 
On   , Applicant’s commander issued a decision that sustained the 
reasons in the proposed removal notice and found that Applicant’s removal was 
warranted to promote the efficiency of the service. Applicant was involuntarily removed 
from federal service. He appealed that adverse action. 
 
An MSPB ALJ conducted a hearing into the propriety of the termination of 
Applicant’s federal employment. Applicant was represented at that hearing. In his 
decision dated   , the ALJ addressed the three reasons for Applicant’s 
removal. The ALJ’s findings and conclusions are summarized or quoted below:  
 
1. As to the agency’s first charge involving the alleged security violation, the ALJ 
noted the official who proposed Applicant’s termination testified at the hearing that, on 
  , he obtained from an enlisted member (E-7) a CD that contained 
classified information on  . An examination of the CD revealed the 
classification markings had been removed from material on the disc and the properties 
section of the CD indicated that Applicant was the author of the disc, which was created 
on   . Two other discs were subsequently discovered and witnesses 
identified Applicant as the original source of them. 
 
2. In his response to the notice of proposed removal, Applicant denied he created 
the CDs in question and argued that he had been in another state performing National 
Guard duty on   , a Saturday. He also argued the properties section of the 
CD can be changed and denied giving the CD to the E-7. At the hearing, Applicant 
called as a witness another E-7 who performed the examination of the CD. This E-7 
testified that Applicant or someone using his password created the CD that he 
examined. He also testified that the information on the disc could only have been 
obtained from the vault at Applicant’s command or from Applicant’s National Guard unit, 
which would have had the same classified information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
3. As quoted below, the ALJ concluded: 
 
         
               
        
          
              
       
         
         
         
         I 
therefore find that the agency has supported the first charge by a 
preponderance of the evidence and it is hereby sustained.7 
 
4. As to the agency’s second charge concerning misuse of government 
computers, the ALJ noted an investigative report contained detailed evidence regarding 
the examination of the hard drives of Applicant’s government-assigned desktop and 
laptop computers. The investigation revealed both computers were used to track 
Applicant’s internet sales of excessed items, although that activity occurred before and 
after duty hours and at lunchtime. Applicant’s laptop also contained “‘numerous 
photographic images from sexually explicit adult web sites.’ The pornographic material 
had been placed on the hard drive in the   timeframe.” 
 
5. Applicant claimed his use of government computers to track his internet sales 
was arguably permissible under agency regulations. He denied visiting pornographic 
websites. He opined the pornographic images may have been attached to an email or 
that one of several individuals whom he allowed to use his laptop to check their email 
may have downloaded the material without his knowledge.  
 
6. As quoted below, the ALJ specifically found as to the second charge: 
 
         
           
         
              
             
        I therefore find that 
the second charge is sustained in its entirety.  
  
7. As to the agency’s third charge concerning Applicant’s alleged repeated failure 
to follow supervisory orders and instructions, the official who proposed Applicant’s 
                                                          
7 Prior to the hearing, I indicated that I was not bound by the MSPB Administrative Judge’s 
credibility determination and would independently make my own credibility determination. 
 
6 
 
 
removal testified in detail about multiple instances of Applicant’s failure to abide by an 
official’s instructions regarding approval methods for requesting leave. Applicant 
claimed this charge was petty and provided reasons for his failure to abide by the 
instructions.  
 
8. As quoted below, the ALJ specifically found for the third charge: 
 
         
            
          
              
         
 
 
9. The ALJ concluded the agency’s removal action was reasonable and 
appropriate.  
 
Applicant appealed the ALJ’s decision to the MSPB appeal board. On  
 , the MSPB appeal board upheld the ALJ’s decision. Applicant did not seek 
judicial review of the MSPB appeal board’s decision in federal court.8 
 
Reciprocity 
Section 2-204 of the NISPOM provides:  
Any previously granted PCL [Personnel Security Clearance] that is based 
upon a current investigation of a scope that meets or exceeds that 
necessary for the clearance required shall provide the basis for issuance 
of a new clearance without further investigation or adjudication unless 
significant derogatory information that was not previously adjudicated 
becomes known to the granting agency.  
In ISCR Case No. 98-0320 (App. Bd. Apr. 8, 1999), the Appeal Board held that 
reciprocity under the NISPOM is mandatory in nature. If Section 2-204 of the NISPOM 
applies, an administrative judge is bound by the prior favorable clearance decision and 
does not have discretion to decide what weight should be given that adjudication.9 
                                                          
8 GE 3 (MSPB appeal board decision, dated   ). 
9 In ISCR Case No. 98-0320 (App. Bd. Apr. 8, 1999), the Appeal Board held: 
Nothing in the language of Section 2-203 [the predecessor to Section 2-204 of the current 
version of the NISPOM, which contains almost identical language] indicates or suggests 
that it is a discretionary provision. To the contrary, the language of Section 2-203 clearly 
indicates it is mandatory in nature. Accordingly, the Board rejects Department Counsel’s 
contention that the Judge has the discretion to decide what weight, if any, should be 
given to the prior favorable CAF adjudication of Applicant’s security eligibility. 
 
7 
 
 
 In this case, Department Counsel offered into evidence Applicant’s Joint 
Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) Investigation and Adjudication History10 that 
contained the following entry: 
 
PSI Adjudication of SSBI Unknown, Opened, Closed 2003 05 30, determined Eligibility of SCI –
DCID 6/4 on 2005 06 09 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines: Personal Conduct, Security Violations and Misuse of Information 
Technology Systems 
 
Eligibility Eligibility EmploymentCode  CAF 
  Date  
 
 SCI - DCID 2005 06 09 Army CCF 
 6/4 
 Pending 
 Reply to  2004 03 11 Army CCF 
 Statement of 
 Reasons 
 
The JPAS entries further reflected that Applicant had a Single Scope Background 
Investigation - Periodic Reinvestigation (SBPR) that closed on June 30, 1996; a Single 
Scope Background Investigation (SSBI) that closed on May 30, 2003; and a SBPR that  
closed on May 14, 2011. Applicant’s latest security clearance eligibility determination 
was June 9, 2005. Another JPAS entry indicated the personnel security investigation 
(PSI) adjudication based on his latest SBPR remained an open DOHA case.11  
 
After reviewing the JPAS entries, I twice reopened the record of the proceeding 
after the hearing to permit the parties to present evidence and argument on the 
application of reciprocity to the U.S. Army Central Personnel Security Clearance 
Facility’s (Army CCF) favorable adjudication on June 9, 2005, as well as evidence 
reflecting that the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) favorably adjudicated 
Applicant’s security clearance on October 25, 2007.12  
 
 In his post-hearing submission, Department Counsel presented documents from 
the Army CCF’s adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in June 2005.13 These 
documents included: 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
The only difference in the language between the current Section 2-204 and the previous Section 
2-203 is that the first sentence of Section 2-204 contains the words “access to classified information“ 
between the words ”grant” and “to their employees”, while Section 2-203 instead contained the words 
“security clearances (TOP SECRET, SECRET, CONFIDENTIAL, Q or L)” between those same words.      
10 GE 4, 6.   
11 Tr. at 153-163; GE 4, 5, 6.   
12 HE 4.   
13 GE 7.   
 
8 
 
 
1. The commander’s letter, dated February 3, 2004, concurring with the 
investigating officer’s recommendations and directing their immediate initiation, which 
would have included Applicant’s removal from federal service. 
 
 2. The Army CCF’s Letter of Intent (LOI) to Revoke Sensitive Compartmented 
Information (SCI) Access Eligibility and Security Clearance, dated March 11, 2004. This 
letter included an SOR detailing the findings of the Army Regulation 15-6 investigation 
that concluded Applicant created multiple copies of a computer disc containing 
classified material on   , that he removed all classification markings from 
these discs, and that he distributed them to coworkers as unclassified material. The 
SOR also alleged that Applicant received nonjudicial punishment in 1997 for falsifying 
orders, that he disobeyed verbal orders from his supervisors, that he used a 
government computer during duty hours for his personal gain, and that a government 
computer confiscated from him contained a cache of internet pornography. The SOR 
noted the investigating officer recommended that Applicant be removed from federal 
service.   
 
 3. Applicant’s rebuttal to the LOI, dated September 1, 2004. This included a five-
page written rebuttal, reference letters, awards/ letters of appreciation, and other 
documents.  In the rebuttal, Applicant admitted that he falsified orders to recover a 
deposit from a landlord. 
 
 4. The commander’s endorsement on Applicant’s rebuttal, recommending 
Applicant’s security clearance be revoked and noting he engaged in a pattern of 
misconduct that showed he was untrustworthy. 
 
 5. The Army CCF’s “Warning Notice” – Determination of Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) Access Eligibility and Security Clearance, dated June 
9, 2005. This document stated in part: 
 
We have thoroughly evaluated your response to reference 1.a [Letter of 
Intent]. This memorandum is notification that your security clearance has 
been granted but with a warning that subsequent unfavorable 
information may result in the suspension of your security clearance. 
[Emphasis in original.] We have made a favorable determination based on 
your explanation concerning the selling of military related items and 
computer disks over the internet . . . . We also took into consideration your 
explanation that you could not have created copies of disks on the   
  with the classified marking removed as you were on Inactive 
Duty Training at [a specific location] from the      
. Also taken into consideration were the numerous recommendations 
you provided along with your statement that while you tracked certain 
items on Ebay from your government computer, this was done before or 
after work hours. You state that at no time did you use a government 
computer to view pornography. You acknowledged that in January 1998 
you received an Article 15 for falsifying orders. We grant you eligibility for 
 
9 
 
 
access to SCI and a Top Secret security clearance in accordance with 
reference 1.b [DoD 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 
1987, as amended]. DA Form 873, authorizing you a Top Secret security 
clearance based on a Periodic Reinvestigation, completed on 30 May 
2003, is being forwarded. 
 
  6. An Army CCF internal document showing that Applicant’s SCI access and 
security clearance were reinstated on June 9, 2005.14 
 
In his Answer to the SOR in this case, Applicant presented an email from a TSA 
Personnel Security Specialist, dated November 13, 2007, that stated “the TSA 
Personnel Security Division has favorably adjudicated your background investigation 
and granted you a Secret security clearance on 10/25/07.” The email also stated, “This 
e-mail is for informational purposes only and will not be accepted as proof of security 
clearance. If your clearance needs to be verified or passed to another agency please 
contact PS Customer Services Desk at [a specific listed website] for guidance.”15 
 
Post-hearing documents reflect that the TSA issued Applicant interrogatories on 
July 13, 2007, requesting information about his termination from federal service in 
January 2005, his nonjudicial punishment in January 1998, and his security clearance 
suspension in  . Applicant submitted a response to the interrogatories on 
July 26, 2007. He was offered a conditional appointment to a TSA position on 
September 16, 2007. On October 25, 2007, Applicant signed a Classified Information 
Nondisclosure Agreement. On January 30, 2008, the TSA issued Applicant a Notice of 
Termination – Failure to Meet the Conditions of Employment. The Notice of Termination 
summarized Applicant’s response to the interrogatories and contained excerpts from the 
MSPB decision. It also concluded that Applicant’s actions that led to his firing from the 
federal service in  were egregious and raised serious concerns about his integrity, 
trustworthiness, judgment, and willingness to comply with rules, regulations, and 
instructions. It concluded he was unsuitable for continued TSA employment and that he 
should be separated from federal service. Because he was serving in a trial period, 
Applicant had no opportunity to appeal or grieve that termination.16  
 
In the post-hearing submissions, Department Counsel argued that reciprocity did 
not apply because Applicant’s security clearance was not based on a current 
investigation. On the other hand, Applicant’s Counsel argued that the investigation was 
current because no significant derogatory information has come to light since the last 
adjudication. He also contended that the operative phase in Section 2-204 was the one 
that addressed “significant derogatory information” and highlighted that “there simply 
                                                          
14 GE 7.   
15 Tr. at 95-101; GE 1; AE 1, 2. Applicant disclosed his prior federal employment termination 
when he applied for the TSA position.    
16 Tr. at 95-101; GE 1, 8; AE 59-61.   
 
10 
 
 
has not been any significant derogatory information that has become known since the 
previous and current investigation.”17 
 
Appeal Board precedent supports Department Counsel’s argument. In ISCR 
Case No. 03-04172 (App. Bd. Jun. 7, 2005), the Appeal Board stated: 
 
Under Section 2-203, reciprocity is predicated on: (a) a person having an 
existing security clearance, (b) based on a current investigation, (c) of a 
scope that meets or exceeds that necessary for the security clearance at 
issue, and (d) the absence of significant derogatory information that was 
not previously adjudicated. If any of the elements is missing, then 
Section 2-203 does not apply. [Emphasis added.] 
 
*  *  *   
Furthermore, nothing in the language of Section 2-203 or the concept of 
reciprocity, indicates or suggests that a federal department or agency is 
precluded from periodically reevaluating whether a person should continue 
to retain a security clearance that was previously granted by that federal 
department or agency. Section 2-203 does not transform a favorable 
security clearance decision into a vested right or entitlement to a security 
clearance in perpetuity.  
 
More recently, the Appeal Board determined that reciprocity, either under Section 
2-204 of the NISPOM or Executive Order 13467, did not apply when there was no 
current investigation or adjudication at the time the SOR was issued.18 
  
Under Section 2-201 of the NISPOM, investigations remain current for five years. 
Here, Applicant’s current security clearance eligibility is based on an investigation that 
closed on May 30, 2003, and was not current when the SOR was issued in this case. 
Reciprocity does not apply to the Army CCF adjudication of June 9, 2005.19 
  
Likewise, reciprocity also does not apply to the TSA adjudication in October 
2007. The TSA security clearance was based on reciprocity. Other than an employee 
background check and the issuance of interrogatories, TSA conducted no independent 
security clearance investigation. Neither the TSA adjudication of October 2007 nor the 
underlying investigation on which it was based were current (i.e., within five years) when 
the SOR was issued in this case.20   
                                                          
17 GE 5; AE 57; HE 4.   
18 See ISCR Case No. 04-12742 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Feb. 25, 2011). 
 
19 See ISCR Case No. 03-04172 at note 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 7. 2005). In this case, an SBPR closed 
in May 2011 that apparently disclosed no additional derogatory information. Nonetheless, the existing 
security clearance was not based on a current investigation.   
20 GE 8. 
 
11 
 
 
Even though the Army CCF previously adjudicated the misconduct alleged in this 
case and no subsequent significant derogatory information was presented, reciprocity 
does not apply here for the reasons stated above.21 
   
Applicant’s Answer and Testimony 
 
 In this case, Applicant testified that, since his security clearance was reinstated in 
June 2005, he has continuously held a security clearance and occupied jobs requiring 
at least a Secret clearance. At various times, he deployed to Afghanistan for a total of 
approximately four years. In Afghanistan, he was involved in training U.S. Special 
Forces and Afghan troops. He worked there under arduous conditions and in dangerous 
settings and traveled at times in unarmored vehicles.22  
 
No security issues have arisen regarding Applicant’s handling of classified 
information since the alleged misconduct. He has received annual security training, 
including training on information technology and communications security. Every time 
he deployed overseas, he also received a special country briefing.23 
 
Applicant has consistently denied most of the misconduct alleged in the SOR. He 
did not deny using a government computer to track sales on the internet, but did claim 
that it was not a violation of regulations. He testified that, while working as a federal 
employee in about 2003 or 2004, he had a disagreement with his supervisor on certain 
safety procedures. The disagreement led to Applicant requesting to be exempt from 
teaching a subject at the school due to his safety concerns. Around the same time, 
Applicant was also selling items on eBay that generated concerns at his command, but 
his conduct was later determined by various investigative agencies to not be prohibited. 
Both of these events strained Applicant’s relationship with his supervisor.24 
 
Regarding the alleged failure to follow supervisory orders, Applicant explained 
that his supervisor took issue with the manner in which he submitted leave requests in 
2004. According to Applicant, the supervisor was primarily concerned about him using 
intermediaries to submit his leave requests. During this period Applicant was reassigned 
to a different department at the school and directed to not return to his department’s 
                                                          
21 In ISCR Case No. 04-12742 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb 25, 2011), the Appeal Board stated: 
We also decline to conclude that DOHA was precluded from considering past conduct in 
the context of a current adjudication. This is even where the past conduct was considered 
in a prior favorable adjudication. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10859 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 
2, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-09163 at 405 (App. Bd. Dec 21, 2010). 
22 Tr. at 88-92, 100-104, 107-116; 164-166; AE 17, 18, 53.   
23 Tr. at 87-93, 107-116, 153; AE 7, 9, 16, 19, 20, 21, 34.   
24 Tr. at 116-121, 144-153; AE 8; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.   
 
12 
 
 
spaces. Because he was banned from those spaces, Applicant indicated the use of 
intermediaries to forward leave requests was a practical choice at times.25 
 
As to the use of government computers to track the internet sales, he stated that 
he accessed eBay typically before or after duty hours or during lunchtime. He also 
denied that he ever searched the internet for pornography using a government 
computer. In his Answer to the SOR, he noted that fellow employees had used his 
government computer on occasion, but acknowledged that he remained responsible for 
its authorized use because it was assigned to him, but also stated, “I am not in the habit 
of using government computers to access prohibited websites (obviously) and do not 
recall if I erroneously visited an incorrect website or what exactly happened.”26 
 
Applicant also testified that, in  , a CD was found at the school 
that did not have proper classified marking. Shortly thereafter, a health and welfare 
inspection was conducted that uncovered nine CDs without proper classified markings. 
At about this time, Applicant was reassigned to a different department at the school and 
did not know the reason for that reassignment. He stated that he did not know where 
the CDs were found during the inspection, but indicated none were found in his 
possession, desk, or personal effects. Three of the nine mismarked CDs were attributed 
to Applicant. The “properties” section of the three CDs identified they were created on 
Applicant’s computer. Throughout this incident, including after his security clearance 
was reinstated, Applicant’s requests to review the CDs were denied.27 
 
Applicant denied committing the security violation. He claimed that his command 
over time developed different theories of how he created the CDs. When he discredited 
one theory, he stated the command created another. He indicated that his command’s 
original theory was that he created the CDs on his government desktop computer. He 
was able to establish, however, that he was serving out of the area on National Guard 
duty on the Saturday the CDs were created. He claimed their next theory was that he 
remotely accessed the command’s computer system to create the CDs. He pointed out 
that the command did not have a classified internet connection in its vault. 
Consequently, he could not remotely access classified information in that computer. 
Finally, he claimed their next theory was that he created the discs at his National Guard 
site. He stated that he first heard of this third theory at the MSPB hearing and was not 
ready to defend against it. He later provided statements of National Guard members 
noting that he did not have access to the unit’s safe where classified information was 
stored during the   drill weekend. Furthermore, the classified CD that was 
copied did not appear on the National Guard unit’s sensitive item inventory until  
                                                          
25 Tr. at 121-130; AE 8; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.   
26 Tr. at 130-133; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.   
27 Tr. at 132-139; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.   
 
13 
 
 
. Applicant also claimed that his assigned government laptop did not have the 
capability of creating CDs.28 
 
Applicant also testified that, in about 2004, his command’s training department 
had distributed a 20-CD set of unclassified training material. Before becoming aware 
that he was the target of an investigation into the alleged security violations, he had 
discovered two CDs in that 20-CD set contained classified information and turned those 
improperly-marked CDs into the command’s security manager.29 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Since his termination from the federal government in , Applicant has been 
promoted twice in the National Guard. He was promoted to E-7 in June 2006 and to E-8 
in March 2008. At one point, he was not only the first sergeant of his National Guard 
unit, but also served as commander of that unit. In those roles, he guided the unit in 
preparing for a deployment.30 
 
 A former commander of a joint task force (JTF) in Afghanistan testified that 
Applicant served there on his personal security detail for about five months. They had 
extensive daily contact during that period. Time permitting, Applicant also served then 
as an instructor in a NATO school that trained Afghan forces. The former JTF 
commander indicated that Applicant always erred on the side of caution in handling 
classified information, which would have included when he served as a courier of 
classified information. In his testimony, the JTF commander described an incident in 
which Applicant took steps to protect him when they came under fire. He stated that he 
trusted Applicant with his life.31 
 
 Applicant’s current manager, a retired Navy senior chief petty officer, testified 
that he has known Applicant for a little over three years. He described Applicant as “one 
of his best guys” and as someone who always followed orders, displayed a positive 
attitude in discharging his security responsibilities, and safeguarded classified 
information or sensitive items. In Applicant’s 2011 performance appraisal, the manager 
rated Applicant as either a “4” or “5” in each performance category on a scale of 1-5 
with “5” being the preeminent category.32 
 
                                                          
28 Tr. at 132-144, 163-164; AE 10, 11; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
29 Tr. at 132-137; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
30 Tr. at 107-116; AE 4, 19, 20, 21, 34.   
31 Tr. at 28-51, 107-116; AE 7, 12, 16, 53.   
32 Tr. at 80-84, 191-200; AE 3, 48.   
 
14 
 
 
 Another of Applicant’s current supervisors, a retired Marine, testified that he has 
known Applicant for about three years. Applicant is part of this supervisor’s team that 
trains U.S. troops deploying to Afghanistan. The supervisor stated that Applicant 
adheres to security standards and protects the company’s proprietary information. He 
indicated that Applicant is reliable and trustworthy and described him as his “right-hand 
man” and as the first person he goes to when he needs something done. The 
supervisor specifically requested that Applicant become a member of his team.33 
 
Applicant’s pastor testified that he has known Applicant for about eight to ten 
years. He indicated that Applicant has volunteered on occasion at a food distribution 
center for the needy, participated in a youth organization’s camping trips, and believed 
he assisted in a hurricane relief effort. The pastor considered Applicant to be reliable 
and trustworthy.34  
 
A sergeant first class in the National Guard testified that he has known Applicant 
for approximately 11 years. They served together in the same National Guard unit. He 
described Applicant as the best in his field of expertise and as someone who was 
reliable and trustworthy.35 
 
Applicant also submitted numerous reference letters attesting to his dedication, 
loyalty, professional skills, and integrity. Throughout his military and civilian careers, he 
has received many certificates of appreciation and awards. His military awards include: 
three Army Reserve Component Achievement Medals, four Army Achievement Medals, 
two Army Commendation Medals, and the Meritorious Service Medal.36 
  
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
                                                          
33 Tr. at 169-180; AE 3.   
34 Tr. at 183-189.   
35 Tr. at 55-64; AE 38; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  See also, Tr. at 67-77. 
36 Tr. at 112-116; GE 7; AE 4, 9, 13-55; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.   
 
15 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 Since Guideline K raises the more serious security concern, it is discussed first. 
AG ¶ 33 sets forth the security concern for the handling of protected information: 
 
16 
 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or unwillingness and 
ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
I have considered all of the handling of protected information disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 34 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of classified information or other 
protected information to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to 
personal or business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at 
seminars, meetings, or conferences; 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or protected information at home or in 
any other unauthorized location;  
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, “palm” 
or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; 
 
(e) copying classified or other protected information in a manner designed 
to conceal or remove classification or other document control markings; 
and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
 A command investigation and MSPB proceedings found that, in  , 
Applicant created CDs containing classified information in which applicable classified 
markings had been removed and that he distributed the CDs as unclassified material. 
Those CDs were later discovered at Applicant’s command. Although the ALJ found that 
restricted information was compromised during this security violation, no evidence was 
presented to show that an actual compromise occurred. Nonetheless, compromise was 
a distinct possibility. In  , Applicant was terminated from federal 
employment, in part, because of that security violation. AG ¶ 34(a) is not applicable, but 
AG ¶¶ 34(b), 34(c), 34(e), and 34(g) are applicable.   
 
 I have considered all of the handling of protected information mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 35 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
17 
 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities. 
 
 Sufficient evidence was presented to establish that Applicant committed an 
intentional security violation. Regarding security violations, the Appeal Board has 
stated: 
Security violations are one of the strongest possible reasons for denying 
or revoking access to classified information, as they raise very serious 
questions about an applicant's suitability for access to classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 97-0435 at 3-4 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998). 
Once it is established that Applicant has committed a security violation, he 
has "a very heavy burden of demonstrating that [he] should be entrusted 
with classified information. Because security violations strike at the very 
heart of the industrial security program, an Administrative Judge must give 
any claims of reform and rehabilitation strict scrutiny." ISCR Case No. 00-
0030 at 7 (App. Bd. Sept. 20, 2001). In many security clearance cases, 
applicants are denied a clearance for having an indicator of a risk that they 
might commit a security violation (e.g., alcohol abuse, delinquent debts or 
drug use). Here the issue is not merely an indicator, rather the Judge 
found Applicant disregarded in-place security procedures in violation of 
the NISPOM.37 
                                                          
37 ISCR Case No. 04-04264 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Sep 8, 2006). See also ISCR Case No. 97-0435 at 
3 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998) that stated: 
Persons granted access to classified information are in a fiduciary relationship with the 
federal government and have strict obligations to properly handle and safeguard 
classified information entrusted to them. See, e.g., DISCR Case No. 90-1546 (February 
6, 1992) at p. 4; DISCR Case No. 89-0062 (October 30, 1991) at p. 7; DISCR Case No. 
88-2577 (February 22, 1991) at p. 13. An applicant who deliberately commits security 
violations has breached his or her fiduciary obligations to the federal government and 
failed to demonstrate the high degree of trustworthiness and reliability that must be 
expected of persons entrusted with handling classified information. Furthermore, security 
violations strike at the heart of the industrial security program, which has the objective of 
ensuring that classified information is properly handled and safeguarded. An applicant 
who deliberately engages in security violations demonstrates a disregard for, or 
indifference to, national security interests and undermines the integrity and effectiveness 
of the industrial security program. See, e.g., DISCR Case No. 86-3753 (February 28, 
1990) at p. 11 n.4 ("Conduct that shortcircuits or evades basic principles and practices 
associated with physical security or personnel security or both thwarts the basic purpose 
of the industrial security program, undermines its integrity, and jeopardizes the security of 
classified information."). Accordingly, security violations raise very serious questions 
about an applicant's suitability for access to classified information. See, e.g., DISCR 
Case No. 88-2576 (November 15, 1990) at p. 9 ("Evidence that an applicant has failed to 
properly handle or safeguard classified information entrusted to him raises serious 
questions as to his security suitability."). 
 
18 
 
 
This case presents unusual facts. Applicant’s former command, the MSPB, and 
the TSA have examined the alleged security violation and concluded that it, as well as 
the other alleged misconduct, warranted Applicant’s termination of federal employment. 
The TSA specifically stated that his misconduct was egregious and raised serious 
concerns about his integrity, trustworthiness, and judgment. On the other hand, the 
Army CCF reviewed the same misconduct and reinstated Applicant’s security clearance 
with a warning in July 2005. In its security determination, the Army CCF noted that it 
considered Applicant’s explanation that he could not have created copies of CDs on 
  , with the classified marking removed as he was on Inactive Duty Training 
at a distant location from   through  . It appears that the Army CCF may 
have been persuaded by Applicant’s explanation about his whereabouts when the CDs 
were created, while his former command and the MSPB were not swayed by that 
explanation. It merits noting that the Army CCF’s favorable adjudication occurred after 
Applicant’s federal employment termination in  , but before the MSPB 
proceedings. During the MSPB hearing, the ALJ had the advantage of receiving in-
person testimony of witnesses, which the Army CCF did not have the benefit of 
considering. Because of the in-person testimony, the ALJ may have considered facts 
and circumstances that were not considered by the Army CCF. The receipt of in-person 
testimony also tends to enhance the weight of the MSPB decision in comparison to the 
Army CCF’s favorable adjudication.  
 In the current proceeding, Applicant presented impressive whole-person and 
mitigation evidence. Since reinstatement of his security clearance about nine years ago, 
he has maintained a security clearance without any security violations. During that 
period, he has been promoted twice in the National Guard, served as his unit’s first 
sergeant and temporarily as its commander, and later retired in pay grade E-8. He 
served with distinction as a contractor in Afghanistan under arduous and dangerous 
circumstances. He has received annual security training and special country briefs 
before deploying overseas. His former JTF commander in Afghanistan testified about 
his security consciousness in handling classified information. His former JTF 
commander and a number of his current supervisors, coworkers, and acquaintances 
attested to his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment.  
 
 Despite the mitigating evidence presented, Applicant has not met his “very heavy 
burden of demonstrating that he should be entrusted with classified information.” 
Applicant has continued to deny that he removed the classification marking from the 
classified information on the CDs or produced those CDs in  . It is unknown 
why he committed such a security violation. Not knowing what his motivations were for 
engaging in that conduct makes it difficult to assess whether such an incident is unlikely 
to recur. His failure to accept responsibility for that security violation also undercuts a 
determination that he has reformed and rehabilitated himself.38 Furthermore, his denial 
of the alleged misconduct, as well as his nonjudicial punishment in January 1998 for 
                                                          
38 The Appeal Board has held that a failure to accept responsibility is evidence that detracts from 
a finding of reform and rehabilitation. See ISCR Case No. 96-0360 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Sep. 25, 1997).  
 
19 
 
 
falsifying orders, raises credibility concerns.39 In applying the strict scrutiny standard, I 
cannot find that he has rehabilitated himself. Notwithstanding that Applicant has held a 
security clearance for over the past nine years without engaging in any further 
misconduct, I find that his security violation in  continues to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
                                                          
39 Applicant’s nonjudicial punishment for falsifying order was not alleged in the current SOR. In 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006), the Appeal Board stated:  
Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's 
credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful 
rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is 
applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis under Directive Section 
6.3. Id.; ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003). 
 
 
20 
 
 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of 
proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or 
other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources.  
 
Section 2-301 of DOD 5500.7-R (Joint Ethics Regulation (JER)) generally 
authorizes DOD personnel to conduct brief internet searches of a personal nature. 
Section 2-301.a.2(d), however, specifically prohibits the use of government 
communication systems (e.g., government computers) to view pornography or conduct 
unofficial selling or soliciting. The MSPB ALJ determined that Applicant violated “the 
regulation cited by the agency” by using government computers to track his internet 
sales. The ALJ’s decision, however, did not identify the regulation cited. The decision 
noted that Applicant’s internet tracking occurred before or after duty hours and during 
lunchtime. No evidence reflected that a government computer was used to conduct any 
sales or solicitations. Applicant’s claim that his tracking of the sales on the government 
computer was not prohibited is understandable and reasonable. Although collateral 
estoppel applies to the ALJ’s findings, I give no weight to the ALJ’s finding that 
Applicant violated an unspecified regulation by tracking eBay sales on a government 
computer during off-duty hours and conclude that finding has no security significance.   
 
The ALJ’s findings concerning Applicant’s security violation in , the 
pornography found on his government computer, and his failure to follow supervisory 
orders and instructions raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d). The 
security violation is explicitly covered under Guideline K, but also warrants consideration 
under Guideline E in examining Applicant’s willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations and in assessing his overall conduct. Therefore, the discussion of the 
Guideline K disqualifying conditions applies equally here and is incorporated under this 
guideline.  
 
AG ¶ 17 lists three personal conduct mitigating conditions that are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 
21 
 
 
 The discussion of the Guideline K mitigating conditions also applies equally here 
and is incorporated under this guideline. The MSPB ALJ concluded that Applicant’s 
failure to follow supervisory orders and instructions was “much less serious” than the 
other conduct examined during that proceeding. I concur with ALJ’s assessment; 
nevertheless, those failures continue to warrant consideration here in evaluating 
Applicant’s overall conduct. For the reasons discussed under Guideline K, I find that the 
alleged misconduct continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions adequately diminish 
the security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged personal conduct.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines K and E in my whole-person analysis. As noted earlier, 
Applicant presented impressive whole-person evidence. Nevertheless, such evidence 
does not eliminate the very serious security concerns arising from Applicant’s security 
violation in . A cleared individual who removes classification markings from 
classified material and places that material in unclassified channels commits an 
egregious security violation and breaches his fiduciary duty to the government. As the 
Appeal Board has stated, such a security violation strikes at the very heart of the 
industrial security program. Despite the mitigating evidence presented, Applicant’s  
security violation continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude that Applicant has 
 
22 
 
 
not met his very heavy burden in this case and that he has failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guidelines K and E. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    Subparagraph 1.a:   Withdrawn 
    Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
