 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00759 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his history of financial problems, he failed to mitigate the 
concerns raised by his history of excessive alcohol consumption. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations and 
alcohol consumption guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing 
convened on December 12, 2013, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, without objection. After the hearing, 
Applicant timely submitted AE D through I, which were also admitted without objection.3 
I received the transcript (Tr.) on January 2, 2014. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant received less than 15 days written notice of the time and place of the 
hearing as required under Directive ¶ E.3.1.8. Applicant waived the notice requirement, 
electing to proceed with the hearing as scheduled.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 25, works as a heating ventilation and air conditioning apprentice for a 
federal contractor. He has worked for his employer since May 2010. According to his 
most recent performance review, Applicant is performing well in his current position.5  
 
Applicant has lived on his own since he turned 18 years old. In the four years 
before he started his current job, Applicant was either underemployed or unemployed. 
As a result of his sporadic employment history, Applicant incurred some delinquent 
debt. Because he did not have health insurance, Applicant accumulated approximately 
$7,500 in delinquent medical debt. In addition, Applicant incurred two delinquent 
consumer accounts, totaling approximately $2,000. He also failed to file his federal 
income taxes in 2007. In August 2013, he enrolled in a debt-repayment program and 
has been making monthly payments toward the resolution of his delinquent debts. He 
has tried to file his 2007 tax return, but has been unable to obtain his W-2s for that year. 
Since 2007, Applicant has filed his federal income tax return every year. Applicant lives 
within his means and has not incurred any new consumer debt.6  
 
 In addition to the financial problems Applicant experienced as he started living on 
his own, he also developed alcohol issues. Applicant admits that he began consuming 
alcohol when he was 12 years old and that through at least 2012, he often drank to the 
point of intoxication and impaired judgment. Oftentimes, he would black out. Although 
                                                          
2 The letter from the Chief Administrative Judge regarding the Applicant’s rights and obligations in a 
DOHA proceeding is appended to the record as Appellate Exhibit (AP E) I. 
 
3 Department Counsel’s memorandum regarding the admissibility of the Applicant’s post-hearing 
submissions is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1.  
 
4 Tr. 5-6.  
 
5 Tr. 15-17; GE 1; AE D-F. 
 
6 Tr. 17-30; GE 1-2, 6-8; AE I. 
 
3 
 
Applicant believes that his alcohol consumption did not have a negative effect on his 
professional life, he does believe that his drinking did have repercussions in his 
personal life. He often argued with friends and family members while intoxicated. At 
times he would become violent. Between 2008 and 2013, Applicant experienced a 
series of negative alcohol-related events after binge drinking.7  
 
In 2008, Applicant was evicted from his apartment after three months for noise 
complaints and underage drinking in the apartment. Every weekend, Applicant, then 19-
years-old, and his friends, who were also underage, would hang out at Applicant’s 
apartment and drink. In February 2011, Applicant was arrested and convicted of 
malicious destruction of property. During an alcohol-induced blackout, Applicant 
returned from a night out with his friends and tried to enter the wrong apartment, kicking 
holes in the front and back doors in an attempt to gain access. Applicant pleaded guilty 
to the charge and was required to attend 30 Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings, 
perform 25 hours of community service, and to pay restitution for the damage he 
caused. Applicant has fulfilled all the requirements of his sentence. Applicant had 
another alcohol-related event in April 2013 when he drank to the point of blackout at a 
family friend’s wedding, which happened to coincide with his birthday. Applicant 
admitted that his behavior at the wedding embarrassed his family so much that his 
brother and cousin had serious talks with him about his drinking habits, suggesting that 
he significantly decrease his alcohol consumption. Applicant credits these talks with 
changing his attitude toward drinking. However, Applicant did not see the need to attend 
any AA meetings or seek counseling after this incident.8 
 
Applicant concedes that he was addicted to alcohol around the time of his 
February 2011 arrest. Between April 2010 and February 2011, he was drinking heavily 
every day. Applicant remained sober for the three months he attended the court-
mandated AA meetings, which remains his longest period of sobriety to date. Even after 
completing the AA requirement of his sentence, Applicant continued to attend meetings 
occasionally through the end of 2012 because he felt he needed reminders about the 
negative impact alcohol was having on his life. By the end of 2012, Applicant felt that he 
no longer needed AA. As of June 2013, Applicant believed that he was no longer 
dependent on alcohol and that he could consume alcohol responsibly. Applicant 
continues to drink socially, either once a week or every other weekend, with the same 
group of friends as when his drinking was at its heaviest. The last time Applicant was 
intoxicated was August 2013. He consumed alcohol days before the hearing at an office 
holiday party. Applicant intends to continue consuming alcohol in the future.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
7 GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. 32-34, 36, 43-44, 49-50; GE 2, 4-5; AE A-C, G-H. 
 
9 Tr. 31-35, 38-40, 42-44, 48. 
 
4 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”10 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $9,500 in delinquent debts. 
The debts are substantiated by Applicant’s credit reports.11 The record supports a 
finding that Applicant had a history of financial problems that resulted in unresolved 
delinquent debts.12 He also demonstrated an inability to pay his debts.13 However, 
Applicant has submitted sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns raised 
by his finances. Applicant has demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent 
debts by participating in a debt-repayment program.14 The Appeal Board has held that, 
“an applicant is not required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all debts 
immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given her circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied 
by concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate 
the plan.15 Applicant has done so and has demonstrated that his finances are under 
control. 
 
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he failed to file his 2007 federal 
income tax return.16 This isolated incident occurred when Applicant was 18 years old 
and is not indicative of current financial irresponsibility or an inability to follow rules and 
regulations.17 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it “often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”18 Although Applicant has 
not been diagnosed as being an alcohol abuser or being alcohol dependent, he has a 
                                                          
10  AG ¶ 18. 
 
11 GE 6-8. 
 
12 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
13 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
14 AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
15 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009). 
 
16 AG ¶ 19(g). 
 
17 AG ¶ 20(a). 
 
18 AG ¶ 21. 
 
 
6 
 
history of engaging in binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment.19 
None of the alcohol consumption mitigating conditions apply. Each of Applicant’s 
alcohol-related events started with drinking in social settings. Because he continues to 
drink socially with the same group of friends, I am unable to find that Applicant will not 
consume alcohol to the point of blackout or impaired judgment in the future. Also, 
Applicant’s attitude about his continued use of alcohol prevents mitigation of these 
issues.  
 
Applicant does not believe that he has a current problem with alcohol. His 
assessment that he was able to overcome his self-diagnosed addiction to alcohol in a 
year and a half, not only contradicts the record, but shows the extent of Applicant’s 
immaturity and his lack of understanding about alcohol addiction. Applicant has only 
been able to maintain three months of sobriety since February 2011. Applicant has not 
made any changes in his life to support abstinence or sobriety let alone responsible 
alcohol consumption habits. He has not received any alcohol counseling nor does he 
recognize the need for any such help. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
After reviewing the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s current suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Security clearance determinations are not limited to 
Applicant’s conduct during duty hours; off-duty conduct can be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s security worthiness.20 Applicant’s off-duty conduct shows a pattern of 
poor judgment. At hearing, Applicant failed to acknowledge the severity of his alcohol 
issues and demonstrated an immaturity that detracts from his current security 
worthiness. While Applicant mitigated the financial considerations concerns, he failed to 
mitigate those regarding his history of binge drinking to the point of impaired judgment.  
 
The award of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is 
based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence 
presented. While a favorable decision is not warranted at this time, in the future, 
Applicant may well demonstrate more maturity and self-awareness about his alcohol-
related issues. He may also be able to present evidence of changes in his life to support 
responsible alcohol consumption or sobriety. At his time, however, Applicant’s request 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
19 AG ¶ 22(c). 
 
20 ISCR Case No. 98-0620 (App. Bd. Jun. 22, 1999).  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Alcohol Consumption:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
