                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )       ISCR  Case No.  11-12987           
                                                              )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Erica Fenstermacher, Esq.  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations and
personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On March 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 22, 2013, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on September 14, 2013, and was scheduled for hearing on
January 18, 2014 by video teleconference. At hearing, the Government's case consisted
of nine  exhibits (GEs 1-9). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and 11 exhibits (AEs
A-K). The transcript (Tr.) was received on January 17, 2014. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated nine delinquent consumer
debts. The alleged debts exceeded $11,000. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly was terminated from his employment due
to his violating his employer’s conflict of interest and workplace code of conduct policies,
after releasing company proprietary information. Allegedly, he used his company
computer to view pornography. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the debts alleged to be
delinquent.  Based on the best information available to him, he claimed all but two of the
alleged debts will be paid. He claimed two of the debts have since been paid (i.e., debts
covered by subparagraphs 1.b ($617) and 1.c ($77)). Applicant claimed he has
maintained excellent credit for many years and has consistently earned annual salaries
between $100,000 and $200,000 during this time. He claimed he never encountered
problems satisfying his debts before his affiliation with Company B in 2011.   
Applicant admitted to viewing pornography on his company computer at an off-site
location, but denied ever doing so during working hours or on his company’s premises.
He denied any commonality of interest or conflicts of interest between the two companies
referenced in the SOR. He claimed  to be extremely familiar with proprietary rights and at
no time during his employment with Company A did he ever reveal anything that could
remotely be considered to be in violation of company policy or statutory definition of
interest conflicts.  
       
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 63-year-old procurement mentor of a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first spouse in June 1975 and divorced her in December
1999. (GEs 1-3) He has one adult stepchild from this marriage. He married his second
spouse in January 2000 and divorced her in June 2011. (GEs 1-3) He has no children
from this marriage. Applicant is currently unmarried and has maintained a romantic
relationship with a female partner for the past four years. (GE 3; Tr. 192-193)  She has
four children who Applicant helps support. (Tr. 192-193)  His partner currently attends
nursing school and receives some financial assistance from Applicant. (Tr. 198-199)
3
Applicant claims no military service and has held a security clearance off and on in
various DOD-related jobs since 1982. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 50-54)  He earned a bachelor’s
degree from an accredited university in September 1982. (GEs 1 and 2)
Applicant’s finances
Between April 2012 and November 2012, Applicant accumulated a number of
delinquent debts (nine in all)  For those debts that were either past due or charged off,
their aggregated balances exceeded $50,000. (GEs 8 and 9 Tr. 186-187) 
Applicant attributes his debt delinquencies to extended unemployment between
February 2012 and November 2012, and corresponding losses of income. (Tr.  99-100)
Applicant deployed to Afghanistan between November 2012 and October  2013 for his
current employer. (Tr. 103) Afghanistan is a very dangerous place for civilian contractors
like Applicant who are exposed daily to rocket attacks and internal threats. (Tr. 105-106)
After he completes rehabilitation of the shoulder he had surgically repaired in
December 2013, he expects to redeploy with the same Company C firm back to
Afghanistan. (Tr. 210-211) He currently receives bi-weekly disability benefits of $2,900
and has a negative monthly remainder. (Tr. 112, 198-200) He has had to access his
savings ($2,000 a month) to pay his bills while he looks for additional work. (Tr. 199-201) 
Before seeking debt consolidation, Applicant contacted his creditors in the hope of
working out individual payment arrangements. (Tr. 101, 194-197) By the time he initiated
his contacts with his creditors in January 2013, most of the creditors had already
assigned their owed debts to collection agencies and refused to work with Applicant. (Tr.
194-197)
In November 2013, Applicant completed a debt consolidation agreement with a
recognized debt consolidation service. (AEs C and K; Tr. 102-104) All of his listed unpaid
creditors are covered by his agreement. (AEs C and K; Tr. 105) The agreement calls for
monthly payments of $929, commencing in December 2013. (AE C) He documented
making a first payment to the debt consolidation service in the amount of $1,022, and will
be making regular monthly payments of $1,089 under his revised monthly payment plan
with the debt consolidation service. (AEs E and K; Tr. 104-105) Included debts are
creditor 1.a ($13,795); creditors 1.c/1.g ($2,302); creditor 1.d ($7,256), creditor 1.e
($4,520); creditor 1.f ($5,594); and creditor 1.h ($10,518). 
Applicant has since paid the $616 past-due balance with creditor 1.b to bring that
account into current status and settled the charged-off balance with creditor 1.I for the
reduced amount of $4,800. (GEs 8 and 9 and AEs C and K; Tr. 101-107,186, 227) After
crediting Applicant with the satisfaction of the two debts covered by subparagraphs 1.b
and 1.i, Applicant’s remaining delinquent debts exceeded $44,000. (GEs 3 and 8; Tr. 186-
187, 190-192). Expenses associated with his caring for his partner’s four children with
orthodontic issues have prevented him from making more financial progress with his
debts over the past two years. (Tr. 192-194)  Currently, he relies exclusively on his
4
disability income. (Tr. 200) He hopes to satisfy his remaining creditors within the next five
years. (Tr. 187)
Applicant completed his most recent personal financial statement in November
2013. (AE C) He reported net monthly income of $6,311 and monthly expenses of $4,075
under his employment agreement with Company C. (AE C) After he completes his
rehabilitation, he hopes to return to Company C under a new foreign service agreement.
(Tr. 200-201) In the meantime, he continues to explore alternative employment
opportunities. (Tr.  110-112, 210-211) He has since destroyed his credit cards and has no
intention of seeking new credit. (Tr. 104)
Since seeking debt consolidation and making separate payment arrangements
with his creditors, Applicant has not pursued financial counseling. (Tr. 211-212)  He has
never encountered delinquent debt issues before and feels he does not need financial
counseling to successfully resolve his debt issues. (Tr. 211-212) 
Applicant’s employment relationships
In November 2009, Applicant joined Company A as a part-time consultant. (GE 5;
Tr. 154) One month later, Company A’s chief executive officer (CEO) and principal
shareholder offered Applicant full-time employment. (GEs 3 and 5; Tr. 58-59) He
accepted the offer and became the company’s director of business operations. (GEs 1
and 3; Tr. 58-61, 154) Prior to his accepting employment with Company A, Applicant
acknowledged and accepted the Company’s proprietary and confidential information
stipulations and workplace code of conduct. (GE 5)
Upon becoming a full-time employee of Company A, Applicant retained additional
consulting work responsibilities with outside firms. (Tr. 70) These arrangements were fully
disclosed to his Company A supervisors when he was hired. (Tr. 70-71) By February
2010, Applicant had completed all of his outside consulting arrangements. (Tr. 70-71,
155)  Before assuming full-time employment status with Company A, he fully disclosed
his business relationship with Company B and introduced Company B’s CEO to Company
A management. (Tr. 71-72 ) No potential commonality of business activities or conflicts of
interest were identified by Applicant or Company A management prior to Applicant’s
accepting a position with Company A. (Tr. 72-75, 160-161, 184-185)
During his employment with Company A, Applicant received key promotions. (GE
3 and AE I; Tr. 62)  His key promotions included an assignment to an executive position
of director of business operations, which placed him in charge of company accounting,
financing, and contract activities. (GE 5; Tr. 62-65) This promotion afforded Applicant
access to top levels of business information, and key information about contract pricing
from Company A and its business partners and subcontractors. (GE 5) 
While still employed by Company A, Applicant continued to perform part-time
consulting services for Company B. (Tr. 73-74)  Despite his invoicing the costs of his
services to Company B, he never informed Company A management of his work and
5
payments. (Tr. 159-160)  Because he worked for Company B on his own time, he never
envisioned any conflict of interest in his business relationships with Company B. (Tr. 160-
162) He assured he was careful never to provide any contract proposals to Company B
that included any Company A rate information. (Tr. 84-89,183)  Applicant never utilized
any information he acquired from Company A in the contract work he performed for
Company B. (Tr. 183) Nor did Company A and Company B ever bid, compete, or work on
a common contract. (GE 5; Tr. 184-186)
For the duration of Applicant’s post-2010 Company A employment, he consistently
avoided any conflict of interests between Company A and Company B. His explanations
of the corporate relationships between the two firms are fully corroborated by a former
vice president of Company A who Applicant introduced to Company B’s president and
chief operating officer.  (AE I) This former colleague affirmed the absence of any potential
“common ground” between the two companies after considerable discussions with the full
knowledge of senior management of Company A. (AE I) Management exchanges
between senior officials of both companies persuaded each of the participants that their
companies “had such incompatible business profiles that no common ground could be
found for the mutual pursuit of work.” (AE I) Neither Applicant nor his former colleague
with Company A could cite to any Company A involvement in any special operations
activities or training of the nature developed and practiced by Company B. (AE I; Tr. 78-
79) 
While still employed by Company A, Applicant’s colleague took note of
considerable corporate downsizing by Company A’s management. During the first eight
months of 2011, Company A’s president and chief operating officer eliminated “over half
of the corporate staff and nearly all of the executives of (Company A).” (AE I; Tr. 89-91)
Applicant’s former colleague endorsed Applicant as an employee who is credible, honest,
and trustworthy, and one who never (to his knowledge) released any information
detrimental to the business or interests of Company A. (AE I) The furnished information
from Applicant’s former colleague is credible, consistent with Applicant’ s explanations,
and accepted.
When Applicant communicated with Company B, he always used his own
telephone line. Occasionally, he used Company A sites to access escort screening
without objection from any of his Company A supervisors. (Tr. 80-81, 165-166) On one
occasion while on a business trip he used his Company A lap top to access a porn site.
(GE 5; Tr. 80-82, 164-165)  Pursuing internet access on company laptops was routinely
encouraged and sanctioned by Company A management during Applicant’s tenure with
the company. (Tr. 65-68) 
In January 2011, Company A’s management initiated a workplace investigation
over company reports of Applicant’s engaging in inappropriate business contacts in
violation of the company’s code of ethics policy. (GE 5)  Pending completion of Company
A’s internal investigation, Applicant was placed in a suspended status in January 2011.
(GE 5) The company’s investigation concluded that Applicant demonstrated unethical
behaviors with his Company A employer by involving himself in activities “involving
6
conflicts of interest surrounding interactions with business competitors and potential
vendors/partners; unethical conduct in business practices, which include possible misuse
of your position with the company for personal financial gain and violations of the STS
Code of Conduct regarding misuse of company information and communication systems.”
(GE 5) 
Based on the results of its investigation and the perceived potential impact of the
raised ethics issues on Company A’s business operations, Company A terminated
Applicant’s employment with Company A, effective January 21, 2011. (GE 5; Tr. 155)
However, Company A’s investigation of Applicant does not detail any specifics of claimed
unethical conduct and undisclosed conflicts. Nor does the report detail any specific
violations of Company A’s corporate ethics designed to ensure the protection of the
company’s proprietary and confidential information. (GE 5) Nothing in its investigation of
Applicant documented any Applicant disclosure of any company proprietary or
confidential information or materiel relating to the business of Company A. When
Applicant inquired of Company A’s CEO why he was being terminated, the CEO declined
to provide any explanations for her actions. (Tr. 90)
Following his release from Company A in January 2011, Applicant inquired of
Company B of whether the company could employ him on a consulting basis. (Tr. 91)
Company B, in turn, employed Applicant as the company’s chief financial officer (CFO).
(Tr. 56, 93) In March 2011, Applicant became a full-time employee of Company B with
assigned responsibilities of managing the company’s major contract. (Tr. 56-57, 91-93)
For the duration of his employment with Company B, he served as the company’s chief
financial officer (CFO) and chief of contracts. (AE J; Tr. 56, 73-74, 91-93, 159-160) And
for the first few months of his tenure with Company B, the company achieved strong
financial performance. (Tr. 94) 
Beginning in December 2011, Company B began experiencing serious and
protracted financial difficulties. (AE J) Company B’s problems stemmed principally from
litigation costs associated with the ouster of Company B’s former CFO.  Company B’s
financial difficulties produced a series of salary cuts and layoffs affecting the company’s
executive and middle management. (AE J; Tr. 94-96) By the spring of 2012, Company B’s
CEO reduced the salary of Applicant (AE J)  
By April 2012, Company B’s finances had deteriorated to the point where it could
no longer pay its office rent. And by September 2012, Company B eliminated Appellant’s
salary in its entirety. (AE J; Tr. 57, 96-97)  Applicant’s salary reductions with Company B
materially affected his finances and his ability to stay current with his consumer debts.
(GE 3 and AE J)
Company C offered Applicant several different positions throughout 2012 that
Applicant turned down. (Tr. 96-98) In August 2012, the company offered him a well-
paying position as a senior procurement mentor with a compensation package of
approximately $180,000. (Tr. 98) Applicant accepted employment with Company C in
7
November 2012. (AE F; Tr. 98) In August 2013, he completed a new foreign service
employment agreement that provides for a bi-weekly salary of $3,903. (AE A) 
Asked in an OPM interview in July 2011 whether any of his business activities with
Company B ever conflicted with his Company A responsibilities, Applicant answered in
the negative. (GE 3; Tr. 168-170) Applicant assured his Company A CEO that his
business with Company B never intersected with his work with Company A. (GE 3) He
assured again in his hearing testimony that he had no conflict of interest with his work at
Company A. (Tr. 160-161) Applicant’s explanations are credible, corroborated, and
accepted.
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded by members of the Army command in Afghanistan who
have worked closely with him and consider his leadership efforts vital to the command’s
training missions designed to transition critical life-support and police personnel functions
into full Afghan responsibilities. (AEs G and H) These U.S. military officials who interfaced
with Applicant consider him to be an experienced advisor whose institutional knowledge
and personal relationships with his Afghan counterparts are irreplaceable. (AEs G and H) 
Colleagues who worked with Applicant at both Company A and Company B
consider him to be credible, honest, and trustworthy. (AEs J and K) Applicant’s
performance rating for the period of 2012-2013 exceeded expectations in all of the
assigned performance categories. (AE F) 
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied.
The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
8
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG, ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern : Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
9
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts and
indications of financial instability, attributable to periods of underemployment and
unemployment. Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s overlapping
employment relationships with Company A and Company B.
Financial concerns
After enjoying many years of solid credit ratings and financial stability, Applicant
encountered financial strains following his income losses stemming from his separation
from Company A in January 2011 and ensuing salary reductions and ultimate
separation from Company B in September 2012. His delinquent debt accumulations
raise potential security concerns about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness in
managing his finances. His actions warrant the application of three of the disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts;” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
10
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s identified periods of salary reduction and income loss in 2011
adversely impacted his finances and caused him to fall behind with a number of his
consumer accounts.  His earnings reductions and losses entitle him to some application
of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.” 
Since losing his positions with Companies A and B, Applicant secured new
employment with Company C and set about to contact his creditors and resolve his debt
delinquencies with a combination of direct payments (creditors 1.b and 1.i) and debt
consolidation of his remaining debts. While an applicant need not have paid every debt
alleged in the SOR, the applicant needs to establish that there is a credible and realistic
plan to resolve identified financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
Here, Applicant has demonstrated considerable progress with his debts through
the payoffs he has made with two of his creditors and the completion of a debt
consolidation plan to cover his remaining creditors.  MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” applies to
Applicant’s situation.
To his credit, Applicant has established a promising track record of payments
with his listed creditors and hopes to repay all of his remaining creditors within five
years. His payments to date have reduced his aggregate debt total by more than $5,000
and reflect satisfactory progress in accordance with the criteria established by the
Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition
with responsible efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at
2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009).
In determining whether Applicant acted reasonably when dealing with his
financial difficulties caused in part by his reduced earnings and loss of work,
consideration is given to Applicant’s initiated contacts with his creditors once he
returned to work and the payoffs and debt repayment plan he was able to complete with
them. His actions satisfied a major component of the criteria established by the Appeal
Board to gauge an applicant’s payment initiatives. See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4
n.9 (App. Bd. Jan., 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25,
2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). Mitigation efforts
necessary to meet Appeal Board requirements are met in Applicant’s case. 
11
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence reflects some unfortunate
economic circumstances associated with Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts.
He is credited with many years of working in the defense industry with a security
clearance and is well-regarded by military commands he has worked with in
Afghanistan. Applicant has since made steady inroads in stabilizing his finances and
shows good prospects for paying off his debts and restoring his finances to acceptable
credit levels.  Overall, Applicant demonstrates considerable progress in stabilizing his
finances with his payment initiatives. His efforts to date are sufficient to meet mitigation
requirements imposed by the guideline governing his finances.
Personal conduct concerns
Security concerns are raised initially as well over Applicant’s overlapping
business relationships with Companies A and B.  More specifically, security concerns
are raised when an applicant has committed conduct that reflects questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations. Applicant’s actions reflect a few isolated lapses of judgment in his use of his
company-issued laptop to access escort service and pornography sites while in travel
status, but no indications of any conflicts of interest in his contemporaneous corporate
relationships with Companies A and B between late 2009 and early 2011. 
Looking at the developed facts and circumstances in this case, some of the
disqualifying conditions under the personal conduct guideline have some application to
Applicant’s situation. DC ¶ 16(d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rules violations; ”DC ¶
16(e), “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that
creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in
activities which, if known, may effect the person’s personal, professional, or community
standing . . .;” and DC ¶ 16(f), “violation of a written or recorded commitment made by
the individual to the employer as a condition to employment,” apply in part to the facts of
Applicant’s case.  
Allegations of conflict of interest concerning Applicant’s overlapping corporate
relationships with Companies A and B are unsubstantiated based on the presented
evidence. Based on a careful review of the administrative record, Applicant may rely on 
MC ¶ 17(f), “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability.” Over the course of his employment with Company A, Applicant did not permit
any of his consulting work for Company B to interfere or conflict with his duties with
Company A.  And at no time during Applicant’s employment relationship with Company
A did the company compete with Company B for business or otherwise exhibit any
commonality of business interests that could create a potential conflict of interest for
Applicant.
Because Applicant’s misuse of his company’s laptop computer to access escort
services and porn sites while on travel status with Company A is so aged and isolated,
12
he may take advantage of several of the mitigating conditions. Specifically, MC ¶ 17(c),
“the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent,
or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, or good judgment,” and  MC ¶ 17(d), “the
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other  inappropriate behavior, and such
behavior is unlikely to recur,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant’s actions and contributions to his
command and his country are impressive. He has over 12 months of recent civilian
experience working with Army training commands in Afghanistan and has held a security
clearance for the better part of 30 years. During his most recent Afghanistan tour he has
been responsible for some very dangerous training missions designed to transition
critical life-support and police personnel functions into full Afghan responsibilities. His
collective efforts have earned hm the profound respect and appreciation of the
commands he has interfaced with in Afghanistan. Applicant is well-regarded as well by
colleagues who worked closely with him at Companies A and B.  
Applicant’s documented actions with the defense contractors he has worked for
over the last four years confirm that the mistakes of judgment he displayed with his use
of an employer-owned laptop computer while on travel status are attributable to isolated
judgment lapses that he has not since repeated. Such mistakes of judgment are not
likely to be repeated in the foreseeable future.
Overall, Applicant’s favorable character evidence, demonstrated trust and
reliability with military commands and colleagues he has worked with are enough to
mitigate security concerns over the isolated mistakes of judgment he displayed as an
employee of Company A.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by the personal conduct guideline.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
   Subparas. 1.a  through 1.i:        For Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):         FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a:                  For Applicant
13
                        Conclusio  n   s   
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
14
  
