 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12191 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations, J, criminal conduct, and E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 17, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations, J, criminal conduct, and E, personal conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 19, 2013. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On October 25, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
it was received on November 14, 2013. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
submit additional information. The case was assigned to me on March 7, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. He denied the remaining 
allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, 
I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He is not married. He has two children. He is a high 
school graduate. He has worked for his present employer, a federal contractor, since 
2004.  
 
 Applicant is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for a tax lien entered 
against him in April 2010 in the approximate amount of $6,842. He indicated in his 
answer to the SOR that he had a payment plan with the IRS to pay $50 a month. A 
letter from the IRS dated March 24, 2012, detailed the tax lien is for tax years 2004 
through 2011. The letter acknowledged that an installment agreement was being 
reinstated for the detailed tax years and that Applicant was to pay $25 a month 
beginning June 2012. The letter further stated that Applicant agreed that the payment 
would change to $180 a month beginning December 2012. Applicant stated he is on a 
payment plan with the IRS for payments of $50 a month. Applicant did not provide any 
proof that he has made any of the payments to the IRS or that the IRS agreed to accept 
the lesser amount.1  
 
 Applicant answered “no” on his February 2011 security clearance application 
(SCA) to “Section 16c: Financial Record, Have you failed to pay Federal, state, or other 
taxes, or to file a tax return, when required by law or ordinance?” In his answer to the 
SOR he stated: “I explained when the interviewer went over the questions with me.” In 
Applicant’s March 15, 2011 and April 13, 2011 security interviews there is no 
information indicating Applicant disclosed his federal tax lien to the investigator. 
Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR that he had a tax lien entered against him 
in April 2010. Based on the number of years Applicant was delinquent on his taxes and 
the fact the letter from the IRS referenced the installment agreement was being 
reinstated, indicating there was a previous one, I find there is sufficient evidence to 
conclude Applicant was aware of his delinquent Federal tax debt and intentionally failed 
to disclose it.2  
 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 4, and 5. 
 
2 Items 2, 3, and 4. 
 
3 
 
 
 In 1997, Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of driving under the 
influence. In 1999, Applicant was charged with and convicted of brandishing a firearm, a 
misdemeanor. Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that it was self-defense. 
During his background interview on March 15, 2011, he stated he and his brother went 
to a residence to confront an individual. A fight broke out and a person pulled out a 
knife. Applicant went to his car to retrieve his handgun and displayed it.3 
 
 In May 2000, Applicant was charged and convicted of carrying a loaded firearm 
in a public area, a misdemeanor. In his answer to SOR, Applicant stated the gun was 
lying on the dashboard of the car so it could be seen.4  
 
In March 2010, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana, public 
swearing/intoxication; reckless handling of a firearm; and discharge of a firearm in the 
city. He was convicted of reckless handling of a firearm and discharge of a firearm in the 
city. He was found not guilty of public swearing/intoxication, and the possession of 
marijuana was nolle prosequi. He received a fine. Applicant stated in his answer to the 
SOR that he fired a warning shot after he believed his house was broken into and he 
was making sure his family was safe.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
                                                          
3 Items 2, 4 and 7. 
 
4 Items 7 and 19. 
 
5 Items 7 through 18. 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline includes examples of conditions that could be disqualifying. I have 
considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 that could raise security 
concerns. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has a Federal tax lien for $6,842. The tax lien is for payments owed for 
tax years 2004 through 2011. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant has not provided any proof that he has made any payments on the 
installment agreement he made with the IRS in 2012 or why he failed to comply with a 
previous agreement. He did not provide any evidence for why he failed to pay his 
Federal taxes. None of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under criminal conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant was convicted in 1997 for driving under the influence. In 1999, he was 
convicted of brandishing a firearm. In 2000, he was convicted of carrying a loaded 
firearm in a public area. In 2010, he was charged with possession of marijuana, public 
swearing/intoxication, recklessly handling a firearm, and discharging a firearm in the 
city. He was convicted of the two firearm offenses. The marijuana charge was nolle 
prosequi and the public swearing/intoxication charge was dismissed. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
  
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has demonstrated a pattern of misconduct from 1997 to 2010, including 
several firearm convictions. There is an almost ten-year span from his 2000 firearm 
conviction to his firearm conviction in 2010. Despite the lengthy period, he continued his 
pattern of making poor decisions when dealing with firearms. Based on his past 
conduct, I am not convinced that future criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. His conduct 
casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. He provided minimal 
explanations for his conduct. He did not provide sufficient evidence in mitigation or of 
successful rehabilitation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for personal conduct under AG ¶ 
16 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
 
7 
 
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant deliberately and intentionally failed to disclose on his SCA that he had a 
Federal tax lien for tax years 2004 through 2011. Applicant has a history of criminal 
offenses from 1997 to 2010; three are firearms convictions and a driving under the 
influence conviction. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant intentionally failed to disclose his Federal tax debt for tax years 2004 
through 2011 on his SCA. His criminal offenses date from 1997 to 2010. He has a 
history of firearms convictions. His offenses are not minor and his pattern of misconduct 
spans approximately 14 years. He has not acknowledged his behavior or provided 
evidence that he has taken positive steps to alleviate the circumstances that caused his 
inappropriate and untrustworthy behavior. I am not convinced his behavior is unlikely to 
recur. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence mitigating his conduct and his 
failure to disclose his tax issues. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, J, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 42 years old. He has worked for his present employer since 2004. 
He has a history of criminal conduct from 1997 to 2010, including firearm convictions. 
He has a delinquent tax debt for tax years 2004 through 2011. He failed to disclose his 
tax lien on his SCA. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to show he is resolving it. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and serious doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, Guideline J, criminal conduct, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:  Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
