 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10255   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Corey Williams, Esq.  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns raised by his repeated security violations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the handling protected information 
and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing convened 
on December 10, 2013, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection.3 After the hearing, Applicant 
timely submitted AE E through H, which were also admitted without objection.4 
Applicant also submitted a written closing argument, which is appended to the record as 
HE II. I received the transcript (Tr.) on January 2, 2014. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Notice Requirement  
 
 Applicant received less than 15 days written notice of the time and place of the 
hearing as required under Directive ¶ E.3.1.8. Applicant waived the notice requirement, 
electing to proceed with the hearing as scheduled.5  
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 Upon agreement of both parties, allegation 1.a is amended to read:  
 
During security processing conducted in 2001, you admitted deliberately 
removing classified materials to your residence, an unauthorized location, 
on approximately three to five occasions in 1989.6 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 59, is an employee of a federal contactor. A scientist, Applicant has 
spent his career working on weapons systems. Due to the sensitive nature of his 
projects, Applicant was initially granted access to sensitive compartmented information 
(SCI) in April 1995. His access was administratively terminated in July 2001. Applicant 
received SCI access again in May 2007. However, based on the results of a 2008 
periodic reinvestigation, another government agency (AGA) revoked Applicant’s SCI 
access in 2010, citing Applicant’s long history of security violations.7  
 
                                                          
2 The letter from the Chief Administrative Judge regarding the Applicant’s rights and obligations in a 
DOHA proceeding is appended to the record as Appellate Exhibit (AP E) I. 
 
3 Applicant initially offered 16 documents to be admitted into evidence. All but four of the documents were 
already included in GE 2. Accordingly, I admitted the four documents that were not already included in the 
record.  
 
4 Department Counsel’s memorandum regarding the admissibility of the Applicant’s post-hearing 
submissions is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
5 Tr. 5-6.  
 
6 Tr. 70-71. 
 
7 GE 1-2.  
 
3 
 
 As part of the 2008 reinvestigation, AGA reviewed Applicant’s 2001 background 
investigation.  During the 2001 investigation, Applicant admitted disclosing classified 
information to his ex-wife in 1988, to an uncleared co-worker in 1996, and to his pastor 
in 1998. Applicant admitted removing classification headers from documents that he 
took home. He also admitted using a classified floppy disk on his unclassified home 
computer three to five times in 1989. While Applicant admits that he committed these 
infractions, he believed his actions were justified at the time because of the urgency and 
importance of the work. He was also trying to balance the demands of his work with the 
stress his work-related absences caused on his marriage and family.8  
 
 In addition to reviewing Applicant’s past investigative file, AGA interviewed 
Applicant. In October 2008, AGA conducted the first of three interviews during 
Applicant’s periodic reinvestigation. In the interview, Applicant reported security 
violations he committed between 2004 and 2008. Applicant admitted taking, without 
permission, materials from his former employer, a national security laboratory in 2004 
and in 2007. The materials included a total of 42 banker’s boxes, 6 CDs, and 129 
videotapes containing proprietary information, documents, reports, and presentations 
related to the laboratory’s national defense projects. Applicant assumed the materials 
contained in the 42 banker’s boxes were declassified based on his interpretation of a 
1992 memorandum;10 however, he did not review of the contents of each box to make 
sure they did not contain classified information before removing them from the 
premises.11 
 
 Three days before the October 2008 interview, Applicant discovered that at least 
one of the boxes contained classified information, which Applicant turned over to his 
current employer’s facility security officer (FSO). The FSO informed Applicant that he 
should not have the proprietary information from his former employer at his home. 
Applicant claims that the FSO instructed him to return the materials to his former 
employer, bring them into work for proper storage, or destroy the materials. Applicant 
did not offer any evidence corroborating this statement. Embarrassed and fearing 
repercussions, Applicant decided to use his personal shredder to destroy the remaining 
classified documents as well as the materials that had not been previously published or 
otherwise publicly released. At the hearing, Applicant admitted that his primary interest 
in taking the materials was to preserve his professional legacy and to reap the benefits 
associated with being the only person in possession of the materials. He knew that his 
former employer would destroy the information after a certain number of years. He also 
hoped that the purloined information would help him in his future work.12 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 22-31, 68, 74-75, 78-81; GE 2. 
 
9 The AGA documents indicate Applicant had possession of 24 tapes.  
 
10 Applicant did not offer the memorandum as an exhibit.  
 
11 Tr. 32-46, 58-61, 85-86, 98-100, 104-106, 112-114; GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. 47-49, 51-54, 56-62, 87-96, 100-102, 106-107; GE 2; Answer. 
 
4 
 
 Two weeks after the interview, the FBI contacted Applicant and interviewed him 
about the information he stored at his home. The FBI also executed a search warrant, 
removing 62 items, including 34 trash bags from Applicant’s home. Applicant intended 
to dispose of the shredded documents with his household garbage. Several months 
later, the FBI returned some of the materials to Applicant. During the second and third 
interviews in October and November 2009, respectively, Applicant revealed that he 
disclosed classified information to another family member and a friend in 2009. He also 
admitted carrying a binder of what he described as random notes related to his work 
that he believed to be inappropriate outside the classified laboratory where he worked. 
Applicant claims that the notes were unclassified. At hearing, Applicant confidently 
testified that it would have been nearly impossible for another person to place his notes 
in context.13 
 
 In April 2010, AGA issued Applicant an SOR, revoking Applicant’s SCI access. 
Applicant, through counsel, exhausted the due process offered by AGA, which included 
a personal appearance and appeal rights. During that process, Applicant argued that 
while he committed the security violations in the 1980s and 1990s, the 2004 through 
2009 security violation allegations were based on factual errors. In July 2011, AGA’s 
appeal board upheld the original decision to revoke Applicant’s access to classified 
information. In response to DOHA interrogatories, which were ultimately admitted into 
the record, Applicant submitted the entire written record of his due process with AGA 
including the documents, records, and reports related to AGA’s decision to revoke 
Applicant’s SCI access.14   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
13 Tr. 50, 54-56, 62, 81-85, 108-109. 
 
14 GE 2.  
 
5 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Handling Protected Information 
 
 An applicant’s deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations 
for protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubts about his security 
worthiness and is a serious concern.15 The SOR alleges that Applicant committed a 
number of security violations between 1988 and 2009. Applicant admits SOR 
allegations ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e regarding the security violations he committed between 
1988 and 1998, but he denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.k that he 
committed a series of security violations between 2004 and 2009.16 However, the AGA 
documents in the record are sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case.  
 
 In interviews with AGA, Applicant admitted that between 1988 and 2009, he 
disclosed classified information to unauthorized individuals; collected, stored, and 
destroyed classified or other protected information at his home; and repeatedly failed to 
comply with the rules for protecting classified information.17 Applicant failed to meet his 
burdens of production and persuasion to mitigate the concerns surrounding his ability to 
handle protected information. Applicant only offered a favorable version of the events 
leading to revocation of his SCI access. He did not present any evidence to refute the 
fact that he has habitually mishandled classified or other protected information for many 
years. Nor did he present evidence of remedial security training. Ultimately, Applicant’s 
numerous security violations undermine any finding that his statements to behave more 
cautiously in the future are credible. None of the available mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 The SOR also alleges, in subparagraph 1.l, that Applicant failed to self-report his 
security violations as they occurred, but waited until his AGA interviews to report his 
misconduct. Failure to self-report security violations is not disqualifying under the 
handling protected information guideline, but it does raise concerns under the personal 
conduct guidelines where Applicant’s behavior is cross-alleged.  
 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
                                                          
15 See AG ¶ 33. 
 
16 Answer. 
 
17 AG ¶¶ 34(a), (b), and (g). 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s history of security violations is not disqualifying under the personal 
conduct guideline. The alleged conduct falls squarely under the handling protected 
information guideline as discussed above. However, Applicant’s failure to self-report his 
security violations to his employers as they occurred and his reasons for doing so, raise 
personal conduct concerns. Applicant admits that he did not report his security 
violations until his AGA interviews in 2001, 2008, and 2009.18 Handling classified 
information is essential in Applicant’s field. Applicant is well aware that developing a 
reputation for improperly handling of classified, sensitive, or proprietary information 
would negatively impact his professional standing and ability to obtain work.19 Applicant 
demonstrated the lengths to which he would go to protect his reputation by improperly 
destroying the information he took from his former employer, which contain classified, 
sensitive, and proprietary information instead of reporting his misconduct to his former 
employer. Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised by his conduct, which 
continues to negatively affect his current security worthiness. None of the personal 
conduct mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Based on the record, it is clear that Applicant should not be granted continued 
access to classified information. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I 
have also considered the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). The federal 
government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
granted access to classified information.20 Security clearance decisions are not an exact 
science, but rather are predictive judgments about a person's security suitability in light 
of that person's past conduct and present circumstances.21 Applicant has repeatedly 
demonstrated a lack of respect and understanding of the rules that apply to the handling 
and safeguarding of classified information and has continually placed his self-interests 
above his fiduciary duty to the government.  There is nothing in the record to suggest 
that Applicant will take his responsibility to protect and safeguard classified information 
more seriously in the future. As such, Applicant’s continued access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
18 Tr. 75, 96 - 97. 
 
19 AG ¶ 16(e). 
 
20 Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
 
21 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-29 (1988). 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Handling Protected  
Information:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph: 1.l:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.c – 2.d:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.                     
  
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
