 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-02164 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 30, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 10, 2013, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 26, 2013. His SOR answer was 
received by the DOD CAF on October 2, 2013. Department Counsel was prepared to 
 
2 
 
 
proceed on November 6, 2013. The case was assigned to me on November 18, 2013. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 19, 2013, scheduling the hearing for 
December 4, 2013. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through K, which were received into evidence without 
objection.  
 
I held the record open until December 20, 2013, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted 
AE L through N, which were received into evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 11, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted with explanation SOR ¶ 1.a, the sole allegation. The answer 
with explanation is incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old driver firefighter, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2005. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance, which is 
a requirement of his continued employment. He previously held a secret security 
clearance when he was employed by a defense contractor from January 2001 to 
March 2005. (Tr. 18-20, GE 1.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1997. He graduated from 
community college in December 2010 and was awarded an associate’s degree in 
general studies. (Tr. 17-18.) Applicant served in the U.S. Army from September 1997 
to September 2001, and was honorably discharged as a specialist 4 (pay grade E-4). 
His military occupational specialty in the Army was 51M (firefighter). (Tr. 20-22, AE L.) 
 
Applicant was previously married from September 1999 to June 2004, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. He remarried in January 2008, and has a two-year-old son 
with his second wife. (Tr. 11, 21, GE 1, GE 2.) His wife works full-time at a bookstore. 
Applicant’s annual salary is $72,000 and his wife’s annual salary is $18,000, for a 
combined annual salary of $90,000. (Tr. 21-22.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR consists of one allegation of an August 2011 $33,916 
deficiency judgment against him. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) In August 2005, Applicant purchased a 
vacant lot for $76,000. He put $20,000 down and financed the balance. At the time he 
purchased the lot, he planned to build a family home on it. In 2006, however, he 
 
3 
 
 
decided the location would not suit his family’s needs and put the lot up for sale. He 
actively tried to sell the lot from 2006 to 2010. Unfortunately during this timeframe, the 
real estate market crashed and a local Government employer had a major drawdown 
that resulted in significant layoffs. Despite Applicant’s best efforts, which included 
lowering his price several times, he was unable to sell the lot. He reached the point 
where he was unable to continue making the $600 monthly payments on an empty lot 
and maintain payments on a home that he had purchased in April 2010. Applicant 
consulted an attorney and was advised to stop making payments on the empty lot and 
let the lot go into foreclosure. Following that advice, the bank foreclosed on the vacant 
lot in April 2011 and sold the land at auction. After the lot was sold, the bank secured 
a deficiency judgment against Applicant for $38,916. (Tr. 11, 22-33, GE 2.) 
 
Applicant submitted documentation that his counsel initiated legal action in July 
2013 to contest the bank’s ability to collect the deficiency judgment. The court ruled in 
Applicant’s favor in October 2013, and the debt in question is no longer enforceable. 
(AE A – AE K.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted his DD-214 and two reference letters. The first letter is from 
his project manager and chief, who has supervised Applicant since March 2005. His 
chief discussed Applicant’s job duties, addressed his trustworthiness, and 
recommended him for a security clearance. The second letter is from an eight-year 
family friend, who discussed Applicant’s work ethic and dedication as a provider, 
husband, and father. (AE M – AE N.) 
 
Applicant’s budget and testimony demonstrates that he lives within his means, 
is current on his debts, and has $18,000 in savings. (GE 2, Tr. 31-33.) Applicant 
primarily spends his discretionary free time with his wife and son and secondarily on 
his hobbies, which are wood working and cooking. (Tr. 35.)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
 
4 
 
 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant warrants full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because his sole debt was 
infrequent, occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and based 
 
6 
 
 
on record evidence, does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
Applicant merits full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because of the unexpected 
downturn in real estate and adverse impact on the local economy following the 
drawdown of a large local Government employer. These factors were circumstances 
beyond his control, and despite his limited resources he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Even though he did not have the funds to remain current on his empty 
lot and support his family, he remained in contact with his creditors and took 
reasonable steps to resolve his debts.1 
  
AG ¶¶ 20(c) 20(d), and 20(e)  are applicable because Applicant resolved his 
sole debt after his attorney successfully challenged it in court and Applicant provided 
documentation of same.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s record of service as a defense-contract employee weighs in his 
favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. He is current on 
his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debt has been 
addressed and is resolved.  
 
As noted by his reference, Applicant is making a significant contribution to the 
national defense. His company fully supports him and recommends him for a security 
clearance. Due to circumstances beyond his control, his debt became delinquent. 
Despite Applicant’s financial setback, it is clear that he had made a full financial 
recovery. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
The applicable mitigating conditions and the whole-person analysis support a 
favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s past military service, 
employment record, the substantial steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, his reference letters, 
and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the security concerns raised.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
