1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 12-01523
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has more than
$100,000 in delinquent debt that is unresolved and ongoing. He did not present
sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial considerations security concern.
Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On June 12, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a statement
of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
2
national interest to grant or continue access to classified information.  The SOR is1
similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the security
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. 
The case was assigned to me on September 11, 2013, to conduct a hearing as
requested by Applicant. The hearing was scheduled for October 10, 2013, but was
postponed due to the shutdown of the federal government. The hearing was
rescheduled for a November date, but it was postponed when Applicant suffered a
heart attack. The rescheduled hearing was held on March 6, 2014. At the hearing,
Department Counsel presented Exhibits 1–5, which were admitted. Likewise, Applicant
presented Exhibits A–D, which were admitted, and he testified on his own behalf. The
transcript (Tr.) was received March 14, 2014. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is employed as
an armed security guard, a job he has held since 2006. He is seeking to obtain a
security clearance for his current job with a security services company. 
Applicant has a good record of employment as shown by four highly laudatory
letters of recommendation submitted on his behalf. (Exhibits A–D) His employment
history includes military service in the U.S. Army during 1987–1989. He has never
married and has no children. He has no police record. He completed high school in
1986 and has taken some college courses. 
Applicant has more than $100,000 in delinquent debt due to uninsured medical
expenses. He admits the SOR allegations consisting of 19 delinquent accounts in
amounts ranging from $66 to $97,777 for a total of approximately $119,000. In addition
to his admissions, the delinquent accounts are established by three credit reports. All 19
accounts are from uninsured medical expenses for medical care he received after
suffering heart attacks in 2008 and 2011. He suffered a third heart attack in 2013, but
those medical expenses are not at issue in the SOR. 
Applicant has not paid, settled, entered into repayment agreements, disputed, or
otherwise resolved any of the 19 accounts. His intention is to resolve the indebtedness
by obtaining relief in bankruptcy court. He stated that intention in December 2011 during
his background investigation. He repeated that statement in April 2013 when he
answered interrogatories. To date, he has not filed a bankruptcy petition nor retained a
bankruptcy attorney to represent him in the matter.   
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a2
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.3
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).6
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 10
3
Applicant’s overall financial situation is essentially living month-to-month and
paycheck-to-paycheck. His personal financial statement, which reports monthly income
and expenses, has a net remainder of $26. At the hearing, he stated that he had less
than $400 in a checking account; he has no other financial or investment accounts; and
he has no other sources of income other than the money he earns for his job.  
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As2
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt3
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An4
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  5
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting6
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An7
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate8
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme9
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.10
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).11
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.12
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 13
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant14
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  15
4
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.11
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it12
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant13
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline14
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  15
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
 AG ¶ 19(a).  16
 AG ¶ 19(c). 17
 AG ¶¶ 20(a)–(f). 18
 AG ¶ 20(b). 19
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 20
5
There is substantial evidence that Applicant has a history of financial problems or
difficulties. His unfavorable financial history indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations.  The facts are more than16 17
sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions. 
 
Based on the available evidence, none of the six mitigating conditions under
Guideline F are sufficient to fully mitigate the security concern.  Applicant has an18
extremely serious financial problem that is unresolved and ongoing. Although he
incurred more than $100,000 of delinquent debt due to serious medical problems
without the benefit of health insurance—a circumstance largely beyond his control—he
has not acted responsibly under the circumstances.  He has taken no concrete actions19
to resolve his dire financial predicament. He talked about filing for bankruptcy as far
back as 2011, but he has done nothing else. He has not acted with reasonable diligence
expected from someone under the circumstances like those at issue. Instead, his
response has been inaction or procrastination or both, which are shortcomings that
militate against a favorable clearance decision. His statements about intending to file for
bankruptcy amount to good intentions, which do not mitigate the security concern. 
Of course, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts.  Rather,20
the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness
consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases,
the Appeal Board has established the following standard:
The Board has previously noted that the concept of meaningful track
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 21
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).22
6
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan
be the ones listed in the SOR.21
Here, the evidence does not support a conclusion that Applicant has established a plan
and taken steps to implement that plan sufficient to mitigate the security concern. 
Applicant’s history of financial problems raises doubt about his judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I
resolve that doubt in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept.  In doing so, I considered Applicant’s good employment record, his22
record of military service, his lack of a police record, the series of heart attacks he
suffered during 2008–2013, and the lack of health insurance. This is an unfortunate
case, and I have empathy for anyone who has experienced such difficult circumstances.
Nonetheless, the evidence established that Applicant has done very little to help
himself, and the favorable matters are not enough to justify a conclusion that he met his
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.s: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
