                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-03668
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Heintzleman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
March 27, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on December 20, 2011.  On September 11, 2013, the Department of Defense
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006.
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on September 19, 2013, and
requested an Administrative Determination by an administrative judge.  Department
Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 23, 2013.  Applicant
responded to the FORM on or about February 6, 2014, submitting a copy of his Answer
and three letters of recommendation.  Department Counsel had no objection, and the
documents are entered into evidence.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated September 19, 2013, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in all the Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Applicant is 36 years old.  (Item 5 at page 5.)  In January of 2007, he lost his well
paying job in State A.  (Item 4 at page 1, and Item 5 at pages 12 and 19.)  This loss of
employment has caused Applicant’s current financial difficulties.
1.a.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor A in the amount of about $31,020 on a
second mortgage in State A.  (Item 8 at page 3.)  He has yet to address this admitted
past-due debt; and as such, I find it is still owed.  (Answer at pages 1~2.)
1.b.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor B in the amount of about $6,258 on a
broken lease in State B.  (Item 8 at page 1.)  He has yet to address this admitted past-
due debt; and as such, I find it is still owed.  (Answer at pages 2~3.)
1.c.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor C in the amount of about $878.  (Item 8 at
page 2.)  He thought his wife had settled this past-due debt, but has offered nothing
further of substance in this regard.  (Answer at pages 3~4.)  I find it is still owed.
1.d.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor D in the amount of about $1,319.  (Item 10
at pages 6 and 16.)  He has yet to address this admitted past-due debt; and as such, I
find it is still owed.  (Answer at pages 4~5.)
1.e.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor E in the amount of about $153.  (Item 8 at
page 1.)  He avers that he believes this dental debt was paid, but has offered nothing
further of substance in this regard.  (Answer at page 5.)  I find it is still owed.
1.f.  It is alleged that Applicant is indebted to Creditor F in the amount of about
$1,180.  In an abundance of caution, he admits this debt, but is “unsure of what this
debt might be.”  (Answer at page 5.)  This alleged debt does not appear on any of the
Governments four credit reports.  (Items 8~11.)  I find this debt is not owed.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  (AG Paragraph 2.)  The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
According to AG Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
3
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
4
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has significant past-due debts,
which he has not yet resolved.
I can find no countervailing Mitigating Condition that is applicable here.
Subparagraph 20(c) requires that “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”  Applicant has yet, in good faith, to
address debts totaling in excess of $39,000.  Accordingly, Applicant has not met his
burden of persuasion.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Applicant has submitted three letters of
recommendation from friends, but the record evidence leaves me with questions and
doubts as to his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  Applicant has over
$39,000 in past-due indebtedness that he has yet to resolve.  For these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person
concept arising from his Financial Considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
5
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
