 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
            )           ISCR Case No. 12-02058                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                            )          
Applicant for Security Clearance                   ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and written record in this case, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
                                               Statement of the Case 
 
On May 24, 2011, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 22, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated September 18, 2013, 
and on December 6, 2013, he requested that his case be determined on the written 
 
2 
 
 
record. The File of Relevant Material (FORM), compiled by the Government, is dated 
January 17, 2014. The FORM lists documents identified as Items 1 through 11. By letter 
dated January 22, 2014, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with 
instructions to submit any additional information or objections within 30 days of receipt. 
Applicant received the file on January 30, 2014. His response was due on March 1, 
2014. Applicant timely submitted a response to the FORM. On March 11, 2014, the 
case was assigned to me for a decision. I marked Applicant’s response to the FORM as 
Ex. A and entered it in the record without objection. I marked the Government’s 
memorandum of March 5, 2014, stating that it did not object to Applicant’s submissions 
in response to the FORM, as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains nine allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.). In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all nine allegations, with explanation. Applicant’s 
admissions are entered as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and the Applicant. In addition to Applicant’s response to the FORM, the record evidence 
includes Applicant’s May 24, 2011 e-QIP; his responses to DOHA interrogatories;1 his 
credit reports of June 2011 and May 2013; a report of an interview Applicant had with 
another government agency in January 2007; and his declaration for federal 
employment, dated March 17, 2005, and May 13, 2005. (See Items 5 through 11; Item 
A.)  
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and a high school graduate. In 1997 he married, and he 
and his wife divorced in 2001. He remains single. On his e-QIP, he listed his parents 
and a half-brother as his relatives. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant has worked for his present employer, a government contractor, since 
September 2008. In July 2011, he told an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) that he was awarded a security clearance from the DOD 
in 1997 or 1998. He also stated that another government agency awarded him access 
to confidential information in 2006. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 In March 2005, Applicant filed a Declaration for Federal Employment (Optional 
Form 306). On the form he reported that he had not filed income tax returns or paid his 
income taxes for three years. He estimated that he owed approximately $3,000. He 
further stated, “In process of making arrangements for payment with IRS” [Internal 
Revenue Service]. (Item 11.) 
                                            
1
 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on July 12, 2011. On June 21, 2013, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant signed a 
notarized statement in which he made no changes to the investigator’s summary of his interview and 
adopted the summary as accurately reflecting his interview. (Item 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Section 26c on the e-QIP Applicant completed in May 2011 asks: “Have you 
failed to pay Federal, state, or other taxes, or to file a tax return, when required by law 
or ordinance?” Applicant answered “Yes” to the question posed at Section 26c. He 
explained that he had made arrangements with the IRS to pay a tax lien. (Item 5.) 
 
 The record reflects that Applicant filed his 2005 Federal income tax return in 
November 2006. In December 2006, Applicant established an installment payment plan 
with the IRS to pay his 2000, 2002, and 2005 delinquent Federal income taxes, interest, 
and penalties. He made six payments according to the plan in 2007, and then stopped. 
The installment agreement was subsequently terminated. (Item 6.) 
 
 When he was interviewed by an OPM investigator in July 2011, Applicant 
acknowledged that he had not filed or paid Federal, state, or other taxes as required by 
law or ordinance. He could not recall which years he failed to file returns or pay taxes 
due. He reported a $538 state tax lien in 1996, a $23,269 Federal tax lien in 2008, and 
a $3,216 Federal tax lien in 2010. Applicant told the investigator that he did not file his 
Federal and state tax returns because “he did not get around to fil[ing] them.” He also 
explained that he had a payment plan with his state of residence to pay delinquent 
income taxes but stopped making payments when he could no longer afford to do so.2  
(Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant reported that in June 2010, he established an installment agreement 
with the IRS to pay his delinquent Federal income taxes for tax years 2000, 2002, 2005, 
2006, 2007, and 2009. The record reflects that Applicant made payments under the 
payment agreement from June 2010 through July 2011. In June 2011, he established 
an installment agreement with the IRS to pay his 2010 delinquent Federal income taxes. 
In August 2011, the IRS cancelled Applicant’s payment agreement when it determined 
that he had not timely filed his 2010 federal income tax return. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant reported that he was able to make a new agreement with the IRS to 
pay the delinquent taxes he previously owed and to pay the additional delinquency on 
his 2010 Federal income taxes. He told the investigator that he believed his Federal tax 
delinquencies totaled $47,000 to $48,000, and he reported that his payments on the 
installment plans totaled $400 each month.3 (Ex. 6; Ex. A.) 
 
 The record reflects that Applicant made payments under the new agreement 
from September 2011 until May 2012. It does not appear from documentation in the 
record that Applicant made payments under the plan between May 2012 and February 
2013. He made payments in March, April, and May of 2013. It is not clear from the 
record that he made any payments thereafter. (Item 6.)  
                                            
2 The SOR does not allege that Applicant failed to timely file state income tax returns or to pay income 
taxes, as required, to his state of residence. Accordingly, I will not consider this information in my 
Guideline F analysis. However, I will consider it in my whole-person analysis. 
 
3 The tax delinquencies alleged on the SOR total approximately $38,163. (Item 1.) 
 
4 
 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.a. that Applicant failed to timely file his Federal income 
tax returns, as required, for at least tax years 2000 to 2008.  In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the allegation and stated that he had filed his delinquent returns and 
had a payment plan in place with the IRS. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant is indebted to the IRS for approximately 
$3,031 in unpaid income taxes, interest, and penalties for tax year 2000. The record 
reflects that Applicant filed his 2000 Federal income tax return in December 2004. (Item 
1; Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant owes the IRS approximately $1,928 in 
unpaid income taxes, interest, and penalties for tax year 2002. The record evidence 
establishes that Applicant filed his 2002 Federal income tax return in December 2006. 
(Item 1; Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant owes the IRS approximately $17,050 in 
unpaid income taxes, interest, and penalties for tax year 2005. The record evidence 
establishes that Applicant filed his 2005 Federal income tax return in October 2006. 
(Item 1; Item 6; Item A.) 
  
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant owes the IRS approximately $8,135 in 
unpaid income taxes, interest, and penalties for tax year 2006. The record evidence 
establishes that Applicant filed his 2006 Federal income tax return in June 2010. (Item 
1; Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.f. that Applicant owes the IRS approximately $4,586 in 
unpaid income taxes, interest, and penalties for tax year 2007. The record evidence 
establishes that Applicant filed his 2007 Federal income tax return in November 2008. 
(Item 1; Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.g. that Applicant owes the IRS approximately $2,810 in 
unpaid income taxes, interest, and penalties for tax year 2009. The record evidence 
establishes that Applicant filed his 2009 Federal income tax return in May 2010. (Item 1; 
Item 6.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.h. that Applicant owes the IRS approximately $619 in 
unpaid Federal taxes, interest, and penalties for tax year 2010. The record evidence 
establishes that Applicant filed his 2010 Federal income tax return in May 2011. (Item 1; 
Item 6; Item A.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.i. that Applicant owes a creditor $91 on a medical 
account in collection status, and the account remains unresolved. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant stated that he believed the debt had been satisfied. However, he failed 
to provide documentation to corroborate payment. (Item 1; Item 4.)      
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant provided a personal financial statement in response to DOD 
interrogatories. The personal financial statement showed his net monthly income from 
employment was $3,324. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant listed the following monthly living expenses: rent, $1,058; groceries, 
$400; clothing, $100; utilities, $200; car expenses (insurance, repairs, gasoline), $870; 
and miscellaneous, $388. Applicant’s total monthly expenses total $3,016. (Item 6.) 
 
 Additionally, Applicant listed payments on two debts: $430 to an automobile 
creditor and $388 to the IRS. Applicant’s monthly debt payments total $818. Applicant’s 
monthly expenses and monthly debt payments exceed his monthly income by $510.  
Applicant told the authorized investigator that he had not received financial credit 
counseling. (Item 6.) 
    
                                                  Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
6 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant has significant delinquent Federal income tax debt. Additionally, he 
failed to timely file his Federal income tax returns, as required, for at least tax years 
2000 through 2008. The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security 
concerns under the facts of this case. Under AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns.  Under AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to 
 
7 
 
 
file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required” can also be a matter 
of security concern. 
 
Applicant has a history of failing to file, as required, his annual Federal income 
tax returns. Additionally, while he has established payment plans to address his Federal 
tax delinquencies, he has failed to follow his payment plans consistently and reliably. He 
acknowledged that he often did not “get around” to filing his Federal income tax returns. 
His personal financial statement suggests that he may be financially overextended, 
making it difficult for him to meet his monthly living expenses and make the required 
payments under his payment agreement with the IRS.  
 
The Government did not allege, nor did the evidence establish, that Applicant’s 
failure to file his Federal income tax returns was willful.4 However, his habitual failure to 
file his Federal income tax returns does raise Guideline F security concerns about his 
willingness to abide by rules and regulations that bind citizens and residents who earn 
income in the United States. Applicant’s habitual unwillingness to follow rules for filing 
income tax returns in turn raises concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to follow rules and regulations necessary to protect classified information. I 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g) apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial behavior. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions could 
apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s failure to timely file his Federal 
income tax returns, as required. Unresolved financial issues might be mitigated if the 
behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” (AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, 
unresolved financial behavior might be mitigated if “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control, (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still 
another mitigating circumstance that might be applicable includes evidence that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)).  
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to file his Federal income tax returns, as 
required, for at least tax years 2000 through 2008. The record reflects that he has had 
stable employment with one government contractor since 2008. His Federal income tax 
delinquencies are ongoing, and the record does not indicate that his failure to file his 
Federal income tax returns in a timely manner, as required, was a consequence of a 
situation beyond his control. Moreover, Applicant has not sought financial credit 
counseling, and his personal financial statement suggests he may be living beyond his 
means. 
 
                                            
4 See 26 U.S.C ¶ 7203. 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant stated that he had paid the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i., but he failed to 
provide documentation to corroborate payment. Moreover, Applicant has made several 
efforts to establish and follow payment plans with the IRS, but at this time, the financial 
delinquencies associated with the IRS debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. through 1.h. remain 
unresolved. 
 
  Applicant has habitually ignored some of the IRS filing rules and regulations for 
many years. It is too soon to tell if his failure to timely file his Federal income tax returns 
and to resolve his Federal tax delinquencies will be mitigated by positive, definite, and 
consistent action. I conclude, therefore, that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) do not fully 
apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 41 
years. His failure to timely file his Federal and state income tax returns is long-standing 
habitual behavior. While he has established payment agreements with the IRS to 
resolve his tax delinquencies, he has not followed them consistently, making it 
necessary for him to reestablish the plans after he failed to make his payments as 
agreed. His financial situation appears precarious, and, according to this personal 
financial statement, he spends more money than he earns each month. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment and reliability as well as his eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                    Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.i.: Against Applicant 
     
                                              Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
