 
1 
 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02381 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. A judgment, debts following two 
vehicle repossessions, collection accounts, and charged-off accounts alleged in the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), have not been resolved. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on July 11, 2013, 
the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On August 7, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing. On October 11, 2013, I was assigned the case. On December 31, 2013, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
hearing convened on January 17, 2014. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 
through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through I, without objection. The record was held 
open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. Additional material (Ex. J 
through M) was submitted and admitted into the record without objection. On January 
28, 2014, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted seven debts totaling 
approximately $27,000. He denies 15 debts, which total approximately $26,000 and was 
unsure about a debt of approximately $500. At the hearing, he stated he had more debt 
than reflected in the SOR. He stated he owed $77,052. (Tr. 58) I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old who rebuilds range targets and has worked for a 
defense contractor since November 2010. (Tr. 37) He is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance. (Tr. 5) He served in the U.S. Army from July 1998 through January 2008 
when he was honorably discharged at the grade of staff sergeant (E-6). (Ex. G, Tr. 64) 
He served in Iraq from November 2005 through November 2006. While in Iraq, two 
Soldiers in his unit were killed. (Tr. 41) He also served in Korea. (Tr. 38) During his 
service, he received four Army Commendation Medals, an Army Achievement Medal, 
and three Army Good Conduct Medals, in addition to other medals, ribbons, and 
awards. (Ex. G)  
 
In January 2008, Applicant was medically discharged. His posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) with traumatic brain injury is rated as a 50% disability, his headaches 
which were a residual of traumatic brain injury were rated at 10%, and his right knee 
osteoarthritis was rated at 10%. (Ex. H, Tr. 40) His overall combined rating is 60%.2 As 
of November 2013, he receives approximately $1,000 per month entitlement from the 
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). (Ex. H) The month prior the hearing, he received 
his first payment and back pay, which together amounted to $13,000. (Tr. 66)  
 
Applicant called no witnesses other than himself. A coworker stated Applicant is 
respectful, has a positive attitude, is punctual, and is “an employee worth keeping.” (Ex. 
D) His supervisor states Applicant is reliable, conscientious, and has a positive work 
ethic. (Ex. E) Applicant is willing to tackle new and challenging assignments and is 
ideally suited for his position. (Ex. E) 
 
 In May 2013, Applicant completed a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) (Ex. 2) 
which indicated his monthly net income was approximately $3,200, his monthly 
expenses were approximately $1,750, and he was paying $375 on his debts, which left 
a monthly net remainder of approximately $1,100. (Ex. 2) He has since stopped making 
the $375 monthly payments. (Tr. 85) In December 2013, Applicant’s take-home pay was 
approximately $1,000 every two weeks. (Ex. I) He has $4,550 in his 401(k) retirement 
                                                          
2 The Department of Veterans Affairs does not add individual percentages of each condition to determine 
the overall combined rating for compensation purposes. (Ex. H)  
 
3 
 
 
 
fund. (Ex. J, Tr. 61) He had $500 in his checking account and $13,000 in savings, which 
represented back pay from the Department of Veterans Affairs. (Tr. 77) At the hearing 
he stated he was paid $15.83 per hour and took home approximately $892 every two 
weeks. (Tr. 59) His wife is a certified nursing assistant with $1,400 monthly income. (Tr. 
59) He estimates his monthly net remainder at $500. (Tr. 61) Other than two $300 
payments on a judgment (SOR 1.a) and two other $75 payments, he has made no 
payments on his delinquent accounts. (Tr. 54) In 2013, he earned $30,600. (Tr. 81) He 
stated, “there’s no excuse. I mean, just irresponsibility on my part, for not making sure 
those bills are getting paid.” (Tr. 42)  
 
In February 2003, when Applicant was still in the Army, a tax lien was filed 
against Applicant and his wife. His wife had started a small business and when she 
failed to have sufficient tax withheld the tax lien was filed. Funds were taken from his 
Army pay to address the tax bill. (Tr. 2) The tax lien was paid and satisfied in November 
2004. (Ex. 5) 
 
 In September 2010, Applicant answered questions about his finances in a 
personal subject interview (PSI). At that time, his net monthly income (income less 
monthly expenses and debt payment) was between $1,000 and $2,200 depending on 
where he was working. (Ex. 2) It was his goal to have all of his delinquent debt paid by 
2015. (Ex. 2) The record contains credit reports from September 2010 (Ex. 5), 
December 2011 (Ex. 4), and April 2013 (Ex. 3)  
 
 In May 2013, Applicant answered written financial interrogatories. (Ex. 2) In his 
PFS he indicated he was making $300 monthly payments on the charged-off account in 
SOR 1.k ($10,933) and $75 monthly payments on the $2,919 charged-off account listed 
in SOR 1.m ($2,919). With the two monthly debt payments, his monthly net remainder 
was $375. (Ex. 2) He failed to provide documentation showing actual payment on these 
debts.  
 
 While on active duty, Applicant had a number of debts being automatically 
deducted from his pay. In January 2008, when he left the U.S. Army, the payments 
stopped. (Tr. 42) In May 2008, a judgment (SOR 1.a, $1,621) was obtained against 
Applicant. (Ex. 5) He had financed the purchase of tires and rims. When the automatic 
monthly payment stopped the creditor obtained a judgment. (Ex. 2) In his September 
2010 PSI, he said he was working to pay this judgment. He asserts he worked out a 
repayment arrangement in November 2013 and made payments of $103 on the account 
that has now increased to $3,542. (Tr. 43) He mailed the payments to city hall. (Tr. 46) 
No documentation showing payment was received in the record.  
 
 In July 2010, while in the Army, Applicant purchased a vehicle. After transferring 
to another state, the vehicle was destroyed in an accident. (Ex. 2) Applicant believed his 
insurance should have covered the loan. The lender states $16,798 is in collection. In 
his September 2010 PSI, he said he would look into this debt to determine if he owed 
any money on the vehicle loan. (Ex. 2)  
 
 Applicant indicated that in March 2010 or April 2010, he started working with a 
debt consolidation agency to take care of his debts and clean up his credit. (Ex. 2) As of 
 
4 
 
 
 
his September 2010 PSI, he had made two payments of $375 each to the company. At 
some point, he stopped making payments and stopped working with this company. 
When he left the Army, he cancelled his cable service, but failed to return the cable 
company’s equipment. The company lists the $1,472 (SOR 1.p) as a collection account. 
In his September 2010 PSI, he states he returned the equipment in 2008, and does not 
owe this debt. In his SOR response, he states this matter should have been resolved in 
2012. (SOR Response) 
 
 In October 2009, Applicant took out a title loan (SOR 1.r, $531) on his vehicle. 
He does not believe he owes any debt. In his SOR response, he neither admitted nor 
denied the collection account. In May 2010 or June 2010, he had the creditor repossess 
the vehicle. (Ex. 2)  
 
 Applicant had four medical accounts that went to collection: $200 (SOR 1.d), 
$318 (SOR 1.s), $500 (SOR 1.t), and $200 (SOR 1.u). In September 2010, he stated he 
believed he had health insurance that should have paid these debts. (Ex. 2, Tr. 48) He 
was going to investigate the collection accounts. A $200 medical collection account 
(1.u) has been removed from his credit reports. (Ex. K) It is uncertain if the medical debt 
listed in SOR 1.d ($200) and SOR 1.u ($200) are the same obligation.  
 
 Applicant had four loans with a creditor. He paid three of the loans and the fourth 
(SOR 1.i, $1,482) was charged off. (Ex. 2) This account was opened in August 2007. 
(Ex. 3, 4, 5) Automatic monthly payments stopped when he left the U.S. Army. (Tr. 50) 
He obtained a number of loans with another creditor, but believes all of them were paid 
before he left the service. Applicant asserted he had documentation showing a zero 
balance on this debt. It was suggested he could submit that documentation following the 
hearing. (Tr. 51) No documentation was received.  
 
 A creditor placed a $4,597 account (SOR 1.j) for collection. (Ex. 2) This account 
was removed from his credit reports. (Ex. K) At the hearing, he asserted he had 
documents related to this debt. It was again suggested that he submit documentation 
following the hearing and again no documentation was received. (Tr. 52)  
 
 Applicant admits owing the collection account listed in SOR 1.v ($180). (SOR 
Response) He had a car loan with the creditor listed in SOR 1.n ($448). His monthly 
payments were $400, but he was one or two months late on the payments. In his 
September 2010 PSI, he was unsure about this debt. (Ex. 2) The debt has now been 
deleted from his credit report. (Ex. M) 
 
 In December 2009, Applicant placed his electrical utility service in his son’s name 
when his son moved in to take over his lease. When the first electrical bill arrived, it was 
large (SOR 1.h, $2,365) because his son had an unpaid utility bill from his previous 
location. The utility company is demanding payment from Applicant because the 
electrical service was in his name when the lease and the electrical service started. (Ex. 
2) In 2009, Applicant purchased a washer and dryer. Payments were automatically 
deducted from his pay. When he left the Army, the payments stopped. The creditor 
charged off $2,919 (SOR 1.m). Applicant was unhappy with his cell phone provider 
(SOR 1.w, $389) and does not intend to pay the collection account. (Ex. 2)  
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 In August 2011, Applicant purchased a vehicle for his youngest daughter with 
monthly payments of $427. (Ex. 4, Tr. 16) When his daughter lost her job, she was no 
longer able to make the monthly payments and the vehicle was repossessed (SOR 1.k, 
$10,933) In his May 2013 PFS he asserted he was making $300 monthly payments on 
the debt. (Ex. 2)  
 
 Applicant submitted a single page, undated letter (Ex. B) from a law firm3 stating 
what services the firm would provide if Applicant became their client. A copy of the 
entire agreement was not presented. The firm was to obtain his credit reports, and send 
challenges to the creditors listed on the credit report in an attempt have the accounts 
removed or deleted from his credit report, thereby, improving his credit score. (Ex. B) 
Applicant states he is paying the firm $95 monthly. (Tr. 58) A number of collection 
accounts have been deleted or removed from his credit reports and “additional 
information”4 was supplied on other accounts. (Ex. F, K, M) Additionally, a number of 
accounts not listed in the SOR have also been removed or deleted from his credit 
reports. (Ex. A, F, K) He hoped that within 30 days of the hearing, the law firm would tell 
him which creditors he owed and how much is owed to each. (Tr. 75)  
 
 In August 2013, Applicant filed a theft report with the local police department. 
(Ex. L) The single page submitted provides little information other than it was a 
misdemeanor theft of $200 currency. (Ex. L) He stated he had been “scammed” by a 
company that charged him $250 to assist him with his finances for which he received no 
services. (Tr. 42, 98)  
 
 Applicant drives a 2000 vehicle purchased in 2009 for $4,000. (Tr. 79) His wife 
has a 2003 vehicle. He has three children ages 21, 23, and 25. (Tr. 83) Two of his 
children live with him.  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s judgment, charged-off and collection accounts, and 
other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Judgment filed in May 
2008. (Ex. 3, 4, 5) The 
delinquent debt is now 
$3,542. (Tr. 43) 
$1,621 Unpaid. Applicant admits owing the 
debt. (Tr. 72) He asserted the account 
manager had agreed to accept $100 
monthly payments starting in November 
2013. (Ex. A, Tr. 43) No documented 
evidence of payment was received. 
b Collection account. (Ex. 
3, 4) 
$345 
 
Unpaid. 
                                                          
3 This was a different debt assistance service then Applicant had hired in 2010. 
 
4 Applicant acknowledged that he had submitted only page one of a report (Ex. F) that contained 16 more 
pages. (Tr. 34) He indicated that the entire report would be submitted after the hearing. A copy of the full 
report was not received.  
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
c Collection account. (Ex. 
3,4) 
$1,440 
 
Unpaid. In his answer, Applicant denied 
this debt.  
d Medical account debt. 
(Ex. 3, 4, 5) 
$200 Unpaid. This may or may not be the 
same $200 medical bill reflected in SOR 
1. u below, which was removed from his 
credit reports. (Ex. F) 
e Collection account. (Ex. 
3) 
$1,531 Removed from Applicant’s credit report. 
(Ex. F) In his answer, Applicant denied 
this debt. 
f Collection account. (Ex. 
3) 
$4,794 Unpaid. In his answer, Applicant denied 
this debt. 
g Collection account. (Ex. 
3) 
$389 Unpaid. In his answer, Applicant denied 
this debt. 
h Utility collection account. 
(Ex. 3, 4) His son took 
over his lease.(Ex. 2, 5)  
$2,365 Unpaid. In November 2013, he had 
contacted the creditor and was 
attempting to establish a repayment 
agreement. (Ex. A) No payments made. 
i Charged-off account. (Ex. 
3, 4) 
$1,482 Admits. Unpaid. Credit report reflects a 
zero balance with $1,482 having been 
charged off. (Ex. 3)  
j Collection account. (Ex. 
3, 4, 5) 
$4,597 This account was removed from his 
credit report. (Ex. K) 
k Debt from repossessed 
pickup truck in 2012. (Ex. 
3, 4, Tr. 53)  
$10,933 Unpaid. Applicant acknowledged the 
debt and asserted he had made $300 
monthly payments, but stopped making 
payments. (Ex. 2, Tr. 55)  
l Debt from repossessed 
vehicle.  
$12,134 
 
Unpaid. Applicant co-signed on vehicle 
loan for his daughter. (Ex. 3) The 
vehicle was repossessed when his 
daughter lost her job. (Tr. 54)  
m Charged-off account for 
tires and rims. (Ex. 3, 4, 
5) 
$2,919 
 
Duplicate debt. Applicant asserts he is 
paying $75 monthly on this debt, but 
failed to provide documentation showing 
payment. (Ex. 2) This is the same debt 
as SOR 1.a above.  
n Charged-off account. (Ex. 
4, 5) 
$448 Account deleted from Applicant’s credit 
reports. (Ex. M)  
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
o Collection account. The 
account had been closed, 
charged off, and 
transferred to a collection 
agency. (Ex. 5) 
$3,553 
 
Applicant’s September 2009 CBR lists a 
zero balance on this account. (Ex. 5) 
Account removed from Applicant’s credit 
reports. (Ex. C, Ex. K) 
p Cable service collection 
account. Account opened 
January 2008. (Ex. 5) 
$1,472 
 
Unpaid. Applicant contacted the creditor 
and was informed the location given 
was a city where he never lived. (Ex. A) 
He asserts he returned the cable 
company’s equipment in 2000. In his 
answer, Applicant denied this debt. 
q Collection account for 
telephone service.(Ex. 4) 
$1,531 
 
Unpaid.  
r Collection account. (Ex. 
5) 
$531 
 
Unpaid.  
s Medical collection 
account. (Ex. 3, 4, 5) 
$318 
 
Unpaid. In his answer, Applicant denied 
this debt. 
t Medical collection 
account. (Ex. 3, 4, 5) 
$500 Unpaid. 
u Medical collection 
collection account. (Ex. 3, 
4)  
$200 Removed from Applicant’s credit report. 
(Ex. F) 
v Collection account. (Ex 5) $180 Unpaid. Applicant asserts this 
delinquent debt was paid, but failed to 
provide supporting documentation. (Tr. 
55)  
w Telephone company 
collection account. (Ex. 5) 
$389 Unpaid. Applicant obtained telephone 
service in September 2010, but was 
unhappy with the service. (Tr. 56)  
 Total debt listed in SOR $53,872  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
8 
 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
9 
 
 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of financial problems. The unpaid judgment was filed 
more than five years ago, in May 2008. He admitted seven debts totaling approximately 
$27,000 and at the hearing stated his delinquent debt was $77,052. (Tr. 58) The debts 
include two vehicle repossessions. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant does not fully meet any of the mitigating factors for financial 
considerations. Some of Applicant’s delinquent accounts go back to January 2008, 
when he left the U.S. Army and his automatic payments on some of these debts ended. 
In September 2010, he was interviewed about his delinquent debts. In May 2013, he 
 
10 
 
 
 
answered written financial interrogatories. In September 2013, he received the SOR 
listing the financial consideration security concerns. It was not until November 2013, 
that he obtained a law firm to assist him with his delinquent accounts. He is waiting for 
the firm to tell him which creditors he owes and how much. Applicant’s financial 
difficulties are both recent and multiple. He produced no evidence of circumstances 
beyond his control, and he has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts. He has 
not demonstrated that his financial problems are under control, or that he has a plan to 
bring them under control. He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts. 
 
Applicant has known of the Government’s concern about his delinquent accounts 
since at least September 2010. In the three and a half years since being interviewed, he 
made a couple of $300 payments and maybe a couple of $75 payments. Otherwise, he 
has paid nothing on his delinquent accounts. His handling of his finances, under the 
circumstances, casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. His ability to repay his debts was not due to factors beyond 
his control. He received a medical discharge from the U.S. Army, but experienced no 
periods of unemployment thereafter. He has been working for his current employer 
since November 2010. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has received no financial counseling and there is no indication his 
financial problems are under control or being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. The 
mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Even though he has known of 
the Government’s concern about his finances since September 2010, his payments on 
his delinquent obligations have been minimal. Through the services of a law firm, some 
of his delinquent accounts have been removed or deleted from his credit reports, but 
this was not though payment of the debts. No repayment plans have been reached. 
Applicant has failed to act aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. Applicant stated he 
was unhappy with the telephone service he received from the creditor in SOR 1.w 
($389), but provided no documented proof to substantiate the basis of his dispute with 
that creditor.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
11 
 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
mitigation Applicant and his wife are not living beyond their means. He drives a 2000 
vehicle and his wife drives a 2004. He honorably served in combat in the U.S. Army 
where injuries resulted in a medical discharge. He is currently rated by the VA as 60% 
disabled. It is noted he has limited income, an annual salary of $30,000, with which to 
address his debts.  
 
 The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
It has been more than three years since Applicant become aware of the Government 
concerns over his finances. It was not until after receiving the SOR that he sought 
financial assistance. He is still waiting for the law firm to tell him who to pay. He 
acknowledged it was irresponsibility on his part, for not making sure those bills were 
being paid. His long-standing failure to repay his creditors, at least in reasonable 
amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his 
fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
An applicant is not required to establish that he has paid off each and every debt 
listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan 
to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan. I 
must reasonably consider the entirety of Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that plan is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a 
reasonable plan may provide for payment on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there 
is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt 
plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Applicant would like to pay his delinquent debt. 
However, the delinquent debts are not being paid. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
 
12 
 
 
 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n and 1.o: For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r – 1.t:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.v and 1.w: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
