 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 12-02912 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct, but failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated May 15, 2013, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In a June 26, 2013, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for 8 
of the 13 allegations raised under Guideline F and, with narrative, the two allegations 
raised under Guideline E. He also requested an administrative decision based on the 
 
2 
 
 
record. The Government converted that request in favor of a hearing on July 22, 2013. 
The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 21, 2013, setting the hearing for 
September 25, 2013.  
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered six 
documents, which were accepted as Exhibits (GX) 1-6 without objection. Applicant 
offered testimony and two documents, which were accepted without objection as 
Exhibits (AX) A-B. He was given until November 2, 2013, to submit any additional 
materials. The transcript of the proceeding was received on October 2, 2013. When no 
additional materials were timely received, the record was closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old technician earning approximately $62,000 to $65,000 a 
year, after a recent across-the-board reduction in pay of $3,000. (Tr. 64) He has an 
Associate’s Degree in electronics. Applicant has been married for nearly 20 years. The 
couple has a teenage daughter.  
 
 Applicant was continuously employed by a series of defense contractors from 
1994 to December 2010, when he was laid off because he could not obtain a required 
certification. This occurred around the same time Applicant and his wife reunited after a 
2008 separation that lasted for about two years. During that period, Applicant 
contributed to the support of his estranged wife and daughter in their home, while he 
rented an apartment. Applicant remained unemployed until about September 2011, 
when he returned to the work force. In June 2012, Applicant’s wife voluntarily left her 
$76,000-a-year job, which has significantly contributed to Applicant’s financial distress. 
(Tr. 14, 16) She resigned her position as a public school teacher after being given the 
choice of resigning or losing her state teaching license. (Tr. 11-12, 29) This choice was 
posed to her by the principal, who no longer wanted Applicant’s wife working in her 
school. (Tr. 13) Because she resigned, she was unable to collect unemployment 
compensation. As of June 2013, his wife continued to be unemployed, despite her 
efforts to find a new teaching position. Taken together, Applicant attributes his current 
financial problems to his period of unemployment and his wife’s lack of employment. 
 
 At issue in the SOR are 13 delinquent debts, which were noted in Applicant’s 
credit report as delinquent. Those debts, and Applicant’s comments regarding their 
current status, are as follows:  
 
1.a: Medical collection, $100. No evidence of payment. Applicant does not recall what 
type of medical service was provided for this charge. (Tr. 31) He maintains that this debt 
has been paid, but offered no evidence to that effect. (Tr. 21-22) 
 
1.b-d, 1.f, 1.h, 1.m: A collection account on an apartment lease balance from when 
Applicant was first laid-off, $1,836; a 2011 judgment based on a joint credit card 
balance, $1,853; a collection account for a credit card, $3,276; a past due amount of 
 
3 
 
 
about $22,000 with a total approximate balance of $367,000 on Applicant’s 2003 home 
loan balance, which first became late during Applicant’s separation; a charged-off 
second mortgage on their home, $120,000; and acknowledgement of a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy from 1998 for which debts were discharged in February 1999. (Answer to 
the SOR; Tr. 22-24) These admitted debts remain unpaid due to his reduction in 
household income. 
 
1.e, 1.i, 1.l: A collection account, $3,411; a collection account, $277; and a collection 
account, $558. Applicant disputes liability for these debts as currently reflected in his 
credit report and the SOR, but provided no documentary evidence of formal disputation 
with any of his creditors or any of the three major credit reporting bureaus. (Tr. 24-25) 
He later conceded that he recognized the debt at 1.e for $3,411 and acknowledged that 
it was unpaid. (Tr. 48-49) 
 
1.g: A charged-off account, $1,703. Applicant testified that the amount alleged must be 
erroneous because the limit on the credit card was $400. The limit on the card is shown 
on Ex. 3 as $500; that same credit card indicates that the card was past due on more 
than one occasion before being charged off, including at least once being over 120 days 
past due. (Tr. 25; Ex. 3 at 4, which is marked as page 8) Applicant testified that he 
brought this discrepancy to the creditor’s attention. He said he was told the increase 
reflected interest. He provided no documentation showing that his liability on the card 
was limited to the card’s credit limit for purchases. (Tr. 25-26; 51) 
 
1.j: A charged-off account, $1,870. This amount is related to property taxes owed on an 
automobile lease. There is no evidence that property taxes are owed on leased vehicles 
in Applicant’s state. Applicant was not familiar with this practice and he orally disputed 
this debt. He provided no documentary evidence, however, of such dispute or that the 
imposition of a property tax was in error. (Tr. 27-28, 52) 
 
1.k: A collection account, $92. Applicant indicated that the $92 utility debt at 1.k 
was paid, but had no documentary evidence showing it had been satisfied. (Tr. 45-46) 
He also disputes the debt, which is for a telecommunication provider, because it does 
not reflect an amount that was part of his home plan with that provider (Tr. 50) He 
provided no documentation corroborating his statement that he disputed this credit 
report entry. (Tr. 50)  
 
 
Additionally, Applicant’s wife has maintained contact with their mortgagors 
regarding the debts at 1.f and 1.h, apprising them of her lack of employment. (Tr. 38-39, 
44) Financial problems with the mortgages appear to date back to 2010, which would 
appear to have begun before Applicant was laid off in December 2010. (Tr. 72) 
Applicant is not currently able to make the required monthly payment of $2,400 on the 
mortgage. (Tr. 39-42) His wife has stressed to the mortgagor that they are maintaining 
the house in good repair. (Tr. 43)   
 
 
4 
 
 
On October 27, 2011, Applicant completed a security clearance application 
(SCA). Under Section 26, he answered “no” to questions inquiring whether, in the 
preceding seven years, he had a judgment entered against him; had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency; had any account or credit card suspended, charged 
off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; or been over 120 days delinquent on any 
debt. Applicant speaks English as a second language. (Tr. 55) He admits that, due to 
confusion, he did not answer these questions “completely and accurately.” (Tr. 53)  He 
had difficulty understanding some of the questions posed under Section 26. (Tr. 55-56) 
For example, he does not understand the term “judgment,” in terms of a legal action as 
opposed to a confiscation. (Tr. 56)  His erroneous answers are the result of a mistake, 
not intentional falsification. (Tr. 58-59)   
 
Although Applicant is currently unable to pay his mortgage payments, he is able 
to pay for his current utilities. He and his family live modestly. The couple’s leased car 
was returned to the dealer and they currently do not have a car. He is timely with his tax 
filings and obligations. (Tr. 61) He has no garnishments on his pay. He has had 
recurrent problems with debt in the past. There is no documentary evidence showing 
that Applicant or his wife timely initiated contact with their creditors either when 
Applicant was laid-off or when Applicant’s wife resigned from her teaching position. (Tr. 
71-72) Pending his wife’s return to work, Applicant is living paycheck to paycheck and 
he has no savings. (Tr. 65-66) He has never had any previous issues maintaining a 
security clearance. (Tr. 64)  He has not received financial counseling. (Tr. 64-65) Going 
forward, Applicant is not incurring any new debts, but he is unable to make notable 
progress on the debts remaining at issue or to resume mortgage payments. (Tr. 67-68) 
He has been forgoing workplace meals to help make ends meet. (Tr. 67) 
 
At work, Applicant is highly regarded as a “dependable, reliable, hard-working, 
conscientious, honest, and courteous” employee. (Ex. A) He is known to be flexible and 
dedicated to his work, where he is noted as an asset. (Ex. A) He has an impressive list 
of references, both supervisory and peer. (Ex. B)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has a 
history of financial distress, starting with a 1998 bankruptcy. He recently had had 
delinquent debts and an adverse judgment. By his own admission, Applicant lives 
paycheck to paycheck. He is clearly unable, not unwilling, to satisfy the debts at issue.  
Such facts are sufficient to raise two of the financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions:  
 
6 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
  
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has faced financial difficulty intermittently for some time. He filed for 
bankruptcy protection in 1998. His finances were strained when he helped support two 
households during his 2008 to 2010 separation, then during his period of unemployment 
from December 2010 to September 2011. They were again strained after his wife was 
given the limited option in June 2012 of resigning from her teaching job or losing her 
teaching license, which qualified her for a teaching position. Since June 2012, Applicant 
and his family have lived solely on his income, which was recently reduced by $3,000. 
Such facts establish that much of Applicant’s current financial distress is the result of 
conditions outside of his control.  
 
 Applicant provided no documentation corroborating his testimony regarding 
progress on some of his debts or documenting contact he or his wife has made with his 
creditor to keep them apprised of their financial situation.  Without such documentation, 
it cannot be concluded that Applicant behaved reasonably in his times of uncontrollable 
distress. He has not received financial counseling. He has not provided any 
documentation showing progress on any of the debts at issue. Further, he has not set 
forth a reasonable plan for addressing his debts in the near future – not because he is 
 
7 
 
 
unwilling to address his debts, but because he is simply not financially able to at this 
time. While Applicant’s testimony was highly credible, this process demands 
documentary evidence to corroborate progress claimed. Given these considerations, I 
find that none of the mitigating conditions available apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
Applicant’s answers to Section 26 of his October 2011 SCA indicated that he had 
not, in the preceding seven years, had a judgment entered against him; had bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency; had any account or credit card suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; or been over 120 days delinquent 
on any debt. If his denial was made in an attempt to deliberately falsify or mislead, the 
following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16 would be relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 16 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
For AG ¶¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omissions must be deliberate. The 
Government established that Applicant’s answers were incorrect and that Applicant, in 
his response to the SOR, acknowledged that his answers were incorrect. In his 
responses at the hearing, Applicant credibly demonstrated that he answers questions 
as directly as he can. He concedes that English is his second language and that he has 
some linguistic difficulty with technical terms such as “judgment,” and with the concept 
of state property tax on a certain types of vehicles. Applicant attributed his incorrect 
answers to mistake. He adamantly testified that he did not intend to falsify. His 
explanation is highly plausible given the circumstances, especially in the absence of 
additional evidence that he intended to lie.  
 
Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. (See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 1, 
2004)(explaining ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). In light of his 
 
8 
 
 
testimony and demeanor at the hearing, I conclude that Applicant did not intend to 
falsify his SCA Section 26 answers. AG ¶¶16(a) is not established and Personal 
Conduct concerns are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old technician earning approximately $62,000 to $65,000 a 
year, after a recent across-the-board reduction in pay of $3,000. He has an Associate’s 
Degree in electronics. Married for nearly 20 years, Applicant and his wife have a 
teenage daughter.  
 
Applicant first had financial difficulties in the 1990s, when he filed for bankruptcy 
protection under Chapter 7. A marital separation, a significant period of unemployment, 
and his wife’s loss of her job have led to significant financial distress. At issue is over 
$150,000 in debt, based on delinquent collection, charged-off, and past-due accounts, 
as well as an adverse judgment. Applicant testified that he or his wife have maintained 
contact with some of their creditors regarding their financial situation. He also testified 
that he has disputed some of the cited debts and paid others. His proffered 
documentary evidence, however, fails to corroborate these assertions. Although 
Applicant is highly credible, this process demands more substantial evidence than oral 
testimony as to progress made.  
 
It is clear that Applicant is unable, not unwilling, to address his debts presently. 
Unfortunately, he is currently living paycheck to paycheck, foregoing workplace meals to 
help meet his financial needs. It seems clear that this situation will continue until his wife 
finds work and starts contributing to the family coffers as she has in the past. While 
Applicant may no longer be acquiring new debt by generally living within his means, 
those parameters have not enabled him to resume payments on his significantly past-
due mortgage. In the interim, it can be assumed that his mortgage-related debt is 
growing larger.  
 
 
9 
 
 
In these cases, the burden is placed on an applicant to mitigate security 
concerns raised in the SOR. Here, Applicant has failed to provide adequate 
documentation tending to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns raised. 
Consequently, clearance is denied.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
