 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-06714 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), and Applicant's Response, I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate 
concerns raised under the guideline for financial considerations. Her request for access 
to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2011, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Public Trust 
Positions (SF-85P). On November 19, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In her 
Answer to the SOR, notarized on December 23, 2013, Applicant admitted six SOR 
                                                 
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(January 1987), as amended (Regulation); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
debts, and denied the remaining four. She also requested a decision without a hearing. 
(Item 4)  
 
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
prepared a presentation of the Government’s case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) dated January 17, 2014. It contained the Government’s argument and 
documents to support its preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request for a public 
trust position.2 Applicant received the FORM on January 31, 2014 and was given 30 
days to respond. She submitted a timely response (Response). The case was 
assigned to me on March 10, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 52 years old. She married in 1987 and has two adult children. 
Between 1991 and 1995, she completed all but one course for a bachelor’s degree. She 
financed her education through student loans. She has worked primarily as a computer 
programmer/analyst since 2001. She started her current employment in 2011, and 
applied for a public trust position. (Items 5, 6) 
 
Applicant had several periods of unemployment. She was unemployed for two 
months in 2007, and was supported by her husband. She was also unemployed from 
October 2009 to May 2010, but her husband was employed. During her 2012 personal 
subject interview (PSI), she stated she left her position to begin traveling in her 
recreational vehicle (RV). Following a layoff, she was again unemployed from 
December 2010 to July 2011. She received $1,300 monthly unemployment 
compensation during this period. She stated during her PSI that she did not experience 
financial difficulties during any of these three periods of unemployment.3 It appears from 
the evidence that Applicant's husband was also unemployed for a number of years; the 
extent of his unemployment is unclear, but he was employed as of October 2013, when 
Applicant completed her personal financial statement (PFS). Although Applicant stated 
in her PSI that she did not experience difficulties during her periods of unemployment, 
she stated in her Answer and her Response that her financial difficulties occurred 
because she was involuntarily laid off. She said in her Response, “[I]n the past I have 
lost my job due to out-sourcing and other reasons out of my control that resulted in 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included nine documents (Items 1 - 9) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
3 DOHA provided Applicant with the opportunity to review the report of her PSI, and correct any 
inaccuracies. She signed a statement that the report accurately reflected the information she provided 
during her PSI. (Item 6) 
 
 
3 
layoffs which caused my family hardships since I bring in the majority of income.” (Items 
5, 6)  
 
 In November 2001, after Applicant was laid off and unemployed for six months, 
she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. Her debts were successfully discharged 
in March 2002. The SOR alleges the bankruptcy, as well as nine subsequent 
delinquent debts, which total $250,832. The debts appear in her credit reports dated 
April 2012 and September 2013, and in court documents of August 2009 through 
August 2010. (Items 4, 7, 8, 9) 
 
 Five of the SOR debts relate to mortgage loans. Two of Applicant’s residences 
in State A (in City 1 and City 2) were foreclosed. (Item 6) 
 
 1.c - $9,430, home equity line of credit (HELOC), June 2005. Applicant 
sought a line of credit in order to remodel her home in City 1. She was employed, but 
her husband was not. Applicant stated in her Answer that after being laid off she was 
unable to meet the payments. The lender obtained a default judgment and foreclosure 
against Applicant in 2009. (Items 4, 7, 8; Answer [2013 credit report]) 
 
 1.f - $31,872, mortgage loan, June 2004. This mortgage loan also relates to 
Applicant's home in City 1. She provided the same information for this loan as 
described under allegation 1.c. The lender obtained a default judgment and foreclosure 
against Applicant in 2009. (Items 4, 7, 8; Answer [2013 credit report]) 
 
 1.g - $16,758, second-mortgage loan, January 2006. Applicant sought this 
loan on the home in City 1 in order to consolidate her debts. Her December 2013 credit 
report shows her last payment was in May 2009, and the creditor had charged off the 
delinquent balance as uncollectible. The record contains no evidence of payment on 
this debt. (Items 4, 6, 7, 8; Answer [2013 credit report])) 
 
 1.h - $135,429, mortgage loan, April 2008. Applicant denies this debt. After 
moving to City 2, she obtained this loan. The property was ultimately foreclosed and 
short-sold. Applicant stated in her Answer that she was told she owed nothing further. 
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) subsequently informed Applicant she owed tax on 
$1,000 related to the sale, indicating that a deficiency balance of $1,000 may have 
been forgiven. Applicant stated that she paid the tax, although she did not receive the 
$1,000 because it was “[P]aid to us but taken back in fees of some sort . . . .” However, 
Applicant provided no supporting documentation to show the IRS correspondence or 
any tax she paid. She stated in her interrogatory response that she had no relevant 
documentation. (Items 4, 6, 7, 8; Answer [2013 credit report]) 
 
 1.j - $25,346, default judgment of foreclosure. Applicant denies knowledge of 
this debt, stating that she has not been contacted about it. The Government provided 
evidence that the debt relates to the court-ordered default judgment on Applicant's 
2004 mortgage loan (allegation 1.f) and 2005 HELOC (allegation 1.c) on the home in 
 
 
4 
City 1. Applicant accepted notice of the suit in September 2009. The court issued a 
decree for foreclosure and sale in October 2009. As this allegation duplicates the debts 
at SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.f, I find for the Applicant on this allegation.4 (Item 9) 
 
 Applicant's SOR alleges the following additional debts. 
 
 1.b - $5,067, federal credit union. UNRESOLVED. Applicant opened this 
account in January 2008, and it became delinquent in June 2009. She stated in her 
Answer that at the time she opened it, she was supporting five people, including two 
children in college and her father-in-law, and she used the funds to help pay bills. 
There is no record evidence Applicant has established a payment plan or made recent 
payments on this account. (Items 4, 7) 
 
 1.d - $3,300, credit card. UNRESOLVED. Applicant made timely payments 
until she was laid off in 2009. She stated in her Answer that she stopped using credit 
cards at that time. In her 2011 public trust application, she stated, “Once I get a job I 
will work on getting this paid.” She provided no documentation showing a payment plan 
or recent payments on the account. (Items 4, 5) 
 
 1.e - $4,906, collection account. UNRESOLVED. Applicant denies this 
account. It appears in her June and December 2013 credit reports. The December 
2013 credit report lists the original creditor, and shows the account was opened in 
2007. The last payment was made in 2009, and the creditor charged off the balance as 
uncollectible. The creditor that appears in the SOR is the collection agency to which 
the original creditor sold the debt. Applicant stated in her Answer that when she 
contacted the collection agency, the company did not have an account in her name. 
She believes it is not her account because she has not opened credit accounts since 
2009; however, the account was opened in 2007. She did not provide documentation 
showing her contact with the creditor, and her credit report does not indicate that she 
formally disputed the account. (Items 4, 7, 8; Answer [2013 credit report]) 
 
 1.i - $18,641, student loan. RESOLVED. Applicant denies this debt, noting that 
her 2013 credit report shows it was paid in full in 2012 under the name of a different 
creditor. The Government, in the FORM, contends that the two accounts are not the 
same, as they have two different account numbers. The 2012 credit report shows the 
account status as ”paid as agreed,” until it was transferred to another company in 
2003. It shows that the account went to collections in 2010, but the balance was 
subsequently paid through insurance, and the account was closed with a zero balance. 
(Item 7) The 2013 credit report states, “A claim has been filed with the Government, 
balance paid or being paid by insurance company.” I find that the account may have 
two different numbers because the two creditors assigned it different numbers. I also 
                                                 
4 When the same information is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, the duplicative 
allegation should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) at 3. 
 
 
5 
conclude that the zero balance shown on the 2012 and 2013 credit reports constitute 
sufficient evidence to show the debt is paid or resolved. (Items 4, 6, 7, 8) 
 
 Applicant’s October 2013 PFS shows she earns a net monthly income of $2,125. 
With her spouse’s income of $1,404, the family has a net monthly income of $3,530. 
She listed monthly expenses of $2,679, leaving her with a monthly net remainder (MNR) 
of $851.5 She listed assets of $15,000 (savings, car, and $12,000 recreational vehicle 
[RV]). Her PFS did not show payments on any debts, including those listed in the SOR. 
(Item 6) 
 
 In her Answer and her Response to the FORM, Applicant provided the following 
information about her financial and personal history. In 2009, she and her husband 
moved into their RV. Because of their financial difficulties, they also stopped using 
credit cards, and have purchased only items for which they have cash available. 
Applicant stated, “This has worked well for us.” In 2012, they rented an apartment. As 
of December 2013, she was planning to move back into the RV in February 2014 to cut 
living expenses and save for retirement.6 They pay their rent and household expenses 
timely, and pay $1,500 to $2,000 into savings for retirement. Her husband served in the 
U.S. Marines for six years. She has had access to customers’ personal information for 
many years, without incident. Applicant also stated, “I do not believe I owe anyone any 
money that I am not paying. I do not receive any mail, email or phone calls regarding 
any debt with anyone.” (Item 4; Response) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each decision regarding a public trust position must be a fair, commonsense 
determination based on all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).7 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or 
mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them because they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of 
access to sensitive information. In this case, the pleadings and the information 
presented by the parties require consideration of the adjudicative factors addressed 
under Guideline F.  
 
 
                                                 
5 Applicant listed her monthly net income as $5,560, resulting in a monthly net remainder of $2,881. 
However, it appears Applicant miscalculated her income by adding her deductions instead of subtracting 
them. (Item 6) 
 
6 Applicant’s file shows she was living in an apartment as of January 31, 2014. (Response) 
7 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
6 
 A trustworthiness decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether it 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security8 for an applicant to either 
receive or continue to have access to sensitive information. The Government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the decision to deny 
or revoke access to sensitive information for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, 
it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a sensitive position, an applicant bears a heavy burden 
of persuasion.9 A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interest as her 
or his own. The standard of “clearly consistent with the interests of national security” 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.10 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to financial 
considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The concern under Guideline F is broader than the possibility that an applicant 
might knowingly compromise sensitive information in order to obtain money. It 
encompasses concerns about an individual’s reliability, judgment, and other qualities 
essential to protecting sensitive information. One who is financially irresponsible might 
also be irresponsible, negligent, or unconcerned in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.11  
 
 
                                                 
8 See DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, ¶ C2.1.1 and ¶ C6.1.1. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
10 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
11 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
7 
 The SOR lists eight delinquent debts, totaling approximately $250,832. As I find 
for the Applicant on two allegations, totaling $43,987, Applicant is responsible for six 
delinquent debts totaling $206,845. She provided no documentation showing she has 
paid or established payment plans for these debts. She has failed to establish a record 
of meeting her financial obligations. The following disqualifying conditions apply under 
AG ¶19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The financial considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, 
especially the following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant accrued numerous debts that have been delinquent for several years. 
The delinquencies are recent because they are still unpaid. Applicant's lack of 
substantial efforts to pay these debts casts doubt on her judgment and reliability. AG ¶ 
20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies where an individual experiences events over which she had 
no control, and which affected her finances. Here, Applicant receives some mitigation 
 
 
8 
because she stated that her financial problems stemmed from three periods of 
unemployment between 2007 and 2011. However, the mitigation is limited because 
Applicant stated in her PSI that the unemployment did not affect her finances. In 
addition, an applicant must act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant stated 
she contacted one creditor, but she provided no supporting documentation. The record 
contains no evidence she contacted other creditors, or made efforts to establish 
payment plans or otherwise resolve the debts. She did not act responsibly toward the 
debts listed in the SOR, and receives only limited mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 Applicant has not brought her delinquent debts under control. Her current debt 
load is more than $200,000. She has made no payments, and has no payment plans in 
place. Despite the evidence in her credit reports that she owes substantial debts, she 
appears unwilling to accept that they are her obligations. She has not shown a good-
faith effort or a track record of meeting her obligations. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not 
apply. She disputes that she owes the delinquency alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. However, her 
rationale that it was opened in 2010, after she stopped using credit, is not supported by 
her credit reports, which show it was opened in 2007. She did not provide 
documentation showing her contact with the creditor, and her credit report does not 
show she lodged a formal dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. an administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant’s history includes positive factors, such as her education, her strength 
of character in being the sole support of her family her husband’s unemployment, and 
her work experience. Applicant has taken positive financial steps by saving for 
 
 
9 
retirement, living in her RV to cut expenses, and using cash rather than credit for 
purchases. There is no evidence that Applicant fails to timely pay her living expenses 
such as rent, utilities, or other monthly bills. Her debts are not related to gambling, or 
abuse of alcohol or drugs. Applicant lives within her means. 
 
 However, the negative factors are more substantial. The process of applying for 
a public trust position began in 2011, almost three years ago, but Applicant has not 
taken steps to pay her delinquent debts, set up payment plans, or to mount a serious 
investigation of any debts that she believes are not her legitimate responsibility. 
Applicant has had sufficient funds available to start the process of resolving her debts, 
because her PFS shows a monthly net remainder of more than $800. However, it may 
be that Applicant believes she is no longer responsible for any debt that has been 
“charged off.” As Applicant chose to have her case decided based on the written 
record, rather than through a personal appearance, I cannot determine the basis for 
her belief that she is not responsible for her delinquent debts.  
 
 Finally, Applicant's credibility is undermined because she gave conflicting 
information about the effect of her unemployment on her financial situation—reporting 
in her PSI that she was unaffected by the unemployment, but stating in her Answer and 
Response that her financial difficulties stemmed from her periods of unemployment.  
 
 Doubts remain about Applicant's reliability and judgment based on her failure to 
take substantial steps to meet her financial obligations. Overall, the evidence fails to 
satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns 
raised by the financial considerations guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i, 1.j  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
sensitive information. Applicant’s request for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
