 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-04008 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established his continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
His recent financial trouble is directly attributable to matters beyond his control and he 
acted responsibly in resolving the debts resulting from such outside matters. His long 
track record of fiscal responsibility and security conscientiousness, as well as his good-
faith efforts to resolve his debts, mitigate the security concerns arising from his recent 
financial trouble. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 26, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with 
DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). On December 22, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing to establish his continued eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
On January 10, 2014, I was assigned Applicant’s case. After coordinating with 
the parties, I scheduled the hearing for February 11, 2014. At hearing, Department 
Counsel offered exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 5, which were admitted into evidence without 
 
2 
 
 
objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (Ax.) A – I, which were also admitted 
without objection.1 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on February 19, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 43, is divorced and has two children. He was born and raised in a 
tough, inner city neighborhood. He shared a small apartment with his parents and 
siblings. His parents emphasized education as a means and a way for Applicant and his 
siblings to overcome their “humble beginnings.” Applicant worked hard in school and 
was accepted into a prestigious public high school. After graduating high school, he 
went onto college where he met his future wife. Applicant’s studies were derailed when 
his wife got pregnant. He was unable to manage his coursework and work two full-time 
jobs, and dropped out of college after his sophomore year.  
 
 Applicant, looking to serve his country and provide a better life for his young 
family, enlisted in the U.S. military in 1990. He served on active duty until 1996, when a 
service-connected injury forced him to separate from the military. His military service 
included a deployment overseas in support of a U.N.-backed peace keeping operation 
in a highly dangerous and volatile region of Africa. He was promoted below the zone on 
three separate occasions, and was honorably discharged in the grade of E-5.  
 
Applicant secured employment as a federal contractor after leaving the military. 
He subsequently underwent a background investigation and was granted a security 
clearance. He has continuously worked as a federal contractor with access to classified 
information since 1996. He has undergone periodic background reinvestigations and 
been granted access to classified information, to include access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI). He has never compromised or mishandled sensitive 
and classified information.2  
 
 Applicant purchased a townhouse, his family’s first home, in 1998. He paid the 
mortgage without issue and, in 2005, sold the townhouse in order to purchase a single-
family home. He purchased the single-family home for approximately $470,000. He 
purchased the new home with a $130,000 down payment and financed the rest of the 
purchase price through a conventional 30-year mortgage loan. He secured a second 
mortgage loan to make needed repairs and improvements to the home.  
 
In 2007, Applicant’s 17 year marriage fell apart and his wife moved out of the 
home. He voluntarily took on the obligation of paying the expenses for their family 
home, his wife’s new residence, and the support of their two children. He dipped into his 
                                                          
1 Ax. H is a press release regarding an executive memorandum prohibiting executive agencies from 
taking adverse employment action against employees and prospective employees facing financial 
difficulty through no fault of their own. The memorandum specifically excludes security clearance 
determinations from its coverage. After considering the exhibit and the fact that this case involves a 
security clearance determination for a federal contractor, I find that it is irrelevant and have afforded it no 
weight in reaching my ultimate conclusion.  
  
2 Tr. at 18-23, 67-69; Gx. 1. 
 
3 
 
 
savings and retirement accounts to pay the mortgage and his other expenses. He 
eventually decided to rent his home to offset his increased cost. He moved into the 
basement and secured a tenant for the upper floors. After a few months, the tenant 
stopped paying the rent and left the home without notice. Applicant’s former tenant left 
almost all their personal property in the home. Several months later, Applicant, who had 
never been a landlord before and was looking to put his house on the market, disposed 
of his former tenant’s personal property by donating it to charity. He was later found 
liable for the purported value of the property and a judgment in the amount of $8,000 
was issued again him. Although Applicant disagreed with the judgment, he located his 
former tenant and submitted documentation showing he satisfied the judgment.3 This 
judgment is alleged in ¶ 1.a of the SOR. 
 
In 2008, Applicant and his wife divorced. They agreed to sell their former marital 
home and split the proceeds. Applicant tried to sell the property, but the collapse of the 
local housing market left him unable to secure a buyer willing to pay the asking price 
that his former wife was demanding to release her claim to the property. Applicant 
secured a second job to pay the mortgage and his other expenses, but the high cost of 
his divorce and other increased expenses put a significant strain on his finances.  
 
 In 2009, Applicant hired an attorney to negotiate with his lenders to resolve his 
mortgages. He negotiated a settlement for the second mortgage and satisfied the loan. 
His efforts to negotiate with the lender holding the first mortgage were frustrated by his 
former wife’s demand to sell their former home at a price point well beyond what the 
market would bear at the time.  
 
In 2010, Applicant, on the advice of his counsel, stopped paying his first 
mortgage to qualify for a loan modification program for distressed homeowners. 
However, Applicant’s efforts to modify the loan continued to be frustrated by his former 
wife’s lack of cooperation.  
 
In 2011, Applicant’s former wife agreed to give him power of attorney to resolve 
the issues involving their former home in return for $20,000 to be paid in $750 monthly 
installments. Applicant agreed and paid per the agreement. He was then able to freely 
negotiate with the lender. He sent the lender $3,500 to pay the past-due balance on the 
mortgage and as a good-faith gesture toward resolution of the mortgage debt.  
 
In December 2012, while Applicant was still negotiating with the bank to resolve 
his mortgage debt, the bank’s foreclosure department proceeded with the foreclosure. 
Six months later, Applicant accepted the bank’s cash offer for the keys to his former 
home. He left the home in good condition and financially assisted his daughter to move 
into her own apartment. 
 
Applicant submitted a 1099-A, showing a balance due of about $335,000 for the 
property. His former lender has not made any demands for payment of this purported 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 26-45; Ax. B, Ax. C (satisfaction of judgment). 
 
 
4 
 
 
debt. The bank recently listed the property for sale for approximately $425,000, or about 
$100,000 more than he supposedly owes on the property. Due to a rebound in the local 
housing market, the listed sales price is far below market value and the property is 
expected to sell quickly. Applicant’s real estate counsel submitted a document stating 
that once the property is sold, he anticipates that Applicant will not owe anything for his 
former home.4 The mortgage debt and foreclosure are alleged in ¶ 1.c of the SOR. 
 
 Applicant’s finances are currently stable. He submitted documentation showing 
that he satisfied a relatively minor cable bill listed in ¶ 1.b of the SOR.5 He has not 
incurred any other delinquent debts. He financially assists his children voluntarily. Over 
the past several months, he has paid about $15,000 for his college-age son’s 
educational and other expenses. After paying his recurring monthly expenses, Applicant 
has approximately $2,000 a month in disposable income that he either saves or uses to 
pay unexpected expenses. He does not owe a balance on his credit cards and pays his 
recurring monthly bills on time. He owns two used, late model cars that are fully paid for 
and does not plan to upgrade or trade them in for a newer model car because both cars 
run well and his children frequently borrow them. He has approximately $90,000 in 
savings to satisfy any potential deficiency balanced owed on his former home.6 
 
 Applicant submitted character letters from current and former co-workers, as well 
as life-long friends. All write in the strongest terms possible that Applicant is loyal, 
reliable, and trustworthy. His current employer selected him to lead a project, which 
required Applicant to safeguard and maintain the company’s most sensitive information. 
He often worked at night and without supervision to complete the project. He was 
selected as the project lead because of his employer’s trust in his security 
conscientiousness and reliability. Applicant successfully completed the project and is 
currently pursuing his undergraduate degree while working full time.7 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 35-46, 52-56, 62-63; Gx. 1 at 37-38, Gx. 5; Ax. A, E, I.  
 
5 Tr. at 45-46, Ax. D. 
 
6 Tr. at 52-70, Gx. 5. 
 
7 Tr. at 67-68; Ax. F – G. 
 
 
5 
 
 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant also bears the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to establish his or her eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.8  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.9 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
8 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”). 
 
9 See generally, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations 
require administrative judges to make predictive judgments).  
 
 
6 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s recent financial trouble raises this concern and establishes the 
following disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions were raised by the evidence:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant established the above listed mitigating conditions. His recent financial 
trouble is directly attributable to the dissolution of his 17-year marriage and the housing 
market collapse. He did not walk away from his financial obligations or idly standby as 
his finances crumbled. Instead, he secured a part-time job, used his savings, and tried 
renting his home to pay the expenses associated with maintaining two households. He 
submitted documentary proof of working with his lender to resolve his mortgages. He 
satisfied the second mortgage before the SOR was issued and submitted 
documentation of having paid the two non-mortgage related SOR debts. In short, he 
acted responsibly in resolving the debts arising from the conditions outside of his control 
and in a manner that leaves me with complete confidence that he will continue to 
discharge his security obligations in a responsible fashion. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s potential mortgage-related liability appears, at first blush, to raise a 
security concern. However, this potential debt was not a result of frivolous or reckless 
spending and does not leave Applicant vulnerable to exploitation. Applicant initially 
attempted to resolve the mortgage by negotiating with the lender in good faith, but his 
efforts were frustrated by his former wife’s intransigence and the housing market 
collapse that left him unable to sell or refinance his former home. After the foreclosure, 
he voluntarily left the home in good condition for its eventual sale by his lender. The 
property is now expected to sell for at least $100,000 more than the balance Applicant 
purportedly owes and, even if it does not, he has the ability and willingness to satisfy 
any potential deficiency balance. Based on Applicant’s past track record of debt 
repayment,10 current strong financial position, and nearly 20-year history of properly 
safeguarding and handling classified information, I am soundly convinced that he will 
resolve this potential debt and continue to responsibly manage his finances.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).11 I hereby incorporate my above comments and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors. From an early age, Applicant 
demonstrated the judgment and exhibited the pertinent character traits the Government 
seeks in those it entrusts with this nation’s secrets.12 He overcame substantial obstacles 
placed in his path through hard work. When his girlfriend got pregnant, they married and 
he worked two full-time jobs to support his young family. He then enlisted in the U.S. 
military to provide for his family and serve his country. He honorably served on active 
duty for six years, including a deployment to a hostile, combat zone. After separating 
from the military due to a service-connected injury, he has continued to serve the nation 
as a contractor for nearly 20 years. His recent financial trouble does not negate this 
favorable record evidence regarding his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 For instance, Applicant paid the mortgage on his first home for seven years without issue, satisfied the 
second mortgage before the SOR was issued, and paid the two other SOR debts.  
 
11 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 13-00311 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 24, 2014) (“In a Guideline F case, a Judge must evaluate 
an applicant’s financial condition for what it may reveal about the applicant’s self-control, judgment, and 
other pertinent qualities.”). 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
