 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02082 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Guideline B (foreign influence) security concerns, but 
failed to mitigate the Guideline C (foreign preference) security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines B and C. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
On September 9, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and indicated that he did 
not wish to have a hearing. On September 23, 2013, the then-assigned Department 
 
2 
 
Counsel submitted a request for a hearing. The case was assigned to me on December 
6, 2013.  
 
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) first issued a notice of 
hearing in this case on December 20, 2013, scheduling the hearing for January 21, 
2014. The hearing was postponed due to a shutdown of the Federal Government in the 
Washington DC metropolitan area on that date because of a snow storm. After 
coordinating with Applicant, a second notice of hearing was issued on January 23, 
2014, and the hearing convened as scheduled on February 3, 2014. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 that were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered no exhibits. The record was held open until February 17, 
2014, for Applicant to submit additional information. His email confirming that he did not 
submit any post-hearing documents is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 12, 2014.   
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old payroll consultant who works for a defense contractor. 
He has been working in that capacity since April 2006. After transferring some college 
credits from a school in France, he obtained a bachelor’s degree from a university in the 
United States in December 2002. He has never been married and has no children. In 
the past, he held a security clearance without incident.1 
 
The SOR alleged, under Guideline B, that Applicant’s parents, sister, and brother 
are citizens and residents of France and that he maintained bank accounts in France 
totaling approximately $18,000. Under Guideline C, the SOR alleged that Applicant 
currently held a French passport that was issued in March 2010 and will expire in March 
2020 and that, although a U.S. citizen by birth, he exercised his French citizenship to 
obtain medical benefits in France. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each 
allegation. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.2  
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and France. He is a U.S. citizen by 
birth and acquired his French citizenship through his parents. He lived in France from 
1990 to 1995 and from 1997 to 2000. He has also lived in Gabon and Norway. At the 
hearing, he stated that he has always had a French passport and has used it as a 
matter of convenience to expedite clearance through European immigration and 
customs. He most recently renewed his French passport in March 2010, and it will not 
expire until March 2020.3 
 
Applicant testified that he was aware that possession of a foreign passport 
created a security concern, but was unaware of the possible option of surrendering the 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 26-29; GE 1. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 19-25, 36-41; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 
foreign passport to a facility security officer. After a discussion of this issue, he indicated 
that he would be willing to surrender his foreign passport if he could retrieve it to travel 
to Europe. The record of the proceeding was left open for two weeks following the 
hearing to provide him an opportunity to determine what he wanted to do regarding his 
foreign passport. As noted above, he submitted no post-hearing matters.4  
 
Applicant maintains a checking and savings account in France. Both accounts 
total about $16,000. He indicated that these accounts are used when he vacations in 
Europe and are not important to his overall financial position. He also has exercised his 
French citizenship by receiving medical care in France. He obtained medical benefits 
while he was a student there. He has not obtained any medical benefits from France in 
over a decade. He is registered to vote in France, but has never voted there.5 
 
Since about 2001, Applicant has primarily resided in the United States and 
indicated that he does not “plan on going anywhere.” He stated that he considers 
himself a U.S. citizen, but also declared that he “would not renounce [his] French 
citizenship for a job.”6 
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, and brother are citizens of France. They reside in 
Paris. Applicant’s father is a retired engineer who worked for a private oil company. His 
mother was a homemaker. His brother owes a small mobile media company. His sister 
is an administrative assistant at a private airline. He communicates with his parents 
every couple of days, with his sister about twice a week, and with his brother once or 
twice a month. He traveled to France or French territories in 2003-2004, 2006-2007, 
2009, and 2013. He indicated that he did not have any other connections in France.7 
 
Although no request was made concerning the administrative notice of facts 
about France, the following facts about that country were obtained from a U.S. 
Department of State website.8  The United States and France are longstanding allies. 
Relations between the United States and France are active and friendly. The two 
countries share common values and have parallel policies on most political, economic, 
and security issues. Differences are discussed frankly and have not generally been 
allowed to impair the pattern of close cooperation that characterizes relations between 
the two countries. 
The U.S. and France work closely on many issues, most notably in combating 
terrorism, efforts to stem the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and on 
                                                          
4 Tr. 21-25, 33-34; GE 1, 2; HE 1. 
5 Tr. 25-26, 29-32; GE 1, 2. 
6 Tr. 19-23, 33-34; GE 1, 2. 
7 Tr. 32-36; GE 1.   
8 See http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3842.htm 
 
4 
 
regional problems, including in Africa, the Middle East, the Balkans, and Central Asia. 
France is a member of the European Union and is the United States’ third-largest 
trading partner in Europe (after Germany and the U.K.). Trade and investment between 
the United States and France are strong. On average, over $1 billion in commercial 
transactions, including sales of U.S. and French foreign affiliates, take place every day. 
U.S. exports to France include industrial chemicals, aircraft and engines, electronic 
components, telecommunications, computer software, computers and peripherals, 
analytical and scientific instrumentation, medical instruments and supplies, and 
broadcasting equipment. The United States is the top destination for French investment 
and the United States is the largest foreign investor in France. The United States and 
France have a bilateral convention on investment and a bilateral tax treaty addressing, 
among other things, double taxation and tax evasion. 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three are potentially applicable here: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s immediate family members are citizens and residents of France. 
Understandably, he maintains close contact with them. He resided in France for eight 
years in the 1990s, maintains bank accounts there, and travels there frequently.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).   
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. France and the 
United States first became allies in the American Revolution. It is very unlikely that 
France would put Applicant in a position where he would be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and his family members living in France. With its strong 
human rights record, and its friendly political and military relationship with the United 
States, it is not conceivable that France would coercively target any French citizen or 
dual citizen living in the United States in an attempt to gather valuable information from 
the United States.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk of greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a 
foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Additionally, the Government’s burden of “substantial evidence” is very low. The 
Government produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his family living in 
France, his relationship with them, and his French bank accounts to raise the issue of 
potential foreign influence. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Four are potentially applicable in this case. 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
 
7 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant’s contacts and interests in France are not minimal, infrequent, or 
casual. On the contrary, his close family ties there are significant. AG ¶ 8(c) does not 
apply. 
 
No evidence was presented that Applicant’s family members living in France are 
politically active or are affiliated with the French Government. There is no evidence that 
terrorists or the French Government have approached or threatened Applicant or his 
family in France because of his work in the United States. There is no evidence that his 
family living in France currently engages in activities which would bring significant 
attention to them or that they or other French elements are even aware that Applicant 
works as a consultant for a government contractor or might have access in the future to 
classified information. As such, it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the U.S. AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
 
Applicant’s financial holding in France, while not negligible, are unlikely to create 
a conflict of interest or be used as a means to exploit or pressure him. He is a U.S. 
citizen by birth. He has resided in the United States for most of the past 13 years. He 
graduated from college in the United States and has been employed primarily in the 
United States. He considers himself a U.S. citizen and intends to reside in the United 
States permanently. However, he is not inclined to renounce his French citizenship. AG 
¶ 8(f) applies and ¶ 8(b) partially applies.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference is as follows:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; (4) residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; (5) using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country; (6) 
seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; (7) voting in a foreign 
election; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen.  
 
 Applicant obtained a French passport in 2010 that will not expire until 2020. He 
has used that passport to travel to France and other European countries. While residing 
in France, he also obtained medical benefits from France. AG ¶¶ 10(a) and 10(b) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security 
concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. At the hearing, Applicant was advised 
that the security concern arising from an individual’s possession of a foreign passport 
could be mitigated under AG ¶ 11(e). Nonetheless, Applicant provided no proof that he 
 
9 
 
destroyed or surrendered his foreign passport to an appropriate security official. His 
possession of a valid foreign passport remains a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
By all accounts, Applicant appears to be a hardworking, law-abiding, responsible 
U.S. citizen. Nonetheless, he has failed to mitigate the security concern arising from his 
possession of a valid foreign passport.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Considering all the 
evidence, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the foreign 
influence security guideline, but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
foreign preference guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
