 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-02060 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated August 22, 2013, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a September 25, 2013, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility 
for nine of the 21 allegations referenced in the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 12, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 13, 2013, setting the hearing for December 10, 2013. Due to inclement 
weather, the hearing was rescheduled for January 14, 2014.  
 
2 
 
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government moved to amend the 
SOR by adding subparagraph 1.v and subparagraph 1.w to the SOR as additional 
allegations. Applicant admitted the new allegation and the Government’s motion was 
granted without objection. The Government then offered Exhibits (GX) 1-5 and one 
Demonstrative Exhibit (DE). They also were accepted without objection. Applicant 
offered testimony and Exhibits (AX) A-F. He was given until February 4, 2014, to submit 
any additional materials. The transcript of the proceeding was received on January 22, 
2014. On February 5, 2014, Department Counsel forwarded four packets of 
supplemental material from Applicant, which were accepted into the record without 
objection as Exs. G-J.  The record was then closed.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old network security analyst who has worked for his 
current employer for about one year. He served in the National Guard from 2000 to 
2006, when he was honorably discharged. Applicant has an associate’s degree and 
multiple certifications in information technology (IT). He is single and has no children.  
 
 Starting in the late 2000s, Applicant began experiencing gastrointestinal 
problems. Those problems worsened in 2009. By 2010, his symptoms became severe 
and he spent months actively seeking medical attention, during which time he lost 40 
pounds and was unable to work for several months. Applicant lacked medical insurance 
at the time. He was eventually diagnosed as suffering from a severe case of Crohn’s 
Disease. His condition improved enough that he was able to return to work for a period 
of time. The illness worsened in 2011, however, and he was unable to work from about 
May 2011 to October 2011. During this last bout of incapacity, he received “a small 
amount of unemployment [compensation],” lived frugally, stayed with his mother, 
completed some IT certifications, and aggressively sought treatment for his condition by 
“going through different medications and seeing what works.” (Tr. 31) Although he was 
still ill, he was able to begin his current job about 11 months ago, where he was 
provided with health insurance. (Tr. 32-33) His symptoms are now under control and he 
has had no significant difficulty resuming a regular work schedule. 
 
 A significant number of the 23 financially-related allegations noted in the SOR 
are related to medical services or debts incurred while Applicant was medically impaired 
and unemployed. The most notable exception is the debt set forth at 1.g. The debts at 
issue are: 
 
1.a – 1.c - Medical - $576, $2,058, $373. Paid.  Tr. 34-36. 
 
1.d – Utility - $86. Paid. Tr. 36; Answer to the SOR at 11. 
 
1.e – 1.f - Medical/Hospital - $10,416, $11,084. Completing settlement negotiations. 
These debts were for emergency room visits in 2010, before Applicant was diagnosed 
with Crohn’s Disease and while he lacked health insurance. He tried to negotiate with 
the collection agency in 2011, but was told the hospital did not negotiate balances. Tr. 
 
3 
 
 
40. Applicant persisted. When approached, the hospital was open to his attempts to 
work with it directly. Tr. 40-41. Since returning to work full time, he has been actively 
engaged in negotiating a settlement with this health provider. Tr. 38-39, 42; AX B. He is 
waiting for the hospital to review its charges and his materials. In the interim, he has 
been addressing his smaller debts. Tr. 39-40. After the hearing, Applicant showed that 
he is currently completing forms from the hospital to facilitate a payoff of the debts. Ex. 
H. 
 
1.g – Apartment lease balance - $5,672. Unpaid. In about 2008, unbeknownst to 
Applicant, a roommate ceased paying her portion of their rent. Shortly thereafter, 
Applicant notified the apartment complex that he was moving, still unaware of his 
roommate’s financial issues. Shortly after he moved, with the understanding that his 
roommate would continue in the rental unit for the duration of their lease, he discovered 
his roommate had abandoned the apartment. He approached her to honor at least half 
the debt thus incurred for the balance owed on the lease, but to no avail. Tr. 47-48; Ex. 
C. The collection agent will not negotiate with Applicant or divide the balance between 
the two former roommates. At present, the full balance is reflected on both their credit 
reports. Applicant has intentionally dropped this debt to the bottom of his priorities 
because he does not want to “benefit her credit report, when I have other stuff that I can 
lean towards (satisfying) as far as like the two huge medical accounts (noted at 1.e-1.f).” 
Tr. 48.  
 
1.h – Telecommunication - $571. Paid. Tr. 50; Answer to the SOR at 21. 
 
1.i – Military overpayment - $334. Paid. Tr. 50-51; AX A at 3. 
 
1.j – Telecommunication - $638. Successfully disputed. Applicant denied ever having 
subscribed to the service at issue and disputed the matter with the credit reporting 
agencies. It was removed from his credit report in less than seven years. (Tr.52-54) 
 
1.k – Collection - $711. Successfully disputed. This 2011 collection effort was disputed 
by Applicant and has since been removed from Applicant’s credit report. Tr. 55. 
 
1.l – College bookstore account - $423. Paid. This account no longer appears on 
Applicant’s credit report. He provided evidence of payment after the hearing. AX I. 
 
1.m – Collection - $285. Paid. Applicant has consistently represented that this debt was 
repaid over a year ago. It is no longer on his credit report. Tr. 57-58. 
 
1.n, 1.p - Medical - $478, $159. Paid. These debts have been addressed and no longer 
appear on Applicant’s credit report. Tr. 58-59. 
 
1.o – Insurance - $136. Paid. Tr. 59. 
1.q – Tax Year (TY) 2006 balance - $1,419.75. Revised as 1.v for $1,589. 
 
 
4 
 
 
1.r -1.w – Federal and state tax issues. Late filings submitted/balances in repayment. 
Applicant failed to timely file federal tax returns for TY 2007 through 2009, and state tax 
returns for TY 2007 through 2011. They have since been filed. Tr. 59-60. The taxes 
went unfiled because he lacked sufficient funds to address his tax debts while 
underemployed as an independent contractor. Applicant owes the IRS $1,589 for TY 
2006, $3,047 for TY 2007, and $1,685 for TY 2010. In sum for TY 2006 through 2010, 
Applicant owes the IRS about $10,000. Tr. 61-62. At least half of that sum is for fees. 
Applicant is currently working with the IRS to reduce the sum owed or waive the fees. 
Tr. 62. He is in a repayment plan with the IRS and presented evidence of four timely 
monthly payments. Tr. 62-63; AX D, AX G. Payments currently consist of $200 a month, 
pending calculation of the adjusted total owed. He is similarly working with his state to 
resolve his state tax issues. State tax returns for TY 2007 through 2011 all have been 
filed. He is awaiting a final calculation on any sum owed to the state. At present, it 
appears his outstanding balance is $436 from TY 2006. Tr. 66-67; SOR at 1.t. 
 
 As noted, Applicant’s plan has been to satisfy his smaller debts while awaiting 
progress on his negotiations with the hospital for his larger medical bills. He has 
adhered to that plan successfully. The vast majority of the debts are related to his 
illness and two periods of unemployment. He maintained contact with many of his 
creditors during his periods of physical and financial distress, and has since made 
contact with the creditors involved in all his undisputed debts.  
 
Applicant’s disputed debts have been removed from his credit report. He has 
made notable progress on his other debts since returning to work full-time. He currently 
lives within his means. His tax repayment plans are reasonable. He has sufficient cash 
reserves to make payments toward any remaining tax balances owed and the final 
balances deemed owed for hospitalizations. He maintains a budget and has a net 
monthly remainder of about $750. He has been regularly applying any such remainders 
toward his remaining debts. Applicant consciously avoided declaring bankruptcy in 
order to honor his debts. His credit score has recently risen by about 140 points due to 
his efforts to address his delinquent debts and repair his credit. Tr. 75 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
delinquent debts and notable tax issues, including failure to timely file tax returns. This 
is sufficient to invoke two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,  
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations, and 
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.    
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 With the exception of the apartment-related obligation noted at SOR § 1.g, the 
non-tax debts at issue are directly related to either Applicant’s illness or his periods of 
unemployment caused by that illness. Throughout his battle with Crohn’s Disease, he 
kept abreast of his financial situation, lived frugally, and stayed with his mother. During 
his periods of illness and financial distress, he worked with a number of his creditors 
and successfully disputed some erroneous entries on his credit report. Since returning 
to full health and to his work last year, he has systematically started paying off his 
delinquent debts to the point where he has satisfied all 15 of the non-tax obligations at 
issue, except for the two largest debts (1.e and 1.f), regarding which he is currently in 
settlement negotiations, and the apartment-related debt (1.g). He has shown that he 
has the commitment and financial resources to continue addressing his remaining 
delinquent debts. As for his tax issues, all his needed tax filings have been made, and 
he is working with both his state and the IRS to resolve any outstanding balances. 
Consequently, I find that mitigating conditions AG ¶ 20(c)-(d) apply.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant emphasis or additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old network security analyst who has worked for his 
current employer for nearly one year. He served in the National Guard from 2000 to 
2006, earned an associate’s degree and multiple certifications in IT, and is single. In the 
late 2000s, he was plagued by severe gastrointestinal problems which went 
undiagnosed for a protracted period of time, adversely impacting his ability to work. By 
the time he was diagnosed with Crohn’s Disease, he had missed several months of 
work in 2010 and incurred numerous medical bills while lacking health insurance. He 
again missed months of work when his condition flared up for about half of 2011. During 
this time, and given his limited income, he worked as best he could with his creditors. 
After appropriate treatment, he was able to return to work full-time about a year ago.  
 
Since that time, Applicant has diligently addressed his delinquent debts by 
paying off his smaller debts, while negotiating for settlement on his two largest debts, 
which were related to his hospital care while he was uninsured. He has filed tax returns 
for the past tax years for which he previously neglected to file due to lack of income or 
savings. He is currently working with both his state and the IRS to resolve his tax issues 
and to determine what, if any, financial obligations are yet owed.  
 
This process does not demand that an Applicant satisfy all debts at issue. It only 
requires that an Applicant develop a reasonable plan for addressing his debts and 
related issues, and provide evidence that the plan has been successfully implemented. 
Here, Applicant has met this standard by articulating his plan, showing how it has been 
implemented, demonstrating significant progress on his debts, and detailing his candid 
workings with both state and federal tax authorities. He has also showed that he has the 
financial resources, personal commitment, and renewed health to satisfy any additional 
balances determined to be owed. Applicant has mitigated financial considerations 
security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
      
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.u:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
