 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-02044 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. DOHA acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 14, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 11, 2013. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 20, 2013, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 30, 2014. 
 
2 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted 
into the record without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. She submitted AE E, which was admitted into the record without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 7, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e and 
1.g – 1.q. She neither admitted nor denied ¶ 1.f, which will be viewed as a denial. The 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a government contractor. She works as a 
health care finder and has held that position since 2011. She has a high school diploma 
and one year of college. She has one child with her fiancé and he has one child who 
lives with them. She has no military background.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts for a total of about $60,000, and 
Applicant’s failure to file federal tax returns for the years 2007 through 2012. The debts 
were listed in credit reports from November 2011, May 2013, and August 2013.2  
 
 Applicant testified that her financial difficulties came about initially when her 
fiancé lost his job in 2008. Additionally, after she contacted the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) in 2012 about filing past-due tax returns, she was informed that someone 
had filed returns for those years using her Social Security number. She filed an Identity 
Theft Affidavit form in 2013, but has not changed her Social Security number. The years 
affected by the identity theft appear to be 2010 and 2011.3  
 
 The debt alleged in ¶ 1.a is a delinquent tax debt in the amount of $4,764. This 
debt is for Applicant’s unpaid 2006 federal taxes. She claims that she has been in 
contact with the IRS about this debt, but since they are investigating her allegations of 
identity theft they have not formalized a settlement agreement. This tax obligation is 
unrelated to the identity theft issue and concerns her claiming a dependent. This debt is 
unresolved.4  
 
 The allegation at SOR ¶ 1.b is based upon unfiled federal tax returns for tax 
years 2007 through 2012. Applicant admitted that she failed to timely file her federal tax 
returns for those years. The IRS has since filed returns for those years on her behalf. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 27, 29; GE 1.  
 
2 GE 3-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 27-28, 30-31; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 27-28, 33-34; GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
She does not know what she owes for those years because the IRS is unable to 
process those returns until her identity theft issue is resolved. Thus, no payment plan 
has been established and she has not made any voluntary payments. This issue is 
unresolved.5 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a past-due mortgage account that Applicant is 
jointly liable on along with her mother. She is a joint debtor on the promissory note and 
is a co-owner named on the deed for this property. She lived in the property with her 
mother from 2006 to 2008. After she moved out of the property, her mother stopped 
paying the mortgage and filed for bankruptcy. Applicant has not been able to get the 
mortgage holder to talk with her while the property is subject to her mother’s 
bankruptcy. She has not made any payments on her own. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d is a collection account in the amount of $2,815. 
Applicant admitted this debt was related to a tax preparation company. This debt is 
unresolved.7 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e is a collection account in the amount of $1,040. 
Applicant admitted this debt. The date of last activity for this account was March 2010. 
Applicant claimed she was making $100 monthly payments, but stopped. She offered 
no proof of payments. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g are charged-off accounts in the 
amounts of $881 and $104, respectively. Applicant provided documentary evidence 
showing that she paid both debts. These debts are resolved.9 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h is a delinquent cable debt in the amount of $591. 
Applicant admitted this debt. The date of last activity on this account was March 2013. 
Applicant contacted the creditor, but has not made any payments on this debt, nor has 
she disputed the debt. This debt is unresolved.10 
  
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i is a collection account for an early terminated 
lease in the amount of $3,828. Applicant admitted this debt. She moved out of a leased 
apartment early when her fiancé lost his job in 2011. She has not made any payments 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 34-35; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 37-40; GE 3-5. 
 
7 Tr. at 40; GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. at 41-42; GE 3. 
 
9 Tr. at 43; AE E. 
 
10 Tr. at 45; GE 4, 5. 
 
 
4 
 
on this debt, but intends to use the proceeds from her fiancé’s tax refund to pay this 
debt. This debt is unresolved.11 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j is a collection account in the amount of $511. 
Applicant provided documentary evidence showing that she paid an amount to settle 
this debt. This debt is resolved.12 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.k is a delinquent consumer debt in the amount of 
$288. Applicant admitted this debt. The date of last activity on this account was August 
2012. Applicant has not made any payments on this debt, nor has she disputed the 
debt. This debt is unresolved.13 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.l is a delinquent consumer debt in the amount of 
$31. Applicant does not know about this debt. The date of last activity on this account 
was September 2008. Applicant has not made any payments on this debt, nor has she 
disputed the debt. This debt is unresolved.14 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n are medical collection accounts in the 
amounts of $204 and $318, respectively. Applicant provided documentary evidence 
showing that she paid both debts. These debts are resolved.15 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.o is charged-off medical collection account in the 
amount of $763. Applicant admitted this debt. The date of last activity on this account 
was October 2009. This debt is unresolved.16 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q are charged-off accounts in the 
amounts of $2,441 and $156, respectively. Applicant provided documentary evidence 
showing that she paid both debts. These debts are resolved.17 
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling, but she may seek out such 
counseling through her church. Her personal financial statement shows that, after 
expenses, she should have about $2,715 in disposable income at the end of the 
month.18 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 50-52; GE 4, 5. 
 
12 Tr. at 43; AE E. 
 
13 Tr. at 52-53; GE 4. 
 
14 Tr. at 53-54; GE 4. 
 
15 Tr. at 55; AE E. 
 
16 Tr. at 56; GE 4. 
 
17 Tr. at 57; AE E. 
 
18 Tr. at 46; GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant offered character letters from four coworkers. They attested to her 
dedication, reliability, and work ethic. They supported her effort to gain a favorable 
trustworthiness determination.19 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
19 AE A-D. 
 
 
6 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal . . . income tax returns as required or the 
fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid. She also failed to 
timely file federal tax returns for the years 2007 through 2012. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
7 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Although Applicant’s fiancé’s periods of unemployment several years ago, and 
having her identity stolen could be considered beyond her control, she has had enough 
time and resources to address these debts. She has paid several of the smaller-
balanced debts, but has not put forth responsible efforts to resolve the issues 
associated with the remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling. Additionally, Applicant has not 
established any type of payment plan for the unresolved debts. AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply, and ¶ 20(d) applies only to the paid debts. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide any documentation supporting disputes of any debts. 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite 
the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s financial situation were 
affected by her fiancé’s unemployment, her victimization by identity theft, and her 
personal circumstances. However, I also considered that despite these factors, most of 
the debts remain unaddressed. Her troublesome financial history causes me to question 
her ability to resolve her debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.f – 1.g:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.h – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.j:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.k – 1.l:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.m – 1.n:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.o:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.p – 1.q:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
