 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5220.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 12-06741
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems over the past several years arose from unforeseen
periods of unemployment and unplanned medical expenses, for which she was not
insured. She has been employed for over two years, has medical insurance, and has
established a debt repayment plan through a recent Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. Her
request for a public trust position is granted.
Statement of the Case 
On March 5, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her1
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, which included her responses to Department of Defense (DOD)
 Authorized by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.2
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by the Directive, as amended.3
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were4
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Also, an index listing each exhibit is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. See Tr. 24 - 34. 5
 The email transmitting Applicant’s post-hearing submissions and waiving objections is included as Hx. 2.6
2
adjudicators’ interrogatories,  it could not be determined that it is clearly consistent with2
the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  3
On August 27, 2013, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which, if proven, raise trustworthiness concerns addressed in the
adjudicative guideline (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F).4
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on January 2, 2014, and I convened a hearing in this matter on January
23, 2014. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5, which were
admitted without objection.  Applicant testified and made a timely post-hearing5
submission of seven exhibits. They have been admitted without objection as Applicant’s
Exhibits (Ax.) A - G.  DOHA received a transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 7,6
2014. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $93,898 for 22
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.v). SOR 1.a - 1.g and 1.i - 1.p represent
unpaid medical bills totaling $6,142. The majority of her remaining debt consists of a
past-due mortgage account for $80,173 (SOR 1.s). The other allegations are for debts
from delinquent credit cards, telephone accounts, or other past-due retail accounts.
Applicant denied SOR 1.g, and admitted the remaining allegations. Her admissions are
incorporated in my findings of fact. Having reviewed Applicant’s response to the SOR,
the transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
The debt alleged at SOR 1.r is a duplicate of SOR 1.q. Also, the debt alleged at
SOR 1.v is a duplicate of SOR 1.t. Accordingly, SOR 1.r and 1.t were withdrawn at the
hearing, and the total amount of debt at issue in the remaining allegations was reduced
to $90,655. (Tr. 10 - 13)
Applicant is 33 years old, has never been married, and is employed by a defense
contractor for work that requires access to sensitive automated information to perform
her duties as a customer service representative. Except for short periods of
unemployment due to lay offs, Applicant has been employed in a variety of jobs since
she graduated from high school in 1999. Between 2006 and 2008, she studied for her
3
associate’s degree, but left school without her degree when she gave birth to her only
child in April 2008. (Gx. 1 and 2; Tr. 41 - 43)
Applicant has worked for her current employer since February 2012. Her work
history consists mainly of customer service and technical support jobs similar to her
current defense contractor position. She was unemployed due to lay off between
September and November 2006; between May and September 2008; between May and
September 2009; and between February and September 2010. Her work between
September 2010 and February 2012 consisted mainly of temporary agency positions.
Applicant averred that her May 2008 lay off occurred because she wanted to take time
off after her child was born, but her employer decided to let her go. Applicant has never
received child support from the father of her child. (Gx. 1 and 2; Tr. 42 - 47)
Applicant and her mother have lived together since at least March 2004.
Applicant relies on her mother’s income (she works in a different part of the same
company as Applicant) to help with mortgage and other payments. In 2003, Applicant
inherited her grandmother’s house. She and her mother moved into that house in 2005.
The original mortgage had been paid off when the grandmother died. Applicant
subsequently obtained a home equity loan of about $80,000 to renovate the house, pay
off her and her mother’s car loans, and pay off other bills. (Gx. 2; Tr. 48, 75 - 76)
When Applicant was laid off in May 2008, she fell behind in her mortgage
payments. After missing about six payments, she resumed paying but only for months
moving forward after she started working again. In 2010, she obtained a loan
modification that accounted for the missed payments, made her current on her
obligations, and lowered her monthly payments from about $1,100 to about $470. (Gx.
2; Tr. 48 - 51)
More recently, Applicant’s mother has been unable to work at times for medical
reasons. Further complicating reductions in her mother’s income is the need for
Applicant to occasionally take unpaid time off to care for her. Applicant again fell behind
on her mortgage payments in late 2011 because she was laid off. Despite finding work
with her current employer in early 2012, Applicant’s mother’s health resulted in an
overall reduction in household income. This made it difficult to catch up on missed
mortgage payments. Foreclosure proceedings started in December 2011. As a result,
the current mortgage lender identified in SOR 1.s refused to accept payments when
Applicant could make them. Applicant currently owes more than $16,000 in past-due
mortgage payments. She has been working with the lender to attempt another mortgage
modification. (Gx. 2 - 4; Ax. B; Tr. 52 - 54, 67)
Until being hired for her current job, she had no employer-sponsored medical
insurance. All of her and her child’s health care was obtained through emergency room
visits. The medical debts alleged in the SOR represent Applicant’s obligation for those
visits after Medicaid has paid its portion of the costs. Also, Applicant accrued two past-
due cell phone accounts (SOR 1.h and 1.t) for which she has been making regular
payments since May 2013. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 4; Ax. D)
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 7
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 8
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 9
 Directive. 6.3.10
4
To stop foreclosure and try to resolve the other debts, Applicant has filed for
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. The resulting repayment plan requires her to pay
$525 each month for 57 months. Applicant has declared $158,121 in liabilities against
$52,364 in assets. Her liabilities cover most of the debts alleged in the SOR; however,
some of the medical debts alleged were too old to be included in bankruptcy and may
no longer be attributable to Applicant. In addition to the Chapter 13 payment, Applicant
was not required to relinquish her home and is required to pay her $470 mortgage
payment. (Ax. G; Tr. 56 - 57)
When Applicant responded to DOD interrogatories in June 2013, she submitted a
personal financial statement (PFS). The PFS reflected a $810 monthly remainder after
expenses. At her hearing, Applicant stated that her net monthly income has decreased
because of increased medical insurance costs. But her expenses will decrease in May
2014, when her daughter no longer requires private daycare, which currently costs
about $460 monthly. (Gx. 2; Tr. 63 - 66)
Applicant has not incurred any new delinquencies since she started her current
job. She completed financial counseling as a prerequisite to filing Chapter 13
bankruptcy. Applicant has an excellent record of performance, as reflected by her
production statistics and by several awards and commendations. (Ax. A; Ax. H; Tr. 70 -
71)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I/II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In7
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also8
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.9
The Directive requires that each decision be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,10
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
5
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the
Government.
Analysis
Financial
The Government’s information and Applicant’s admissions in response to the
SOR, are sufficient to support the allegations in the SOR. The facts thereby established
raised a trustworthiness concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant has been experiencing financial problems for several years. Until
recently, she has been unable to make any substantial progress in resolving her debts.
Available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), the record shows she has been willing,
but often unable, to pay her debts.
I have also considered the following pertinent mitigating conditions under at AG ¶
20:
 AG ¶¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is11
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue) and 20(f) (the affluence resulted from a legal source of income) have
no relevance to these facts and circumstances.
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.11
The record supports application of all of these mitigating conditions. Applicant’s financial
problems arose largely through uneven employment and unplanned lay offs. Her current
job appears to be more stable than any of her previous positions, making it less likely
she will again be laid off and lose income. Also, she has employer-sponsored health
insurance that obviates the need for emergency room visits for basic medical needs. 
Applicant has not incurred any new debts since early 2012, and she has shown
throughout the past several years that she is as proactive in her debt resolution efforts
as her resources permit. She obtained a loan modification in 2010 to resolve her
mortgage debts, she entered into repayment agreements with at least three of her
creditors, she started negotiating with her mortgage lender to resolve her most recent
mortgage debts, and she has now established a structured repayment plan through her
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. Applicant’s current income allows her to meet all of her
expenses, including her bankruptcy payments, and her positive cash flow will increase
later this year when she no longer has to pay for her child’s daycare. On balance,
Applicant has mitigated the Government’s concerns about her financial problems.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a 33-year-old single
mother. Until early 2012, she experienced several lay offs and unexpected expenses
associated with her mother’s health. On several occasions, she demonstrated a
willingness to try to resolve her debts to the best of her ability. Her record at work over
7
the past two years has been excellent, and there is no indication that she is unable or
unwilling to protect sensitive information. Her current circumstances have improved so
that her past history of lay offs will not recur, and she has embarked on a reliable plan of
debt repayment. A fair and commonsense assessment of available information shows
that Applicant’s finances no longer pose an unacceptable trustworthiness concern. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.q, 1.s, 1.u, 1.v: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.r, 1.t: Withdrawn
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national
security for Applicant to have access to sensitive automated information. Request for a
position of trust is granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
