1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-06228 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated personal conduct security concerns, but failed to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 10, 2013, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E 
(personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 6, 2013, and DOD CAF received his 
answer on May 14, 2013. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 21, 
2013. The case was assigned to me on October 24, 2013. DOHA issued a notice of 
2 
 
hearing on October 31, 2013, scheduling the hearing for December 4, 2013. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant did not call any 
witnesses, but did testify on his own behalf. He did not offer any exhibits. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 11, 2013. 
 
Procedural and Preliminary Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.c. Without objection 
from the Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 10-11.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Although Applicant did not “deny” or “admit” the SOR allegations, he did provide 
explanations that I am construing as constructive denials to all SOR allegations. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old senior systems engineer, who had been employed by 
a defense contractor since April 2012. He is required to obtain a security clearance as a 
condition of his continued employment. (GE 1, Tr. 20-22, 35.) 
 
 Applicant was awarded his GED in October 1983. He did not pursue higher 
education. (GE 1, GE 7, Tr. 22-23.) Applicant was married from 1997 to 1998, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. He remarried in 2004. Applicant’s wife is a retired state 
employee and currently is a part-time employee at a grocery store. Applicant has no 
children. He did not serve in the armed forces. (Tr. 23-14, 36.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR consists of seven separate allegations, a credit card collection account 
for $1,005; a telephone company collection account for $249; a bank collection account 
for $411; a past-due mortgage account for $44,855; a cable television collection 
account for $57; a collection account for $462; and an August 2008 bankruptcy court 
judgment for $102,933 entered against him for fraudulent pre-petition money transfers 
made prior to filing Chapter 7 Bankruptcy. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.g.) 
 
After a successful career in computer-related jobs, Applicant opened a flooring 
business in September 2003. Initially, his new flooring business thrived to the point that 
he was able to expand. However, as a result of the downturn in the economy in 
approximately 2006, Applicant was forced to close his business in May 2007 and file for 
bankruptcy in August 2007. (Tr. 36-46.) 
 
3 
 
During cross-examination, it became clear that Applicant has taken no action to 
contact his creditors, attempt to settle or dispute his debts, or otherwise resolve his 
debts. Applicant’s debts were brought to his attention as early as August 2012 when he 
was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. Applicant 
advised the investigator that he got behind on his bills as a result of being unemployed. 
Additionally, Applicant received notice of his debts when he received his April 2013 
SOR and also when he received a copy of his July 2012 credit report forwarded to him 
by Department Counsel before his hearing. (Tr. 62-81, GE 7, GE 9.) As noted, Applicant 
did not submit any exhibits. He has not sought financial counseling. 
 
Applicant was quite candid when discussing his debts. When queried by 
Department Counsel about the connection credit problems could have on his security 
clearance eligibility, he responded, “…when I look at my life and I look at these debts 
that I may or may not owe and I think of just my peers and what debts I know they owe, 
I kind of feel this is – I hate to use the word insignificant, but lack of a better word, to me 
I just don’t see this as being a liability.” (Tr. 64-65.) 
 
Applicant testified that he paid his attorney $1,500 to represent him at his August 
4, 2008 pre-petition hearing for fraudulent pre-petition money transfers. Applicant’s 
attorney advised him there was “no evidence” to support the trustee’s claim and 
assured him that the matter would either be set aside or dismissed. His attorney failed 
to appear at a scheduled hearing and a $102,933 default judgment was entered against 
Applicant. Applicant was unaware of the default judgement and was under the 
impression that the matter was resolved. He pressed his attorney for documentation; 
however, his attorney advised him “[d]on’t worry about it.” His attorney, a sole 
practitioner, committed suicide at some point after that and Applicant has not been able 
to retrieve any of his documents. Applicant did not see a copy of the default judgment 
until Department Counsel forwarded him a copy in discovery documents. Having seen 
the documentation, Applicant agrees that a default judgment was entered against him. 
(Tr. 28, 59-62, 82, GE 3.) 
 
Currently, Applicant is not drawing a pay check and is “on the bench” and stated 
he will have work “as soon as [his] clearance is granted.” He estimates that his family 
monthly income is approximately $3,000. (Tr. 83.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the $102,933 
judgment, discussed supra, on his June 2012 e-QIP. Applicant credibly testified 
regarding what he believed to be the status of his judgment at the time he completed his 
e-QIP. I accept his explanation that he believed he answered his e-QIP truthfully. 
Having had the occasion to observe Applicant’s demeanor during his testimony and 
taking into account all of the circumstances that led up to and following this judgment, I 
find that Applicant did not deliberately falsify his e-QIP when answering the e-QIP 
question about past judgments. 
 
4 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant previously served as a volunteer fire fighter for 15 years. (Tr. 24.) He 
did not submit reference letters or work-related performance evaluations. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
5 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, e-QIP, OPM interview, and SOR response.  
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent debts 
are numerous, recent, and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. His business failing is a circumstance beyond his control, but he has not acted 
reasonably. As noted, Applicant has made no effort to address his debts even after they 
were brought to his attention.1  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false answer on 
his security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
7 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately provided false information or omitted 
required information on his June 2012 security clearance application. Applicant’s 
alleged falsification of his e-QIP is not substantiated. AG ¶ 17(f) provides a condition 
that could mitigate security concerns in this case, stating, “the information was 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” AG ¶ 17(f) fully applies to 
SOR ¶¶ 2.b. Although he admitted preparing his e-QIP, and now recognizes that his 
answer was incorrect, he honestly and reasonably believed that the judgment was 
“taken care of” by his attorney. While Applicant could have been expected to exercise 
greater care in completing his e-QIP, his lapses in judgment do not constitute knowing 
and willful conduct.2  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
                                                          
2
The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
8 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis section under 
Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, further comments are 
warranted. 
Applicant’s record of community service as a volunteer fire fighter weighs in his 
favor. He is a law-abiding citizen, desires to contribute to the national defense, and lives 
within his means. Apart from his SOR debts, there is no evidence to suggest that he is 
not current on his day-to-day expenses. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. June 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish 
a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).   
 
However, Applicant’s failure to address his debts in any meaningful manner since 
the closure of his business in 2007 precludes a favorable decision. His failure to 
recognize the importance of regaining an acceptable level of financial responsibility 
does not weigh in his favor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, 
and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he 
has mitigated personal conduct security concerns, but has not mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g: Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraphs 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraph 2.a:  Withdrawn 
   Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 2.c:   Withdrawn 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
