KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E; Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant failed to demonstrate that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  False
statements in Applicant’s bankruptcy petition, combined with all the other evidence, supports
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and unreliability. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 12-09314.a1
DATE: 03/20/2014
DATE:  March 20, 2014
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-09314
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Charles D. Swift, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 19, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations); Guideline E
(Personal Conduct); and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 18,
2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
1The Judge entered formal findings favorable to Applicant under Guideline B.  Those findings are not at issue
on appeal.
2
David M. White denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge made the following findings:  Applicant is 55 years old and is married for the
second time.  After a period of financial difficulties and a downturn in home prices in the area where
he lived, Applicant filed his first petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief, and received a discharge
of his debts in 1996.  In 2009, his divorce from his first wife was finalized.  The divorce decree
made Applicant and his wife jointly liable for payment of mortgage loans on the home.  They had
borrowed so much equity out of the house that, after the real estate market collapse, they owed
significantly more on the loans than the house was worth.  In 2009, while Applicant was overseas,
his wife stopped making mortgage payments and the house was repossessed.  Applicant’s wife also
filed for and was granted Chapter 7 bankruptcy, leaving Applicant solely responsible for their
formerly joint debts.  Applicant earned about $300,000 during the year he was assigned overseas.
Although he had numerous delinquent debts, he did not use these funds to repay them.  He instead
chose to spend this money on travel and entertainment, make extra payments of alimony to his ex-
wife, and to make maximum contributions into his retirement investment accounts that would be
exempt from allocation to creditors in bankruptcy proceedings.      
Applicant’s overseas assignment was troubled.  He was apprehended for a security violation.
He was accused of unauthorized revelations of sensitive and company-proprietary information, and
he behaved disruptively at work and in a hotel where he resided.  He was later evicted from an
apartment.  He was found sleeping on duty on one occasion.  A human resources representative from
his company reported that he was terminated for cause as a result of these incidents. 
Applicant married a foreigner in 2010.  They spent a year and a half in the wife’s country.
Applicant considered himself retired, although her had no funds from which to pay his extensive
delinquent debts.  A month prior to returning to the United States with his wife in 2011, Applicant
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief without hiring an attorney to represent him.  He used his
daughter’s U.S. address and certified on the petition that he had been domiciled in the bankruptcy
court’s district for 180 days immediately preceding the date of the petition.  He claimed his 2009
income was $75,000.  He listed his ex-wife on various parts of the petition, but did not list his
current wife.  He also failed to disclose his current wife’s ownership of substantial property in her
home country.  Applicant could not obtain an ownership interest in his wife’s foreign property.
However, Applicant became part owner in a foreign corporation that enabled him to share in that
property.    Applicant listed a $13,700 student loan he had co-signed with his son as a claim on the
bankruptcy petition.  He thought it had been discharged with his other debts, but now realizes that
3
the loan is not dischargeable.  He has made arrangements to rehabilitate the loan and to begin
repayment.
Applicant declared no real property and more than $150,000 in personal property on his 2011
bankruptcy petition.  Of that personal property, he claimed more than $150,000 as exempt IRA
investments.  He declared more than $250,000 in liabilities to creditors holding unsecured claims.
He was granted a bankruptcy discharge in September 2011.   
Applicant’s wife runs a small business to support them.  Of the more than $150,000 he
claimed in exempt retirement savings at the time of his bankruptcy, he had withdrawn and spent
about $135,000 by October 2012 to start his wife’s business, and for vacation and travel expenses.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s 2011 discharge of more than a
quarter million dollars worth of unsecured debts through bankruptcy, rather than making payments
toward them during 2009 while earning over $300,000, was recent and followed his similar
treatment of previous debts in 1996.  His failure to resolve the non-dischargeable student loan debt
is ongoing.  He offered insufficient evidence from which to conclude that such disregard of
voluntarily incurred obligations is unlikely to recur, or does not cast doubt on his current reliability
or judgment.  He neither showed that his serious indebtedness was caused by his later divorce or
unemployment, nor demonstrated responsible action under the circumstances during the year he
earned about $300,000.  Applicant failed to sufficiently investigate or document a valid basis to
dispute the legitimacy of the student loan debt.  He established no clear indications that his financial
issues have been or are being resolved, and are under control for the future.     
Under Guideline E, although Applicant claims that bankruptcy did not concern his current
wife or any debts incurred during their marriage, his use of his daughter’s address to file the petition
and his certification that he had lived in that court district during the preceding 180 days when filing
the petition by mail from overseas support the conclusion that he intended to conceal his true marital
and resulting financial status from the bankruptcy court.  This concealment together with the series
of incidents during his 2009 employment overseas establish significant security concerns.  When
combines with all available information, Applicant’s conduct supports a whole-person assessment
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, and unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations.  Applicant did not demonstrate a change in personal attitude or
financial circumstances that would support a finding of permanent behavioral change, or a finding
that recurrence of untrustworthiness and questionable judgment is unlikely.                
Applicant argues that the Judge erred by not correctly weighing the mitigating factors in his
case.  With regard to Guideline F, he cites such facts as his divorce, his loss of his job, and his
support of his ex-wife and his adult children as circumstances that led to his 2011 bankruptcy.  He
indicates that in 2009 he was current on all his debts.  Concerning the $13,700 student loan debt,
Applicant asserts that he believed he had a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the debt.
Applicant’s arguments with regard to his debts do not establish error on the part of the Judge.  
2Part of Applicant’s argument makes specific reference to the foreign country’s property laws.  These references
were not made part of the record below.  Consequently, they are new evidence, which the Board cannot consider on
appeal.  Directive, ¶ E3.1.29.
3Government Exhibit 7, an e-mail memo from the company human resources department, speaks directly to
Applicant’s termination from his company and the reasons therefor.  The authenticity of the document has not been
challenged.
4
The Board has examined the record evidence and the Judge’s decision.  We find no reason
to believe that the Judge did not properly weigh the evidence or that he failed to consider all of the
evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06622 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012).  Two
conclusions were central to the Judge’s analysis under Guideline F.  One was his conclusion that
Applicant had not adequately demonstrated that his serious indebtedness prior to his 2011
bankruptcy was caused by his divorce or by his period of unemployment.  Another was his
conclusion that Applicant chose to resolve his debts in 2011 by filing bankruptcy rather than making
payments toward them in 2009 while he was earning over $300,000, and that this resolution was
similar to his treatment of previous debts in 1996.  These conclusions, and the findings upon which
they are based, are supported by substantial record evidence.  Regarding the $13,700 student loan
debt, the Judge concluded that Applicant failed to sufficiently investigate or document a valid basis
to dispute the legitimacy of the debt, which remained outstanding.  This, too, is supported by
substantial evidence.  We  have considered the totality of Applicant’s arguments on appeal and find
no error in the Judge’s ultimate conclusions regarding mitigation under Guideline F. 
 As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s brief consists largely of a presentation of a different interpretation of the record
evidence.
Regarding Guideline E, Applicant asserts that he did not deliberately provide false or
misleading information when preparing his bankruptcy documents, nor was he terminated from his
employment in 2010 as a result of misconduct.  In concluding that Applicant deliberately failed to
disclose pertinent information on his bankruptcy petition, the Judge considered a variety of
circumstances, including the fact that Applicant did not disclose the identity of his current wife and
her financial status, and used his daughter’s address in the United States on the bankruptcy petition
while he was living overseas.  The Judge’s conclusions regarding Applicant’s failure to disclose are
supported by substantial evidence.2  Likewise, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant engaged in
numerous questionable practices and misconduct while employed overseas in 2009 is supported by
substantial record evidence.3  His conclusion that these matters were not mitigated is also sustainable
on this record.  
5
Applicant argues that the Judge erred when applying the whole person concept.  The
principal issue under this analysis is whether Applicant demonstrated that he has made significant
changes to his conduct.  The Judge concluded that Applicant did not demonstrate a change in
personal attitude or financial circumstances that would support a finding of permanent behavioral
change indicating trustworthiness and good judgment.  After a review of the record and the Judge’s
decision the Board concludes that the Judge’s whole person analysis is supported by substantial
record evidence.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
