 
1 
 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02358 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The judgment and four 
charged-off accounts alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), totaling 
approximately $24,000, have not been paid. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on September 11, 
2013, the DoD issued an SOR detailing financial considerations security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On September 25, 2013, Applicant answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing. On December 6, 2013, I was assigned the case. On 
December 31, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing convened on January 16, 2014. I admitted 
Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through E, without 
objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant 
to submit additional information. On January 28, 2014, DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.). On February 3, 2014, an email was received from Applicant, which was 
admitted into the record without objection as Ex. F.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted owing the judgment and four 
charged-off accounts, but disagreed as to the amount owed on these delinquent 
accounts. His admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old fleet manager2 who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 1977, and seeks to maintain a secret security clearance. 
(Tr. 37) He has had no periods of unemployment. (Tr. 40) Applicant called no witnesses 
other than himself. He produced numerous letters of appreciation as to his 
professionalism, leadership, dedication, hard work, and superior work performance. (Ex. 
C) 
 
 In 1998, fifteen years ago, Applicant had a heart attack and was away from work 
for a “considerable length of time.” (Tr. 23) He was not unemployed during this period. 
At a time not reflected in the record, Applicant cosigned on a car loan for his son. 
Applicant learned the car had been repossessed four months after the repossession 
occurred. (Tr. 24) Applicant got behind on his payments for his credit cards. He had 
more money going out than coming in. (Tr. 24) Ten years ago his credit rating dropped, 
which prevented him from being able to borrow money to repay his delinquent accounts. 
(Tr. 24, 25) When his financial problems started, both he and his wife received credit 
counseling. (Tr. 49)  
 
In 2007, Applicant obtained his current position, which resulted in less income, 
because he no longer received overtime pay. His lower income coincided with his 
mother moving into their home. In 2008, his mother died. (Ex. A) About this time, he 
was diagnosed with colon cancer, which required a resection. (Tr. 23) Following two 
surgeries, his current monthly out-of-pocket medical expenses are $400. (Ex. A)  
 
In March 2009, approximately five years ago, a judgment (SOR 1. e, $4,124) was 
entered against Applicant for an unpaid credit card debt. (Ex. 4) He has used the credit 
card to buy groceries, gasoline, and for bail for his son. (Ex. 4) In 2008 or 2009, 
Applicant had entered into an agreement with the debt consolidation company. (Tr. 32) 
He paid $75 weekly to the company. (Tr. 49) In his January 2012 Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI), he stated this debt was being repaid through a debt consolidation 
company. (Ex. 4) He used this company to pay off one credit card account and was 
working to address a second credit card account when the financial company went out 
of business in 2009. (Tr. 50) (Ex. 4, SOR Response, Tr. 32)  
                                                          
2 Applicant started as a custodian and worked his way up in the company to his current position.  
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant’s December 2011 credit bureau report (CBR) lists a $4,369 collection 
account (SOR 1.a) that was 150 days past due; a $9,395 collection account (SOR 1.b); 
a $5,747 collection account (SOR 1.c); and a $4,124 judgment (SOR 1.e). (Ex. 2) His 
May 2013 CBR lists three charged-off accounts: $4,369, $9,395, and $5,747. (Ex. 3) 
The 2013 CBR does not list the judgment, but does list a $240 charged-off energy 
account. (Ex. 3) 
  
In the January 2012 PSI, Applicant stated he was using the debt consolidation 
company to pay the $4,369 collection account listed in SOR 1.a. (Ex. 4) At that time, he 
owed $1,430 on the charged-off account listed in SOR 1.c ($5,747). This credit card had 
been used to buy groceries and miscellaneous items. (Ex. 4) These delinquent 
accounts remain unpaid. 
 
In July 2013, Applicant responded to written financial interrogatories. (Ex. 4) At 
that time, his gross annual salary was approximately $98,000. His weekly take-home 
pay was approximately $1,000. (Tr. 45) His net monthly remainder (net monthly income 
less net monthly expenses and monthly debt payment) was approximately $450. (Ex. 4) 
His wife works as a paid caregiver. (Tr. 39, 48) The amount of her annual income is not 
part of the record.  
 
Applicant has more than $142,000 in his 401(k) retirement plan. (Ex. D) In June 
2010, he borrowed $34,000 from his retirement fund.  (Ex. E) The loan was used in part 
to pay off “the wife’s truck.”3  (Tr. 36) He pays approximately $160 weekly to repay the 
loan, which has an approximately $7,000 balance. (Ex. E, SOR Response) Once the 
loan is repaid, he intends to obtain a new loan to pay his delinquent accounts. (Ex. A, 
SOR Response)  
 
Applicant and his wife have lived in the same house for 30 years, and he has 
approximately $90,000 equity in the home. (Ex. 4) In October 2011, he was 30 days late 
on the $1,215 monthly mortgage payment, but has since brought his mortgage current. 
(Ex. 4) In December 2011, the balance on his mortgage was $64,483. (Ex. 2) He 
believes his house will be paid for in another seven years. (Tr. 47) There was a period 
of time when two non-relatives also lived in his home and relied upon him for financial 
support. For the past five years, his grandson has lived with him. 
 
Applicant’s wife drives a 1998 automobile, and he drives a 1991 pick-up truck. 
(Ex. A, Tr. 41) Creditors currently contact him seeking payment on his delinquent 
accounts. (Tr. 33) He has a debit card, but no credit cards. (Tr. 42) He has $1,000 in his 
savings account and $300 in his checking account. (Tr. 43, 44)  
 
 As of February 3, 2014, Applicant had experienced problems with his truck’s 
motor and was waiting for documents so he could file his taxes. (Ex. F) He was planning 
on paying the charged-off energy account (SOR 1.d, $240) with his income tax refund.  
  
 A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection, and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
                                                          
3 It is uncertain if this was Applicant’s wife’s truck or the truck of Applicant’s son’s wife.  
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Charged-off credit card 
account. (Ex. 2, 3) 
$4,369 Unpaid. The same creditor is listed in 
the judgment listed in e. below. 
Applicant is uncertain if this is one 
obligation or two different obligations. 
(Tr. 29)  
b Charged-off account on a 
vehicle repossession. 
(Ex. 2, 3, Tr. 31)  
$9,395 
 
Unpaid. In 2009, the creditor offered to 
settle for $3,800, but Applicant was 
unable to accept the offer. (Tr. 28, 31)  
c Charged-off credit card 
account. (Ex. 2, 3) 
$5,747 
 
Unpaid. 
d Charged-off utility 
account. (Ex. 3) 
$240 Unpaid. Applicant plans on using any 
federal income tax refund to pay this 
debt. (Tr. 29)  
e Judgment obtained in 
March 2009. (Ex. 2, 3, Tr. 
51) 
$4,124 Unpaid.  
 Total debt listed in SOR $23,875  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He has experienced financial 
problems for more than ten years. Applicant has an unpaid judgment and four 
delinquent accounts that total approximately $23,000. He has paid none of the debts, 
even the $240 utility bill. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations fully mitigate the 
Applicant’s financial security concerns. Applicant was questioned about his financial 
delinquencies in January 2012. Applicant was unsure whether debts listed in SOR 1.a 
and SOR 1.e were duplications of each other. I have chosen to mitigate the debt in SOR 
1.a as a possible duplication of the judgment debt in SOR 1.e.The $240 utility bill4 
remains unpaid. His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He produced no 
evidence of recent circumstances beyond his control, and he has not acted responsibly 
in addressing his debts.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems have existed for ten years and he is currently 
being contacted by the creditors of his delinquent accounts. When his financial 
problems first began, he and his wife received some financial counseling. Even with the 
counseling, his financial problems continue. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. He has failed to 
demonstrate that his financial problems are under control, or that he has a plan to bring 
                                                          
4 Applicant was not asked about this debt during his January 2012 PSI, but has known of the 
Government’s concern about the delinquent utility bill since September 2013, when it was listed in the 
SOR.  
 
7 
 
 
 
them under control. He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply because he has made no payment on his delinquent debts. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), the debts were incurred some time ago, but remain unpaid. 
The judgment (SOR 1.e), entered against him five years ago in March 2009, remains 
unpaid. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because, to date, 
Applicant’s efforts to address his delinquent accounts have been minimal. He has no 
repayment plan to pay his delinquent accounts. He failed to act aggressively, timely, or 
responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
In 1998, Applicant had a heart attack. In 2007, he obtained his current position, 
which resulted in less income because he no longer received overtime pay. His financial 
problems were contributed to by his mother moving into his home. In 2008, six years 
ago, his mother died. He has had colon cancer that required a resection and he pays 
$400 monthly out-of-pocket medical expenses following his surgery. His financial 
problems were contributed to by paying some of his son’s debts, the raising of his 
grandson, and two unrelated people living for a time in his home. These are unexpected 
events largely beyond his control.  
 
Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to 
circumstances outside his control, I must still consider whether Applicant has since 
acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.5  
 
Since 1977, Applicant has not been unemployed. He has had financial problems 
for a long time and has known of the Government’s concern over his finances since 
January 2012. Since that time, he has made no payments on any of the SOR delinquent 
obligations. By failing to make even minimal payments, he has failed to act responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account. 
He admits owing the debts, but disagrees with the amount the creditors claim is owed. I 
conclude Guideline F against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 
(App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has worked for the same employer for 37 years and 
has excellent duty performance. He has lived in the same home for 30 years. And, 
although never unemployed, has experienced medical problems that resulted in surgery 
and substantial ($400) monthly medical costs. Applicant and his wife are not living 
beyond their means. He drives a 1991 pickup and his wife a 1998 automobile. He has 
provided support for his son, grandson, and has taken individuals into his home when 
those individuals were in need. The two non-relatives have now left the home and are 
no longer dependent on Applicant for financial support. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has known since January 2012 of the Government’s concern about the 
majority of his delinquent accounts. He has failed to pay any of the debts during the 
two-year period since being interviewed. His failure to repay his creditors, at least in 
reasonable amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns 
about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
An applicant is not required to establish that he has paid off each and every debt 
listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan 
to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan. In 
this case, none of the debts have been paid and no repayment plans have been 
arranged. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
 
9 
 
 
 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
