 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-04433 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns for drug use. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On January 5, 2012, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
On December 30, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a January 23, 2014, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations 
raised under Guideline H. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
The Government was ready to proceed on February 12, 2014. The case was assigned 
to me on February 20, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on February 28, 2014, setting the hearing for March 19, 2014. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered two documents, 
 
2 
 
 
accepted into the record without objection as Exhibits (GX) 1-2. Applicant gave 
testimony and introduced one witness. Applicant was given until March 27, 2014, to 
submit any additional materials. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on 
March 25, 2014. Between March 26, 2014, and March 27, 2014, Applicant submitted 
three documents, which were accepted into the record without objection as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) 1-3. The record was then closed.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old product development manager who has been with his 
present employer for two-and-a-half years. He has never had a security clearance. His 
January 2013 SCA is his first application for a security clearance. Applicant has earned 
both a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree in electrical engineering. He has been 
married to his current wife for about two years. He has a grown child from a previous 
relationship. Applicant introduced a character witness who gave complimentary 
testimony regarding Applicant’s character. (Tr. 43-50) Applicant has received favorable 
performance reviews. 
 
 While in high school, circa 1978, Applicant began using marijuana. From 1978 to 
about 1981, he used the drug about two times. He also tried lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD) and methaqualone during this time frame. (Tr. 28, 30-31) From 1981 to 1991, 
Applicant used marijuana about twice a week. From 1982 to 1987, he used cocaine 
once or twice a month. He also used psilocybin mushrooms (mushrooms) occasionally 
from 1982 to 1988 and a couple of times between 1991 and 1999. In the interim, from 
1991 until 2011, his illegal use of marijuana was reduced to about twice a year. He 
thinks there may have been years during this final period when he did not use illegal 
drugs. (Tr. 23) He usually used marijuana on dates or with friends at concerts. He was 
never “concerned about legal consequences or being caught or arrested or anything like 
that.” (Tr. 26) 
 
Applicant completed his SCA on January 5, 2012. Under Section 23 (Illegal Use 
of Drugs or Drug Activity), Applicant wrote that he had last used marijuana at a June 
2011 concert held at a local park. In response to the question as to whether he intended 
to use this drug in the future, he answered, “no.” (GX 1, SCA, at 33 of 38) After 
completing the SCA, Applicant “made the assumption that [DOD] would consider 
[subsequent drug use] improper and [he] recognized that at the time. . . .” (Tr. 26-27) 
 
In May 2012, while entertaining guests from out of town, Applicant used 
marijuana on the night before his wedding. Also in 2012, Applicant accepted one dose 
of his wife’s prescribed Xanax medication to help calm his nerves before a speech. (Tr. 
29-30) Applicant again used marijuana in March 2013 at a birthday party he and his wife 
were hosting. The drug was supplied by the same out-of-town guests with whom he had 
used marijuana before his wedding. (Tr. 22-24)  
 
Regarding the two instances of using marijuana after completing his January 
2012 SCA, Applicant stated that they were “not intention-driven. They were 
 
3 
 
 
opportunistic.” (Tr. 56) He maintains that he had the intent not to use marijuana, but 
explained that situations came up where he did. (Tr. 57).  
 
In the recent past, Applicant has only used marijuana with the out-of-town friends 
noted above. He last used marijuana 12 months ago. He recently was offered marijuana 
at a concert, but declined to use the drug. (Tr. 37) Applicant acknowledges that drugs 
are present at outdoor concert events, but stated, “it is not my intention to be around 
[illegal drugs], but I can’t control the person next to me.” (Tr. 36, 38) He attends 
concerts for enjoyment, not for work. His 2011 marijuana use was at an outdoor concert 
venue. At these events, he pursues his hobby of recording concerts.  
 
Applicant stated that it is a “personal choice” whether he uses drugs, and he 
noted that he is no longer around regular drug abusers or those with whom he used 
drugs before he married. (Tr. 32, 34) He maintains close and daily social contact, 
however, with someone who “smokes a little weed once in a while . . . .” (Tr. 32) Most of 
the time, other people have provided Applicant with drugs. He has, however, 
contributed to its purchase at times in the past. (Tr. 34) At the hearing, Applicant stated 
that it is his present intent not to use drugs in the future. (Tr. 40) A licensed clinical 
psychologist has determined that Applicant does not have chemical dependency issues. 
(AX 3) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and derived 
from the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 24) “Drugs” are defined as mood and behavior altering 
substances and include drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens) and inhalants and 
other substances. (AG ¶ 24(a)(1-2)) “Drug abuse” is the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction. (AG ¶ 24(b)) 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from about 1978 until March 
2013. In 2012, he used a medication prescribed to his wife. Of less recent interest, 
Applicant used cocaine once or twice a month from 1982 to 1987, and used psilocybin 
mushrooms on multiple occasions between 1982 and 1988. He again used such 
mushrooms on one or two occasions between 1991 and 1999. Applicant also admits to 
contributing to the purchase of marijuana. Such facts are sufficient to raise Drug 
Involvement Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse) and AG ¶ 25(c) 
(illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, 
or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). With disqualifying conditions 
raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate related security concerns. 
 
Although Applicant’s past use of mushrooms and cocaine is remote in terms of 
time, his abuse of marijuana remains worrisome. He has never been concerned about 
legal consequences related to his illegal drug abuse. His marijuana use continued after 
he stated his intention in his January 2012 SCA not to use drugs in the future. Indeed, 
 
5 
 
 
after completing the SCA, Applicant admitted that he assumed DOD would consider 
subsequent drug use improper. That abuse of marijuana continued until almost exactly 
one year before the hearing, so his drug use is very recent. Applicant’s only explanation 
for not maintaining the intention he expressed in his January 2012 SCA of not using 
marijuana in the future is that his 2012 and 2013 lapses were “not intention-driven,” but 
only “opportunistic.”  
 
In his January 2012 SCA, Applicant recorded his last date of marijuana use as 
having been in June 2011. Eleven months later, he used the drug in May 2012. Ten 
months later, he used marijuana in March 2013. As of the hearing date, 12 months had 
passed without recurrence. His most recent intervals of illegal drug abuse reflect a 
recurrence of drug use about every year, despite a continuing expression of intent not to 
use drugs again in the future.  What is needed is a demonstrated intent fortified by a 
proven record for successful abstinence, not merely the continued expression of an 
intent that is subject to incidental caprice. Moreover, Applicant continues to go to 
venues where he knows drugs will be present. While he has reduced his drug-using 
contacts, a close and daily contact continues to use marijuana. Further, he has 
employed no safeguards to help him avoid relapse. Finally, he has yet to demonstrate 
that he appreciates that his drug use is not just antithetical to the qualities expected of 
one maintaining a security clearance, but illegal. In light of these considerations, I find 
that none of the drug involvement mitigating conditions apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporate my comments under 
the above-referenced guideline in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old product development manager who has been with his 
present employer for two-and-a-half years. He has earned both a bachelor’s degree and 
a master’s degree in electrical engineering. Married for two years, he is the father of a 
grown child from a previous relationship. Character witness testimony regarding 
Applicant was highly favorable. Applicant showed that he is successful in his work. He 
has never held a security clearance. 
 
Applicant started using marijuana in high school. After high school, he used 
cocaine and psilocybin mushrooms on a few occasions, through 1987 and 1999, 
respectively. He also used his wife’s prescription Xanax in 2012. The one-time use of 
 
6 
 
 
Xanax appears to have been an isolated event, and the cocaine and mushroom abuse 
are very dated. The most worrisome issue in this case concerns Applicant’s marijuana 
abuse through March 2013, barely one year ago.  
 
Applicant provided scant evidence of rehabilitative efforts to refrain from illegal 
drugs or indicating his future ability to successfully remain drug-free without 
“opportunistic” relapse. At best, he has reduced the number of his drug-using contacts. 
However, his January 2012 statement of intent to not use drugs in the future was 
nullified with his marijuana-using lapses in May 2012 and March 2013. Insufficient time 
has passed for him to demonstrate that his ongoing expression of intent and current 
abstinence can be sustained. In light of the regularity of his recent past lapses into drug 
use, more than one year is needed to demonstrate his ability to sustain a drug-free 
lifestyle. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate drug involvement 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b-1.d:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall 
Administrative Judge 
