1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-02597
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Andria Catalano Redcrow, Esquire
March 6, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on September 27, 2011.  On October 15, 2013, the Department of Defense
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 24, 2013.  He answered
the SOR in writing on November 12, 2013, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request soon thereafter, and I received the
case assignment on January 16, 2014.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January
24, 2014, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 12, 2014.  The
Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 6, which were received without objection.
1
Department Counsel argues that gambling also contributed to Applicant’s current financial difficulties.  Counsel points
to an $80 debt to a casino, alleged as the last Subparagraph of the SOR.  Applicant attributes this debt to a casino room
charge and not to gambling.  (TR at page 39 line 19 to page 40 line 7, and at page 53 lines 2~6.)  Counsel also points
to a $4,544 Las Vegas judgement and to an $850 debt to a casino (both debts are listed in Applicant’s Schedule F of his
Chapter 7 Bankruptcy Petition, but neither is alleged in the SOR), as proof of gambling.  (AppX A at pages 20 and 25.)
Applicant denies this assertion.  He is unaware of the judgment, but was listed in the Bankruptcy Petition in an
abundance of caution.  (TR at page 53 line 12 to page 59 line 5, at page 64 line 18 to page 66 line 4, and at page 68 line
20 to page 69 line 1.)  He attributes the $850 debt to a family New Years Eve celebration, food and room charges, but
not to gambling.  (Id.)  Applicant’s daughter corroborates his testimony.  (TR at page 61 line 11 to page 64 line 17.)  I
find that Applicant’s current financial difficulties are not attributed to gambling.
2
Applicant testified on his own behalf, as did his younger daughter, and submitted
Exhibits (AppXs) A through K, which were received without objection.  DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (TR) on February 21, 2014.  I granted Applicant’s request to
keep the record open until March 12, 2014, to submit additional matters.  On February
25, 2014, his submission, Exhibit L, was were received without objection.  The
submission included the following request: “The Applicant has no further exhibits to offer
into evidence and requests that you [Department Counsel] forward this to the Court so
that the record may be closed and a decision made.”  The record was thus closed on
February 26, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in all the
Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations.  He also provided additional information
to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The 64-year old Applicant served in the South Vietnamese Navy during the
Vietnam War.  (TR at page 6 lines 11~16, and at page 45 lines 4~22.)  He came to the
United States in 1980, and became a U.S. citizen in 1998.  (Id.)
In the 1990's, Applicant’s wife developed Type II Diabetes.  (TR at page 31 line
23 to page 34 line 6, and AppXs D and E.)  Later, she also contracted Hepatitis C.  (Id.)
At “first for a couple of years,” she took a pill, but later had “to use insulin together with
the pill.”  (TR at page 31 line 23 to page 34 line 6, and AppXs D and E.)  Her kidneys
have ceased functioning, and she has been receiving dialysis for end-stage renal
disease July of 2010.  (Id.)
In 2005, Applicant was laid off from his job.  (TR at page 34 lines 7~24.)  His
unemployment benefits were not sufficient to cover his wife’s medical needs.  (Id.)  This,
coupled with his spouse’s life threatening illness has caused his current financial
difficulties.   (See also TR at page 61 line 11 to page 64 line 17, and AppX I; the1
testimony of his younger daughter, and the testimonial of his older daughter,
respectively.)
3
1.a.~1.p.  Listed in the SOR are 16 alleged and admitted past-due debts totaling
about $58,242.  Applicant filed for the protection of a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in
November of 2013, as evidence by that filing.  (AppX A at page 3.)  All of the alleged
past-due debts are included in Applicant’s Chapter 7 Bankruptcy, as evidenced the
petition’s Schedule F.  (TR at page 43 line 2 to page 44 line 10, at page 51 line 11 to
page 52 line 15, and AppX A at pages 20~28.)  He also completed the Post-Petition
Instructional Course in November of 2013, as evidenced by Bankruptcy Court
documents.  (AppX B.)  Finally, Applicant’s debts were discharged on February 11,
2014, as evidenced by the “DISCHARGE OF DEBTOR” Order.  (AppX L.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
4
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has had difficulty meeting his
financial obligations.  However, I find two countervailing Mitigating Conditions that are
applicable here.  Under Subparagraph 20 (b), where “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, . . .
unexpected medical emergency, . . . ), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances,” may be mitigating.  Applicant was forced to file for the protection of a
Chapter 7 bankruptcy due to him being laid off his job in 2005, and due to his wife’s life-
threatening medical condition.  Under Subparagraph 20 (d), it may also be mitigating
where “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts.”  Applicant has addressed all of his debts through his February 2014
bankruptcy discharge.
5
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
The administrative judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Those who know Applicant in the
workplace speak most highly of him.  (AppXs F~G.)  The record evidence leaves me
without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance.  For this reason, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns
arising from his Financial Considerations, under the whole-person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
6
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
