1
                                                           
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-04271
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On October 23, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 20, 2014. A notice of
hearing was issued on February 21, 2014, scheduling the hearing for March 7, 2014.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into evidence, without objection. Applicant
testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-G, which were admitted without
objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 13, 2014. Based on a review of
the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the majority of the factual
allegations under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), with explanations. He denied
SOR allegations ¶ 1.e and ¶ 1.g.
Applicant is a 44-year-old defense contractor. Applicant graduated from high
school in 1989 and attended trade school, receiving a certification in August 2000. He
has been with his current employer since 2011. (GX 1) This is his first request for a
security clearance. 
Applicant married in 1990. He and his wife have no children. Applicant’s wife left
him in approximately May 1999. They are not legally divorced, but they have no contact
with each other. She left Applicant with all of the marital debt. He filed for bankruptcy in
1999. (Tr. 59)  Applicant does not deny that he is in debt. He states that over the last
two years, he has worked to repay some of his debt. (Tr. 13) He provided
documentation that several accounts had been paid in 2013. (GX 2, AX D) These debts
were not listed on the SOR.  In 2014, Applicant also paid his car note and provided
documentation to support the claim. (AX C )
Applicant explained that he left his employer in 2006 or 2007 to start his own
business. (Tr. 33) The home construction business began to fail when the economy
faltered. His business involved custom carpentry, and by June 2009, he had no
customers. (Tr.33) The years before the start of his new business venture, Applicant
earned about $50,000 to $60,000 a year. Since he was self-employed, he did not
collect any unemployment when his business failed leaving him with no income. From
2007 until 2009, he had some temporary work. Applicant made approximately $18 an
hour. 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts, including medical accounts, a
judgment, a mortgage debt, and past-due accounts totaling approximately $91,005. The
credit reports confirm the debts. (GX 3, 4)
The 2009 judgment alleged in SOR 1.a for $972 is not paid. Applicant admitted
that he has not resolved the debt because he claims the surgery did not work. (Tr. 23)
He has not been in touch with the creditor. 
.
The medical account in the amount of $1,431 alleged in SOR 1.b has not been
paid. Applicant presented documentation concerning the account that still has the full
balance. (AX A). He explained that he telephoned the creditor, but he was put on hold
and he could not continue to spend the time. (Tr.14)
The charged-off account alleged in SOR 1.c for approximately $16,450 remains
unpaid. This amount is for a second mortgage loan. He does not remember when he
purchased the home, but he believes it was 2005. He had a down payment, but this
account is the result of a refinanced second mortgage. (Tr. 30) Applicant stopped
paying in 2009, as he did not have consistent work. (Tr. 32)
3
The past-due mortgage account alleged in SOR 1.d for approximately $69,876
remains unpaid. Applicant has not made any payment since 2009. He moved from the
home in July 2011. He is not sure about the foreclosure proceedings. (Tr. 42) Applicant
attempted a loan modification at some point, but he does not recall details.  He has not
contacted the loan company.  
A collection account alleged in SOR 1.e for approximately $1,000 is unresolved.
Applicant does not know the origin of the debt. He thinks that it might be a medical
account. The account has been credited with a payment of $250. It does not list a
balance. (AX G) Applicant believed the account was paid, but a credit report in the
record does not confirm the account is the same account that is listed on the SOR. (Tr.
51)
The medical account alleged in SOR 1.f for $1,252 remains unpaid. This is also
a medical account that Applicant does not recognize. He has not contacted the creditor.
The collection account alleged in SOR 1.g for $74 is not paid. Applicant disputes
this debt. He believes he completed a dispute form on line. (Tr. 52) He thinks that he
disputed the amount with Equifax. (Tr. 53) 
Since 2011, Applicant has earned about $22 an hour. However, the number of
hours that he works each day is not the same. If he has an offshore job, he earns time
and a half. Applicant recalls that in 2012, he spent 89 hours off shore, In 2013, it may
have been up to 30 days. (Tr. 39)
Applicant projects that his monthly net salary is $3,505. After expenses, he has a
monthly net remainder of about $742. Applicant has a checking and a savings account.
He acknowledged that he does not have a savings plan. He plans to use any money
that he makes offshore to pay some delinquent debts. He was candid in that he does
not know when or for how long the next offshore assignment may be. (Tr. 59)
Applicant presented two letters of reference from his employer. (AX E, F) He is
described as a key team member of the offshore operations team. He has shown a
strong sense of loyalty, ethics, and leadership. Applicant consistently volunteers for
overtime and travel. He is dependable. Applicant never had a violation of any kind.
A colleague, who has known Applicant for more than twenty years, believes him
to be trustworthy and honest. He is aware of Applicant’s financial hardships. Applicant
is described as a hard worker who is committed to maintaining his employment. 
Applicant could not recall details about many of the debts. He was sincere, but
vague concerning his attempts to contact some creditors. He acknowledged that he
tried to call certain creditors by phone, but he was put on hold. Applicant did not follow
up with any written correspondence. (Tr. 28) He also believed he had made some
monthly payments on medical accounts at some point, but he could not be certain. (Tr.
27) He now seeks financial help with budgeting from a friend. (Tr. 62)
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
      Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations
Applicant acknowledges that he has delinquent debts.  He also filed for
bankruptcy in 1999. His credit reports confirm the debts. Consequently, the evidence is
sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions in ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following
are potentially relevant:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
6
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s financial problems began when his wife left the marriage and he
inherited the marital debt. He filed for bankruptcy in 1999, which is an acceptable
method of resolving debt. However, since that time, Applicant has incurred delinquent
debt in the amount of $91,055. He left his employment to start his own business.
Unfortunately, the business failed in 2009. Applicant was not able to find steady full-
time employment and could not pay his home mortgage loan and medical bills. His
business failure and unemployment exacerbated his financial situation. However,
Applicant has not acted responsibly. In 2013, he  paid several non-SOR debts. He has
not resolved or made a concrete plan to pay the debts that began in 2009. He disputed
two SOR debts, but did not provide documentation. In sum, Applicant has not made
good-faith efforts to contact his creditors to resolve and address the financial issues.
Applicant has not received formal financial counseling. He intends to pay his bills by
using money he saves from working offshore. However, he does not know when that
might occur. He has not actively contacted his creditors. AG ¶¶ 20 (b) and (d) are
relevant in part. However, Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the financial
considerations concern.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
7
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 44-year-old defense contract employee. He is skilled in his work and is
recommended by his employer. He was ambitious and started his own business.
However, the business failed due in part to the faltering economy. He tried to find work
and did not receive unemployment benefits. He also inherited marital debt and was
forced to file for bankruptcy in 1999. 
Applicant has paid several debts that are not alleged in the SOR. He produced
documentation that proves his assertion. Applicant incurred the delinquent debt as a
result of his business failure. He has been gainfully employed since 2011, but he has
not made payment arrangements for the bulk of his debt. He has not contacted his
creditors. He has not followed through on his delinquent mortgage accounts. He has not
met his burden to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
Applicant was candid at the hearing. He wants to pay his debts, but is not
actively doing so. He has not acted reasonably under the circumstances. I have doubts
and reservations about Applicant’s current reliability. Any doubts must be resolved in
favor of the government. Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
