 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10676 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 March 14, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had five delinquent debts, totaling $106,017, identified on the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR). Applicant refinanced one debt and it is now in good 
standing. One debt was forgiven by the creditor. One delinquent account was listed on 
the SOR twice. Applicant made a single payment on it in January 2014. One debt 
remains unaddressed. Additionally, security concerns were raised under the Guideline 
for Personal Conduct regarding Applicant’s security clearance denial in 2011, in part 
relating to his 2008 felony conviction and falsifications during his February 26, 2009 
security clearance interview. Applicant failed to mitigate the financial and personal 
conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on 
June 18, 2013. On October 17, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons to Applicant detailing security concerns under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
 
2 
 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on November 5, 2013, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). On January 14, 2014, Department Counsel issued Applicant an 
Amendment to the SOR detailing additional security concerns under the guideline for 
Personal Conduct. Applicant answered the Amendment to the SOR on January 20, 
2014. The case was assigned to me on January 21, 2014. A notice of hearing was 
issued to Applicant on January 21, 2014, scheduling a hearing for February 11, 2014. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled via video teleconference. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf, called one witness, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through DD, which were admitted into the record without objection. Applicant requested 
that the record be left open to allow him to submit additional evidence and his request 
was granted. On February 14, 2014, Applicant presented additional exhibits, marked AE 
EE through AE PP.1 Department Counsel had no objection to AE EE through AE PP, 
and they were admitted into the record. The record then closed. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 21, 2014.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of a state statute. The statute was not admitted into evidence but was included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibit I (HE I), and administrative notice was taken of it.  
 
Motion to Amend the SOR 
 
At the hearing on February 11, 2014, Department Counsel made a motion to 
amend the SOR, in order to conform to the evidence, by adding ¶ 2.a, pursuant to 
Directive ¶ E3.1.6. This allegation was contained in the Amendment to the SOR sent to 
Applicant January 14, 2014. Applicant had no objections to the amendment and 
previously admitted these allegations in his January 20, 2014 Answer. The motion to 
amend was granted. (Tr. 13-14.) The additional allegations are as follows: 
 
2. Guideline E: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any 
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. Available 
information raising this concern shows that: 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s post-hearing submission was lettered AE CC through AE NN. I renamed the documents to 
avoid duplicating AE CC and AE DD. 
 
3 
 
 
a. You were issued a Statement of [R]easons dated May 7, 2010, which 
contained allegations of criminal conduct and willful false statements of 
material fact. After a hearing the Administrative Judge found the 
following allegation[s] to be true: 
 
i. You were arrested in about [date omitted] in [city and state omitted], 
and charged with (1) Possession of Marijuana for Sale, a felony, (2) 
Cultivating Marijuana, a felony, (3) Tampering With Electric, 
Telephone, and Cable Television, a felony, and (4) Injuring or 
Interfering With Electric Lines, a felony. You pleaded guilty to Count 
(1) and to a reduced charge of Count (2) and were sentenced to 
three years probation to expire February 2012, two days jail with 
credit of time served, pay restitution, community service, and fined. 
Counts (3) and (4) were dismissed. 
 
ii. In a February 26, 2009 interview with an authorized investigator 
with the Department of Defense, you falsified material facts in that 
you stated that you had no idea what your renter was involved with 
at your rental property, you had never seen the cultivating of 
marijuana, and you had failed to notice that the tenant had tapped 
into the electric box of surrounding neighbors; whereas in truth, you 
deliberately failed to disclose that you knew your tenant was 
growing marijuana in your rental property and that the electrical box 
had been tampered with, as set forth above. 
 
The Administrative Judge reached an unfavorable determination in your 
case, based on evidence adduced at your November 30, 2010 hearing. 
He concluded in his June 15, 2011 Determination that in light of your 
continuing inconsistencies, there is some doubt as to your current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 37 years old. He joined the Marine Corps Reserve in 1994. He was 
on active duty from June 2004 to February 2006. He was deployed to an overseas war 
zone from March to October 2005. He again served on active duty from February 2007 
to September 2008. In June 2009 Applicant resigned his commission (he was a chief 
warrant officer-2) and was administratively discharged under other-than-honorable 
conditions. He has been employed with a government contractor since 2000. He seeks 
a security clearance in connection with his employment. (GE 3; GE 5; Tr. 39-42, 69, 73.) 
 
Applicant possesses both bachelor’s and master’s degrees. He was married from 
2001 to 2005. His first marriage ended in divorce. He married his second wife in 
September 2011. He has a daughter, age 16, from a prior relationship, and a one-year-
old son with his second wife. (GE 3; GE 5; Tr. 39-42, 66.) 
 
 
4 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR identified financial 
concerns including five delinquent debts totaling $106,017. Applicant’s debts appear in 
credit reports entered into evidence. Personal Conduct security concerns arose out of a 
2011 denial of Applicant’s application for a security clearance based in part on 
Applicant’s October 2008 criminal conviction and subsequent falsification of a February 
2009 interview with an authorized investigator for the Department of Defense relating to 
the circumstances of his criminal conviction. Applicant admitted SOR subparagraphs 
1.a, 1.c through 1.e., and 2.a. He denied subparagraph 1.b. (Answer; GE 1; GE 2; GE 
4; GE 6; GE 8; GE 10; Tr. 13-14.) 
 
In 2003, Applicant purchased a condominium [property A] for $245,000. He 
initially financed the entire purchase with a single, 30-year fixed-rate mortgage. 
However, he refinanced the purchase and took out a home equity line of credit 
(HELOC) on the property. Property A is his current residence. SOR allegation 1.b, a 
delinquency of $18,046 on a total debt of $283,085, pertains to the primary mortgage for 
property A. Applicant produced documentation that shows he modified this loan in 
October 2013 and has been current on his payments since the bank approved the 
modification. The HELOC on property A is described in SOR allegation 1.a, and is 
identified as having a delinquency of $33,897 on a total debt of $35,500.2 This debt has 
been delinquent since at least June 2011. Applicant made a $3,000 payment toward 
this debt on January 16, 2014, “as a token of good faith” but has not come to an 
agreement with this creditor to make future payments. (GE 10; AE DD; AE EE; AE FF; 
AE GG; AE HH; Tr. 41-49, 59-60.) 
 
In December 2005 Applicant purchased an investment property [property B] for 
$420,000. He purchased a second investment property [property C] for $500,000 in 
January 2007.  He rented out both property B and property C to tenants. (Tr. 39-43, 53-
55.) 
 
Applicant testified that he had difficulties renting property C for the first three 
months after he purchased the property. His friend knew a potential tenant and 
arranged for that individual to lease the premises.3 The tenant illegally cultivated 
marijuana at the property. Applicant admitted at hearing that he was aware that 
marijuana was being grown on the property from both the odor of the marijuana and a 
“big, like a box, shed thing, in the garage,” beginning approximately the second month 
of the lease. He failed to evict the tenant or report the marijuana cultivation to 
authorities. In October 2008 Applicant was arrested and charged with: (1) Possession of 
Marijuana for Sale, a felony; (2) Cultivating Marijuana, a felony; (3) Tampering With 
Electric, Telephone, and Cable Television, a felony; and (4) Injuring or Interfering With 
Electric Lines, a felony. He pled guilty to Count (1) and to a reduced misdemeanor-level 
                                                          
2 The debt identified in SOR subparagraph 1.c is for the same amount and uses the same partial account 
number. It is found to be a duplicate of SOR subparagraph 1.a. 
3 Applicant reported in his July 2, 2013 Personal Subject Interview that he found the tenants through 
Craigslist. (GE 7.) 
 
5 
 
charge of Count (2). Counts (3) and (4) were dismissed. He was sentenced to three 
years of probation, which expired February 2012; served two days in jail (with credit for 
time served); paid restitution; performed community service; and paid fines. On May 16, 
2012, he petitioned the Superior Court of his state to withdraw his plea. The Court 
granted Applicant’s Petition. It dismissed Count (1) and Count (2) was expunged from 
Applicant’s record. (HE I; GE 1; GE 2; GE 5; AE A; Tr. 53-57.) 
 
In February 2009, Applicant was apparently interviewed by an authorized 
investigator of the Department of Defense, although Department Counsel failed to enter 
documentation of that interview into evidence. In that interview, Applicant allegedly  
denied knowledge of his tenant’s illegal activities. Based in part on this evidence 
adduced at a security clearance determination hearing held November 30, 2010, an 
administrative judge from DOHA concluded in a written decision dated June 15, 2011, 
that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information should be denied. Applicant 
admitted in his testimony on February 11, 2014, that he falsified the facts during his 
February 2009 interview with an authorized investigator of the Department of Defense 
and during his testimony to the other administrative judge in November 2010. He 
explained that his falsifications were due to not “thinking straight.” (GE 1; GE 2; GE 5; 
Tr. 57.) 
 
Due to the high level of defense legal fees from his criminal court case, along 
with the costs involved in maintaining his rental properties and a decline in the 
economy, Applicant found himself financially overwhelmed. In December 2009 he short 
sold property B. He does not owe anything further towards the mortgages on that home. 
Similarly, in March 2010 Applicant stopped making his mortgage payments on property 
C. It was sold through a bank-approved short sale in March 2012. Applicant no longer is 
liable for any debt related to property C. (GE 5; Tr. 50, 64-65.) 
 
Applicant has two delinquent credit cards that he used to maintain properties B 
and C. The first credit card was delinquent in the amount of $9,181, as alleged in 
subparagraph 1.d. This account had been delinquent since October 2012. Applicant 
produced a letter from this creditor, dated January 17, 2014, which indicated this 
creditor “will no longer attempt to collect the unpaid debt” and issued Applicant a “1099-
C Cancellation of Debt” for this account. This debt is resolved. The second, in allegation 
1.e, is a credit card debt of $10,996, and it remains delinquent. It has been delinquent 
since January 2009. Applicant testified that he is attempting to negotiate this debt with 
the creditor but has not yet resolved this account. He produced documentation that he 
has resolved two other credit card debts that were not alleged on the SOR. He is 
current on his student loans. (GE 10; AE W; AE X; AE BB; AE II; Tr. 49-52, 62-64.) 
 
Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement, completed on February 6, 2014, 
shows that he has a remainder of $2,422 after he satisfies his monthly expenses. He 
identified assets of $30,000 including $5,000 of bank savings and three vehicles. (AE 
V.) 
 
Applicant testified that he has significantly changed his life since his criminal 
incidents and falsifications. He expressed remorse for his prior criminal activities. He 
 
6 
 
earned his master’s degree in 2010. He underwent six counseling sessions with a 
licensed psychologist in 2008 and 2009. His psychologist opined that Applicant 
achieved his “presenting goal” of getting “back on the straight and narrow.” In 2013 
Applicant sought treatment for stress management with a licensed “mental health social 
worker.” He is attended an eight-week class in “Mantram Repetition.” He testified he is 
now focused on being “the best father, husband, and citizen that [he] can be.” (AE Y; 
AE OO; AE PP; Tr. 66-73.) 
 
One witness spoke on his behalf and others wrote letters of support. They noted 
that Applicant is respected for his honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity by his 
professional contacts. His performance appraisals reflect he is a valued employee and 
that he exceeds performance expectations. He has received a number of awards and 
certificates in recognition of his job performance and valuable contributions to his 
company. He presented a number of emails from coworkers and professional contacts 
that recognized his hard work and dedication. (AE B through AE U; AE Z; AE AA; AE JJ 
through AE NN; Tr. 76-87.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
7 
 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. The relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately $106,017 in delinquent 
debt. Applicant modified the refinanced loan described in allegation 1.b, and is now in 
good standing on that $283,085 mortgage. The delinquent credit card debt in allegation 
1.d was forgiven by the creditor after Applicant failed to satisfy it for several years. 
Applicant made a single payment in January 2014 on the delinquent debt identified in 
allegation 1.a (and duplicated in 1.c), but has not reached a repayment agreement with 
this creditor. Allegation 1.e, a credit card delinquency of $10,996, is his oldest debt and 
has been unaddressed since 2009. In its entirety, the Government has established its 
prima facie case against Applicant. The evidence shows Applicant has an 
“unwillingness to satisfy” his delinquent accounts, given his monthly remainder. He has 
an overall “history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
8 
 
 
 Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, but found inapplicable, including:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts were caused, in significant part, by his criminal conduct. 
Therefore, the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were not largely beyond 
Applicant’s control. He failed to articulate why he had waited until the month prior to the 
hearing to make a $3,000 payment on the debt alleged in 1.a. and he failed to 
document his efforts to further resolve that debt. While the debt in 1.d is resolved by the 
creditor’s forgiveness of the debt, Applicant did not act responsibly or demonstrate a 
good-faith effort to repay it. Accordingly, resulting concerns under AG ¶ 19(c) remain 
unmitigated. The debt alleged in 1.e has not been resolved. His financial delinquencies 
are ongoing. He has no concrete plan to address his two remaining delinquencies, 
which total approximately $40,000, despite his significant monthly remainder. While 
Applicant receives some credit for the mitigating evidence including, but not limited to, 
the modification of his mortgage loan on property A and maintaining two credit cards in 
good standing, the mitigating evidence presented is not sufficient to overcome the 
concerns raised by his conduct. 
 
The Appeal Board has held, “A security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”4 Security 
clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. 
Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to 
make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”5 
Applicant’s ongoing decision not to address his remaining debt in a meaningful manner 
reflects poorly on his current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. I cannot find that financial problems are unlikely to recur. He has 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
5 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
9 
 
not established that the problem is being resolved or is under control, or that he made a 
good faith effort to repay his remaining delinquent accounts. None of the mitigating 
conditions were sufficiently established by the record evidence with respect to those 
debts and the financial history of which they are symptomatic. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 The Government alleged that the June 15, 2011 unfavorable security clearance 
decision by a DOHA administrative judge raises concerns in connection with Applicant’s 
present application for a security clearance. That adverse decision was based, in part, 
on Applicant’s October 2008 arrest and subsequent conviction, and his February 26, 
2009 falsification. The Government did not allege the underlying conduct as raising 
specific concerns at present. The previous adverse decision in not per se disqualifying, 
since Directive ¶¶ E3.1.37 through E3.1.40 permit reapplication at least one year after a 
final unfavorable clearance decision. However, when taken as a whole, Applicant’s 
admitted past criminal and personal conduct, which led to his disqualification from 
possessing a security clearance in 2011, is inherently connected with his financial 
problems, discussed above. This credible adverse information is properly considered, 
as a whole, under Guideline E. It supports a whole-person assessment that Applicant’s 
recent history indicates he may continue to exercise questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, and unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations; and therefore may not properly safeguard protected information. AG ¶ 
16(c) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
 
10 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant pointed to achievements like receiving his master’s degree in 2010 and 
his counseling in 2008 and 2009 as mitigation. Yet, at his November 30, 2010 hearing, 
which occurred after his treatment with the psychologist and after he achieved his 
master’s degree, he was not fully truthful with the administrative judge. He also cited 
more recent therapy with a licensed social worker. He offered volumes of character 
evidence that averred he is an honest, reliable, and valued employee. Yet during 2013 
and through his latest hearing, the details of his explanations continue to be 
inconsistent. For instance, in the July 2, 2013 Personal Subject Interview, he indicated 
that he found the property C marijuana-growing tenants through Craigslist, but he 
testified at hearing in February 2014 that a friend introduced him to those tenants.  
 
Applicant bears the burden to show that the Government’s concerns have been 
mitigated. He has not established that the factors that led to the denial of his clearance 
in 2011 happened under unique circumstances or that they are unlikely to recur. His 
veracity remains in question and he potentially remains vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
11 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is a hardworking and dedicated employee who performs well on the 
job. He failed to produce sufficient documentation that his remaining delinquent debts 
have been addressed or are otherwise being satisfied in a responsible manner. His 
veracity and personal conduct are still in question. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations or Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
