 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ____________ )  ISCR Case No. 13-00848 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence.  Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories 
on July 13, 2013.2 On October 31, 2013, the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (SF 86), dated September 10, 2012.  
 
2
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated July 12, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
modified (Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access 
to Classified Information (effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. The 
SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on November 7, 2013. In a sworn statement, dated 
November 7, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. However, on January 13, 2014, 
he withdrew that decision when he submitted an amended response to the SOR and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on January 28, 2014, and the case was assigned 
to me on January 29, 2014. A Notice of Hearing was issued on February 3, 2014, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on February 26, 2014. 
 
During the hearing, 3 Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 3) and 63 Applicant 
exhibits (AE A through AE KKK) were admitted into evidence, without objection. 
Applicant and eight other witnesses testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was 
received on March 7, 2014.  
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to the State of Israel 
(Israel), appearing in 12 written submissions. Facts are proper for administrative notice 
when they are easily verifiable by an authorized source, and relevant and material to the 
case. In this instance, the Government relied on source information regarding Israel in 
publications or press releases of the U.S. Department of State,3 U.S. Department of 
Commerce,4 the Congressional Research Service (CRS),5 the Interagency Operations 
                                                          
3
 U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: Israel, the West Bank and Gaza, dated June 19, 
2013. 
 
4
 U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Order Relating to Telogy LLC, dated May 
5, 2010; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: New Jersey Firm Fined 
$700,000 for Unlicensed Exports of Specialty Powders, dated October 1, 2009; U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: California Exporter Settles Criminal and Civil Charges for Illegal 
Exports of High Performance Oscilloscopes to Israel, dated April 12, 2005; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of 
Industry and Security, Press Release: Minnesota Company Settles Charges Relating to Illegal Exports, dated 
December 15, 2003; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: Israeli Man 
Settles Charges of Concealing Material Facts, dated February 2, 2002; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of 
Industry and Security, Press Release: Arizona Company Settles Charges of Illegal Exports of Lasers, dated May 22, 
2001; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: Pennsylvania Company Fined 
for Export Violations Involving China and Israel, dated March 15, 2011.  
 
5
 CRS, Library of Congress, Israel: Background and U.S. Relations, dated June 12, 2013. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Security Support Staff (IOSS),6 and the Office of the National Counterintelligence 
Executive (ONCIX).7 
 
The press releases were presented apparently to substantiate that Israel actively 
pursues collection of U.S. economic and propriety information, and, therefore, 
Applicant’s relationship with an Israeli friend and the friend’s Israeli wife, both of whom 
reside in the Hellenic Republic (Greece), raised suspicion about him. None of the cases 
cited involved Applicant personally or involved espionage through any familial or friend 
relationship. The anecdotal evidence of criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens or 
foreign citizens or companies is of decreased relevance to an assessment of Applicant’s 
security suitability, especially where there is no evidence that Applicant, or any member 
of his family, was ever involved in any aspect of the cited cases or ever targeted by any 
Israeli intelligence official.  
 
With regard to the ONCIX reports, I note that one is 14 years old, and the cited 
facts are based, in part, upon a private survey of “nearly a dozen selected Fortune 500 
companies.” The report does not indicate how the companies were selected, what 
companies were selected, or how they decided upon their input to the survey. The 
survey results do not indicate whether the collection of economic information was 
accomplished through “open” methods, such as reading a newspaper, that raise no 
security issues under the relevant criteria, or more covert methods that might raise 
security concerns. Furthermore, as the selected companies are unidentified, it is 
impossible to assess possible bias or determine if there is an existing anti-Israel 
economic or political agenda. For these reasons, I conclude the factual matters 
asserted by Department Counsel, as demonstrated by the proffered report, should be 
given less weight than information from a more authoritative source. It appears that the 
collection method of information changed after that report, and the above concern does 
not pertain to the subsequent ONCIX report. 
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,8 as set 
forth below under the Israel subsection. However, while I do not reject the facts set forth 
in the various press releases, the inference that Applicant or his family, or his Israeli 
                                                          
6
 IOSS, Intelligence Threat Handbook, dated June 2004 (excerpts only). 
 
7
 ONCIX, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, FY 2005, 
dated August 2006; ONCIX, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, 
FY 2000, undated. 
 
8
 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the Internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents). Tr. at 12-16. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
friend and the friend’s Israeli wife participated in criminal activity was not argued during 
the hearing and is specifically rejected.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegation (¶ 1.a.) of the 
SOR. That admission is incorporated as a finding of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor for which he has 
served as the senior member of the technical staff and aviation integrator since 
September 2012. He was previously a vice president - general manager, and a director 
of operations with different employers, as well as a self-employed consultant. Applicant 
was briefly unemployed from December 2005 until February 2006, and again from May 
2012 until September 2012. He served in the U.S. Army inactive reserve from July 1977 
until July 1997, when he was honorably retired as a sergeant first class.9 Applicant is 
seeking to obtain a security clearance, the level of which has not been specified. He 
was granted a secret clearance in 1977, and a top secret clearance in 1983. An interim 
secret security clearance was revoked for unspecified reasons in February 2013.10 
 
Applicant was born in the United States in 1960 to parents, both of whom were 
also born in the United States.11 A foster child from the age of 12, following his father’s 
death and his mother’s inability to raise him, Applicant attended five different high 
schools before he returned home and obtained his General Educational Development 
(GED) diploma.12 He immediately enlisted in the U.S. Army. He subsequently received a 
bachelor of science degree in business administration in management, summa cum 
laude, in July 2009,13 and a master’s degree in business administration (MBA) in 
December 2010.14 Applicant was married three times: the first marriage, to a woman 
born in Germany, lasted from October 1978 until October 1987;15 the second marriage, 
to a woman born in the United States, was from March 1989 until July 1995;16 and in 
November 1996, Applicant married another woman born in the United States.17 In 
addition to his own two children (a daughter born in 1993, and a son born in 1995), he 
                                                          
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 16-17; AE A (Certificate of Retirement, dated August 1, 1997). 
 
10
 Tr. at 29, 52-53. 
 
11
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 5, 21-22. 
 
12
 Tr. at 24-25. 
 
13
 AE BBB (Transcript, dated August 3, 2009). 
 
14
 AE AAA (Transcript, undated). 
 
15
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated November 5, 2012), at 2. Applicant’s first wife is now deceased. 
 
16
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 2. 
 
17
 Tr. at 53-54; GE 1, supra note 1, at 19-20. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
also has two stepchildren. All of the children and stepchildren were born in the United 
States.18 
 
Military Service 
 
 During his military career, Applicant was awarded the Meritorious Service Medal, 
the Army Commendation Medal (three awards), the Army Achievement Medal (three 
awards), and the Good Conduct Medal (four awards),19 as well as numerous certificates 
of achievement or appreciation, and letters or memoranda of commendation, 
appreciation, or congratulations. One such letter of appreciation was from a major 
general.20 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
This case is somewhat unusual for the security concerns of the DOD 
adjudicators regarding Applicant arise not because he was born in, or currently has 
family members in, Israel; because he has a business or professional associate or 
friend in Israel; because Applicant has a substantial business, financial, or property 
interest in Israel; because he is sharing living quarters with a person or persons, and 
that relationship creates a heightened risk of inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion by any governmental entity of Israel; or that Israeli representatives or nationals 
are acting to increase Applicant’s vulnerability to possible future exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Instead, the sole identified reason for 
the security concern is that Applicant has a “close association” with a citizen of Israel, 
who resides in Greece, and that individual owns a business that specializes in particular 
electronic security and surveillance systems, and he has conducted business with 
various foreign private businesses and governments. In other words, it is the position of 
the DOD CAF that Applicant’s connections to that individual creates “a potential conflict 
of interest between [Applicant’s] obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and [Applicant’s] desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.”  
 
The individual in question was born in Romania, raised and educated in Israel, 
and served with the Israeli Defense Force (IDF) on active duty and as a member of the 
reserve as a paratrooper and paramedic.21 He is a dual citizen, holding citizenship in 
                                                          
18
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 23-25; Tr. at 54. 
 
19
 AE C (Certificate, dated September 19, 1994); AE D (Certificate, dated August 10, 1993); AE K 
(Permanent Orders, dated July 6, 1990); AE Q (Permanent Orders, dated ----, 1987); AE U (Certificate, undated); AE 
W (Permanent Orders, dated August 27, 1985); AE Z (Certificate, dated January 4, 1985); AE BB (Permanent 
Orders, dated January 8, 1985); AE EE (Permanent Orders, dated June 18, 1984); AE DD (Certificate, dated June 
28, 1984); AE FF (Certificate, dated May 30, 1984); AE GG (Permanent Orders, dated May 3, 1984); AE II 
(Permanent Orders, dated January 23, 1984); AE UU (Permanent Orders, dated January 14, 1981); AE XX 
(Certificate, undated). 
 
20
 AE G (Letter, dated December 10, 1991). 
 
21
 GE 3 (Curriculum Vitae, dated August 21, 2013); AE CCC (E-mail, dated September 9, 2012). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
both Israel and Greece,22 is married to a Greek national,23 and has permanently resided 
in Greece since 1997.24 He has developed surveillance systems for various Greek law 
enforcement agencies, the U.S. Army, various types of ships, including cruise ships and 
research ships, worldwide, as well as hotels, colleges, casinos, and airlines in Greece, 
Israel, and elsewhere throughout the world.25 His adult children reside in Israel, and one 
minor child resides with him and his wife in Greece.26 Other than his active duty and 
reserve service with the IDF between 1975 and 1997, Applicant’s “associate” never had 
any affiliation with the Israeli government, intelligence service, or any political party.27 
 
Applicant first met the individual in question in 2004 when Applicant was tasked 
by his employer at that time to train the individual in the operation of some equipment 
that had been purchased by the Greek Army. The individual would then, in-turn, train 
members of the Greek Army in Greece. The assignment was completed, but Applicant 
was subsequently tasked to augment the training in Greece. Applicant traveled to 
Greece to fulfill his obligations, accompanied by his wife. The individual and his wife met 
Applicant and his wife at the airport and served as chaperones and translators during 
the stay.28 At that time, Applicant’s relationship with the individual was merely 
professional. However, the two wives developed a closer relationship. Later that same 
year, the individual’s wife visited Applicant and his wife for five days over the 
Thanksgiving holiday. The individual did not accompany her to the United States.29 The 
two wives bonded over shopping and sightseeing. There was little interaction over the 
next two years. 
 
In 2006, Applicant and his wife flew to Greece on vacation and joined the 
individual and his wife at their home for a few days before heading out to an island for a 
week, where they learned about Greek culture and enjoyed Greek food. Applicant and 
his wife returned to Athens for a couple of days before returning home.30 In 2008, 
Applicant was tasked with representing his employer at a three-day worldwide 
conference in Greece. He and his wife returned to Greece and they stayed with the 
individual and his wife. They remained some extra days simply laying by the beach and 
enjoying each other’s company.31 The last time Applicant and the individual saw each 
                                                          
22
 GE 3, supra note 21. 
 
23
 GE 3, supra note 21; Tr. at 32. 
 
24
 GE 3, supra note 21. 
 
25
 GE 3, supra note 21. 
 
26
 GE 3, supra note 21. 
 
27
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 3. 
 
28
 Tr. at 31-32. 
 
29
 Tr. at 32. 
 
30
 Tr. at 33-34. 
 
31
 Tr. at 34-35. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
other face-to-face occurred during that trip in 2008, approximately six years ago.32 Since 
2004, the families have exchanged intermittent e-mails, and have occasionally used 
Skype. Applicant estimated the number of “contacts” during the entire period to be more 
than 75 times.33 They generally discuss family issues, politics, and the economies in the 
United States and Greece.34 They rarely have telephone contact.35 The contacts 
between the families have tapered off over time, and eventually, because of the security 
concerns alleged by the DOD CAF, Applicant’s contacts with the individual essentially 
ceased, and they have had no contact, except for the exchange of Christmas gifts, or a 
New Year’s Skype, since about August 2013.36 
 
In September 2012, Applicant described his relationship with the individual as 
“close friends.”37 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant described the relationship as 
“merely friends with no business ties.”38 During the hearing, Applicant explained that his 
wife’s relationship with the individual’s wife was the stimulus behind his continuing 
relationship with the individual. As a result, the four of them developed a closer 
relationship over the years.39 That relationship is characterized more as a family 
relationship or personal relationship rather than a close personal relationship.40 Since 
they have not met face-to-face in such a long period, that friendship has “waned a little 
bit,” but Applicant still considers the individual to be “just a friend.”41 Although Applicant 
once loaned the individual $200, which was never repaid, neither Applicant nor his wife 
has any investment interests in the individual’s business.42 
 
The business activities of Applicant and the individual are in different spheres. 
Applicant’s former company, the one for which he worked when he met the individual, 
was into the manufacture of chemical and biological warfare decontaminants which 
were spun off into commercial products for mold and for the decontamination of 
clandestine methamphetamine laboratories.43 His present employer is into software 
design and support for modeling and simulation of specific missile defense systems.44 
                                                          
32
 Tr. at 35. 
33
 GE 2, supra note 2, at 6-7. 
 
34
 Tr. at 35-36; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 1. 
 
35
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 3. 
 
36
 Tr. at 46-47. 
 
37
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 28. 
 
38
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 1. 
 
39
 Tr. at 44-45. 
 
40
 Tr. at 54-55. 
 
41
 Tr. at 58-59. 
 
42
 Tr. at 37, 51-52. 
 
43
 Tr. at 41-42. 
 
44
 Tr. at 56-57. 
 
8 
                                      
 
The individual’s company specializes in developing and installing surveillance 
systems.45 
 
Applicant denied any preference, sympathy, or allegiance with foreign interests 
or governments,46 and stated that his foreign relationships have never, nor will they 
ever, be used to pressure, blackmail, or coerce him in any way.47 He does not believe 
there should be one iota of a security concern regarding any “divided loyalties” on his 
part.48 
 
Character References 
 
The president of Applicant’s employer, Applicant’s senior manager/direct 
supervisor, friends, and past and present co-workers are effusive in their praise for him. 
Applicant has been characterized as very discrete, trustworthy, loyal, dedicated, 
completely honest, patriotic, eager, friendly, dependable, well-liked, deliberate, 
enthusiastic, committed to excellence, and extremely professional. He possesses 
excellent moral character and judgment.49 When several congressional office buildings 
were contaminated with anthrax, Applicant served as the lead technician for two weeks 
while decontaminating the area at the risk of his own life, using his employer’s 
decontaminant foam and equipment.50 
 
Israel 
 
In his motion for administrative notice, Department Counsel highlighted nine 
factors regarding Israel derived from the identified publications that he felt were 
significant. Included in those factors were the following: “The Government of Israel 
considers U.S. citizens who also hold Israeli citizenship or have a claim to dual 
nationality to be Israeli citizens for immigration and other legal purposes[,]” and “U.S. 
citizens visiting Israel have been subjected to prolonged questioning and thorough 
searches by Israeli authorities upon entry or departure. In some cases, Israeli 
authorities have denied U.S. citizens access to U.S. consular officers during the 
temporary immigration detention.” Both factors are essentially irrelevant and immaterial, 
as Applicant has never been a citizen of any country but the United States, and he has 
never attempted to enter Israel.  
 
                                                          
 
45
 GE 3, supra note 21; Tr. at 50. 
 
46
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 15, at 3. 
 
47
 GE 2, supra note 2, at 15. 
 
48
 Tr. at 38. 
 
49
 AE III (Character reference, dated February 21, 2004); AE JJJ (Character reference, dated February 22, 
2004); AE KKK (Character reference, dated February 16, 2004); Tr. at 64-102.   
  
50
 Tr. at 68. 
 
9 
                                      
 
In addition, Department Counsel emphasized five factors related to individuals 
and companies selling classified documents to Israel, disclosing classified information to 
Israeli diplomats and lobbyists, violating export controls, illegally exporting restricted 
technology to Israel, and illegal technology transfers to Israel. Such information is 
considered anecdotal evidence of criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens or foreign 
citizens or companies. As such, as noted above, it is of decreased relevance to an 
assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, especially where there is no evidence that 
Applicant, or any member of his family, was ever involved in any aspect of the cited 
cases or ever targeted by any Israeli intelligence official. The two remaining factors cited 
by Department Counsel are: Israel is one of the active collectors of proprietary 
information, and Israel is a major global arms exporter. 
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy of nearly 7.7 million people, drawn from 
more than 100 countries. As such, Israeli society is rich in cultural diversity and artistic 
creativity. Following a proposed United Nations (UN) partition plan under which 
Palestine would be divided into separate Jewish and Arab states, and a British 
withdrawal from the area, in May 1948, Israel proclaimed its independence. It was 
immediately invaded by armies from neighboring Arab states which rejected the UN 
partition plan. The initial conflict was concluded by armistice agreements in 1949. The 
United States was the first country to officially recognize Israel, only eleven minutes 
after Israel declared its independence.   
 
Following the armistice, Israel and its Arab neighbors have, over the ensuing 
decades, engaged in periodic hostilities involving national military forces attacking each 
other. In addition, because of Arab support of several terrorist organizations, including 
Hamas, Al-Fatah, and Hezbollah, there have been an increasing number of terrorist 
incidents, including rocket attacks, kidnappings, and suicide bombings in Israeli cities, 
and retaliatory Israeli actions across Israel’s borders. Terrorist attacks are a continuing 
threat in Israel, many of which are directed at American interests. U.S. citizens, 
including tourists, students, residents, and U.S. mission personnel, have been injured or 
killed by terrorists while in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza. Due to the volatile security 
environment in those areas, the United States continues to warn against any travel to 
them. Hamas, a U.S. State Department-designated foreign terrorist organization - 
violently assumed control over Gaza in 2007. No official travel is permitted inside the 
Gaza Strip and official travel to the West Bank is restricted to mission-essential 
business or mission-approved purposes.  
 
In 1967, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 242, the “land for peace” 
formula, which called for the establishment of a just and lasting peace based on Israeli 
withdrawal from all territories occupied in 1967 in return for the end of all states of 
belligerency, respect for the sovereignty of all states in the area, and the right to live in 
peace within secure recognized boundaries. In 1979, Israel and Egypt signed a peace 
treaty, and in 1994, Israel and Jordan signed a peace treaty. In 1995, Israel and the 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) signed an interim agreement. Nevertheless, 
Israel’s right to exist has been threatened and terrorist incidents occur with increasing 
frequency. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Most Israelis enjoy a middle class standard of living, and per capita income is on 
a par with some European Union member states. Israel generally respects the human 
rights of its citizens, although there have been some issues pertaining to the treatment 
of Palestinian detainees and discrimination against Arab citizens. Despite the instability 
and armed conflict that have marked Israel’s relations within the region since 1948, 
Israel has developed a diversified, technologically advanced market economy focused 
on high-technology electronic and biomedical equipment, metal products, processed 
foods, chemicals, and transport equipment. Israel is a world leader in software 
development. 
 
The United States and Israel have a close friendship based on common 
democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests, and the United States is 
Israel’s largest single trading partner. In 1985, Israel and the United States concluded a 
Free Trade Agreement designed to strengthen economic ties by eliminating tariffs. As of 
2011, $22.1 billion in Israel’s exports went to the United States while $14.3 billion in 
imports came from the United States. The U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) is 
required by law to identify countries which deny adequate and effective protection of 
intellectual property rights. In 2005, the USTR placed Israel on its Priority Watch List. In 
2012, Israel was one of 13 such countries including, Argentina, Canada, and Chile.  
  
Israel and the United States do not have a mutual defense agreement. 
Nevertheless, on several occasions, former President George W. Bush declared that 
the United States would defend Israel militarily in the event of an attack. The United 
States has pledged to ensure that Israel maintains a “qualitative military edge” over its 
neighbors, and has been a major source of Israeli military funding. Strong congressional 
support for Israel has resulted in Israel receiving benefits not available to other 
countries. Israel is permitted to use part of its foreign military assistance grant for 
procurement spending from Israeli defense companies. Israel was one of the first 
countries designated “a major non-NATO ally,” affording it preferential treatment in 
bidding for U.S. defense contracts and access to expanded weapons systems at lower 
prices. Israel and the United States are partners in the strategic defense initiative “Star 
Wars” missile defense project, and have concluded numerous treaties and agreements 
aimed at strengthening military ties, including agreements on mutual defense 
assistance, procurement, and security of information. The two countries participate in 
joint military exercises and collaborate on military research and weapons development. 
Arms agreements between Israel and the United States limit the use of U.S. military 
equipment to defensive purposes. The United States has acted to restrict aid and/or 
rebuked Israel in the past for possible improper use of U.S.-supplied military equipment. 
 
The United States has voiced concerns about Israeli settlements, Israel’s military 
sales to China, Israel’s inadequate protection of U.S. intellectual property, and 
espionage-related cases implicating Israeli officials. Israel was listed as one of the 
seven nations, along with China, Japan, France, Korea, Taiwan, and India, that 
aggressively targeted U.S. economic properties in 2000. Israel was not specifically so 
identified in 2005, unlike China and Russia, both of which were specifically identified as 
aggressive collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. technologies. As noted above, 
some Israeli military members, as well as a variety of individuals and companies from 
 
11 
                                      
 
the United States have been implicated in the improper export to Israel of protected 
U.S. technology and intellectual property.  
 
Greece 
 
 Greece, an important partner of the United States, is a member of the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and occupies a strategic location in the Eastern 
Mediterranean on the southern flank of NATO. It contributes to NATO operations in 
Afghanistan, did so in Kosovo, and is active in counterterrorism and counter-piracy 
maritime efforts.51 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”52 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”53   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”54 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
                                                          
51
 AE HHH (U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, Fact Sheet: U.S. Relations 
With Greece, dated September 10, 2013). 
52
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
53
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
54
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
 
12 
                                      
 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and it has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.55  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”56 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”57 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
55
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
56
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
57
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.58 Applicant’s relationship with his friend, who is a 
dual citizen of Israel and Greece, and who resides in Greece, is the current security 
concern for the Government. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns, but 
only one such condition might apply here. Under AG ¶ 7(a), contact with a foreign family 
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of 
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion is potentially disqualifying. 
I find AG ¶ 7(a) applies in this case. However, the security significance of this condition 
requires further examination of Applicant’s relationship with his friend to determine the 
degree of “heightened risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States. In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”59 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States is relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it controls is 
likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the United States. It 
is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the existence of a 
democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely that a foreign 
government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or associates in 
                                                          
58
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
59
 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
that foreign country. As noted above, Israel and the United States have a close 
friendship, with the United States committed to Israel’s security. The United States’ 
efforts on behalf of Israel are to see that Israel maintains a “qualitative military edge” in 
the region. Israel receives preferential treatment in bidding for U.S. defense contracts 
and substantial economic aid. Nevertheless, the interests of the United States and 
Israel are not always completely aligned, for each country has its own self-interests, 
especially in the areas of national security and economics. 
 
Israel has been listed as an aggressive collector of sensitive and protected U.S. 
technologies. Considering the nature of the Israeli government and society, it is unlikely 
that the Israeli government would attempt coercive means to obtain sensitive 
information. There is no evidence that Israel has used coercive methods. However, it 
does not eliminate the possibility that Israel would employ some non-coercive measures 
in an attempt to exploit a friend or relative. While Applicant’s friend may maintain his 
Israeli citizenship, he is also a citizen and full-time resident of Greece. There may be 
speculation as to “some risk,” but that speculation, in the abstract, does not, without 
more, establish sufficient evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a 
security clearance.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s friend is, or has been, a political activist, 
challenging the policies of the Israeli government; has ever had any affiliation with the 
Israeli government, intelligence service, or any political party (other than his service with 
the IDF); that terrorists have approached or threatened him for any reason; or that the 
Israeli government has approached Applicant. As such, there is a reduced possibility 
that they would be targets for coercion or exploitation by the Israeli government, which 
may seek to quiet those who speak out against it.  
 
Throughout the world, and especially in Israel, terrorist attacks are a continuing 
threat. Within Israel, many of those attacks are directed at, not only Jewish or Israeli 
interests, but American interests as well. However, a distinction must be made between 
the risk to physical security that may exist in the abstract because Applicant has no 
association with anyone within Israel (since his friend resides in Greece), and the types 
of concern that rise to the level of compromising Applicant’s ability to safeguard national 
security. Israel does not condone the indiscriminate acts of violence against its citizens 
or tourists in Israel or those who reside in, or visit, Greece, and strictly enforces security 
measures designed to combat and minimize the risk presented by terrorism. Also, there 
is no evidence that terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or his friend for 
any reason.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the U.S. Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may apply where the evidence shows 
 
15 
                                      
 
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty or 
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where contact or communication with foreign 
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.  
Applicant’s relationship with his friend is such that it is highly unlikely that 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of that 
friend or Israel, and the interests of the U.S. The friend’s sole connections with Israel 
are that he is a citizen of Israel, with grown children in Israel. But, he has not resided in 
Israel since 1997. Except for periodic business activities throughout the world, including 
Israel, his business is not based in Israel. He is a Romanian-born citizen of Greece, and 
has resided in Greece with his Greek wife for a period of 17 years. There may have 
been terrorist attacks by Hamas, Al-Fatah, and Hezbollah, in Israel, the West Bank, and 
Gaza. Many of those terrorist incidents, including rocket attacks, kidnappings, and 
suicide bombings, may have been directed at American interests, including U.S. 
tourists, students, residents, and U.S. mission personnel. However, neither Applicant 
nor his friend is located in Israel, and those actions have little significance on the 
situation here. 
Applicant is an honorably retired U.S. Army sergeant first class who was granted 
a secret clearance in 1977, and a top secret clearance in 1983. His interim secret 
security clearance was revoked for unspecified reasons in February 2013. His entire 
family, including parents, wife, and children, are native-born U.S. citizens. They still 
reside in the United States. Like many individuals, Applicant and his wife enjoy periodic 
visits to Greece. There is no conflict of interest, because Applicant’s sense of loyalty or 
obligation to his friend is so minimal, and Applicant has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S. that he can be expected to resolve any potential 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Applicant’s relationship with his friend has evolved over time. They have 
socialized face-to-face in 2004, 2006, and 2008. Applicant and his wife stayed with his 
friend during the visits in 2006 and 2008. They initially maintained contact or 
communication with the friend and the friend’s wife with more frequency, but as the 
years passed, the relationship has waned. The present relationship, primarily through e-
mail and Skype, is relatively casual and infrequent. There is little likelihood that 
Applicant’s relationship with his friend could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
16 
                                      
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant and his family - his wife, 
children, and stepchildren, as well as his surviving parent - are native-born U.S. citizens 
residing in the United States. His Romanian-born friend is a dual citizen of Israel and 
Greece, residing and working in Greece. Applicant’s relationship with his friend has 
evolved into a more casual and distant relationship. Applicant is not vulnerable to direct 
coercion or exploitation through his friend, and the realistic possibility of pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress with regard to his friend is low. 
 
Decisions concerning Israel must take into consideration the geopolitical situation 
in that country, as well as the potential dangers existing there. Israel, like the United 
States, is a democracy.  Both countries have been victims of Islamic terrorists. Because 
both nations share a common vision for the future, it is in Israel’s interests to maintain 
friendship with the United States to counterbalance international terrorism. It is very 
unlikely Israel would forcefully attempt to coerce Applicant through his relationship with 
his friend who does not even reside in Israel. Furthermore, while there is evidence that 
Israel is an active participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade 
secret theft, or violations of export-control regulations, there is no evidence that 
Applicant has been targeted.   
 
As noted above, Applicant is well respected by his friends and colleagues for his 
honesty, integrity, and truthfulness. That he and his friend keep in periodic contact 
should not be considered a negative factor. (See AG && 2(a)(1) through 2(a)(9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
17 
                                      
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
