KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Appeal Board examines a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by
substantial evidence.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection or
obligation to in-laws.  Prior lengthy service to a foreign government is relevant to a Guideline B
analysis.  Adverse decision affirmed.    
CASE NO: 13-00559.a1
DATE: 03/12/2014
DATE: March 12, 2014
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-00559
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On  
July 12, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the
written record.  On November 6, 2013, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(a): “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons . . . are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual . .
. and the interests of the U.S.”  
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal.  Applicant
was born in Afghanistan, where he attended high school and college.  He served as a high-ranking
officer in the Afghan military from the early 1980s to the early 1990s and, afterward, remained in
the inactive reserves.  He received an honorable discharge from the military.  Applicant left
Afghanistan in the early 1990s, moving to another country in the Middle Ease.  Applicant came to
the U.S. in the early 2000s, becoming a naturalized citizen several years later.  
Applicant’s spouse was born and raised in Afghanistan.  She is a naturalized U.S. citizen,
as are her four children with Applicant.  Applicant’s mother and father-in-law are citizens and
residents of Afghanistan.  They are not aware of the nature of his work.  Although in his response
to the File of Relevant Material Applicant stated that he had not spoken with them in over a year,
in an earlier document he stated that he contacted them once a month.  
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for the quality of his work performance.  A
supervisor stated that his efforts were critical to mission achievement.
Afghanistan has a history of political unrest.  Terrorist activities remain high in Afghanistan.
Terrorist  organizations such as the Taliban and al-Qaeda operate within its borders, targeting U.S.
and Afghan interests by such means as suicide bombings, assassination, and hostage-taking.
Afghanistan has a poor human rights record.  According to recent reports by the Department of
State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnapings of Americans and other Western nationals.
  
The Judge’s Analysis
Concluding that Applicant’s circumstances raised Guideline B concerns, the Judge entered
favorable findings regarding three allegations concerning Applicant’s own immediate family.
However, the Judge concluded that Applicant had failed to mitigate concerns arising from his in-
laws in Afghanistan and his former service in the military.  She stated that, given the presence of
foreign terrorist organizations within the borders of Afghanistan, she could not rule out the
possibility that Applicant’s in-laws could become a means through which he could be subjected to
coercion or duress.  Though acknowledging that loyalty to foreign in-laws is a positive character
trait, the Judge stated that Applicant had not provided evidence sufficient to sustain a favorable
application of Mitigating Condition 8(a).1  
2See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(c): “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation[.]”  
3
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted evidence favorable to Applicant but concluded
that this evidence was not sufficient to outweigh those factors that militated against approval of a
clearance, citing explicitly to Applicant’s over 10 years of foreign military service.  She stated that
there is no information about the nature of Applicant’s duties while he was in the military, nor was
there any information about the extent to which his wife and children maintain contact with his
foreign in-laws.2  
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s findings of fact.  Specifically, he argues that the Judge’s
finding that he had remained in the inactive reserves after his service as an officer was not true.  We
examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by substantial record evidence, that is, “such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of
all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.21.  See also ISCR Case No. 11-
00970 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012).  
In this case, the only evidence concerning this matter was supplied by Applicant himself.
He stated in his security clearance application (SCA) that he had served as an officer in the
Afghanistan military during a specified time between the early 1980s and the early 1990s.  In reply
to a question about the status of his service during the time he served, Applicant checked “Inactive
Reserve.”  Item 4, SCA, dated March 21, 2011, at p. 15.  In his reply to the SOR, Applicant stated
that he had been a high-ranking officer in the military between two dates named in the SCA.
However, he stated that, after the latter of the two dates, he left the service.  The record evidence
states only that, during the dates asserted by Applicant in the SCA and alleged in the SOR, he served
as an officer in the inactive reserves of the military of Afghanistan.  There is no evidence in the
record of any further service after the dates given by Applicant in his SCA.  Therefore, the Judge’s
finding that Applicant served as an officer until the early 1990s, after which he entered the inactive
reserves, is in error.  However, given her statement that there is no evidence as to what Applicant
may have done while in the military, and given her findings about Applicant’s in-laws in
Afghanistan, it is not likely that, but for this error, she would have decided the case differently.
Also, in the Analysis section of her Decision, the Judge makes reference to Applicant’s 12 years of
military service.  This reference excludes any consideration of purported inactive reserve status after
1992.  Therefore, the error is harmless.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  “There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to,
the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11577 at 4 (App. Bd.
Feb. 7, 2007).  “The presence of terrorist activity in a foreign country is a significant factor in
Guideline B cases.”  ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011).  Prior lengthy service
to a foreign government is also relevant.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12449 at 5 (App. Bd. May 14,
2007).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be
4
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
