 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 13-00701 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On November 1, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign 
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an answer dated November 25, 2013, Applicant admitted one of two 
allegations under Guideline C and both allegations under Guideline B. He also 
requested a decision without hearing. The Government prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), which included a request for administrative notice regarding 
Pakistan, on January 24, 2014. Applicant timely responded to the FORM with a two-
page letter with seven attachments. The case was assigned to me on March 11, 
 
 
 
 
2 
2014 by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). After receiving the 
official case file, I reviewed its contents in its entirety. Noting no objections, I granted 
the Government’s request for administrative notice on certain facts regarding 
Pakistan.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the nation of Pakistan. It was accepted into the record as part of 
the FORM. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 
12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Various facts pertaining 
to Pakistan were derived from the offered request and its attachments; other facts 
are derived from similar Government publications introduced in other DOHA cases 
and commonly known.  
 
Pakistan, a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia, gained 
independence from Britain in 1947. It has a population of more than 170 million. It 
held successful elections in February 2008 and has a coalition government. 
However, many parts of the country are affected by militancy and violent extremism.  
 
Terrorist networks operate within Pakistan. The U.S. Department of State 
(DOS) defines terrorist safe havens as “ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed 
physical areas where terrorists are able to organize, plan, raise funds, communicate, 
recruit, train, transit, and operate in relative security because of inadequate 
governance capacity, political will, or both.” (Administrative Notice, Attachment I) 
The DOS concludes that, despite efforts by Pakistani security forces, groups 
including Afghan and Pakistani militants, foreign insurgents, and al-Qaida terrorists 
have safe haven in Pakistan. There, they train and plan attacks against the United 
States and its allies in Afghanistan. Taliban senior leaders also enjoy safe haven in 
Pakistan.  
 
The Pakistani government has a poor human rights record. Reported 
violations include extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances by security 
forces, lack of judicial independence, arbitrary arrest, honor crimes, wide-spread 
corruption, disappearance and imprisonment of political opponents, and trafficking in 
persons. The DOS warns U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan in 
light of the presence of terrorists who have attacked civilian and foreign targets. 
Credible reports indicate that authorities routinely used wiretaps, and intercepted 
and opened mail without requisite court approval.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old man working in the defense sector. Born and raised 
in Pakistan, he completed a bachelor’s degree in the late 1990s. He never served in 
the Pakistani military. Applicant travelled to the United States in 2005 after obtaining 
United States permanent residency status. He qualified for that status through the 
sponsorship of a sister who initiated the process for him in 1996. In 2009, Applicant 
was issued a Pakistani passport that was marked to expire in January 2014. It 
replaced a 2004 Pakistani passport that expired in 2009. Later that year, he married. 
In the autumn of 2010, Applicant became a naturalized United States citizen and 
received a United States passport. On his U.S. passport, Applicant visited Pakistan 
later that year to arrange to have his wife join him in the United States. He never 
traveled on his Pakistani passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. 
 
Applicant received the SOR in November 2013. When he understood that his 
Pakistani passport and dual citizenship could pose security concerns, he formally 
renounced his Pakistani citizenship in a written document. He did not do so earlier 
because he believed his oath of U.S. citizenship made him solely a U.S. citizen. He 
also turned over his Pakistani passport to a security officer. It has since expired. It is 
Applicant’s intent to live in the United States, raise his family here, and be buried 
next to his father, who is interred in the United States. (Answer to the FORM) There 
is no evidence that Applicant has any notable connections to another country in 
terms of real estate holdings, investments, or savings. His only remaining nexus to 
Pakistan is in relation to his family members. 
 
At issue in the SOR are several of Applicant’s relatives. At SOR allegation 
2.a, Applicant is noted as having “a sister who is a United States citizen and 
residents (sic) of Pakistan.” At SOR allegation 2.b, it is written that he has three 
brothers-in-law and two sisters-in-law who are citizens and residents of Pakistan.  
 
Applicant has four sisters. Two are residents and citizens of the United 
States. (Security Clearance Application, FORM, Item 4, pages 31-32 of 55, at entries 
#9-10) One is a citizen of the United States, but a resident of Pakistan. (Security 
Clearance Application, FORM, Item 4, page 30 of 55, at entry #8) One is a citizen of 
Pakistan, but a resident of the United States. (Security Clearance Application, 
FORM, Item 4, page 29 of 55, at entry #7) Although Applicant admitted the 
allegation at SOR 2.a, it remains unclear as to which sister is at issue because no 
sister is shown as being both a citizen and resident of Pakistan. The only sister 
clearly described in his Answer to the SOR is the spouse of the second brother-in-
law described below. That sister lives in Pakistan when her husband is abroad on 
assignment, but comes to their home in the United States when her husband is on 
vacation. It is the couple’s intent to permanently reside in the United States starting 
next year. 
 
Regarding Applicant’s brothers-in-law (BIL I), one has “filed for his United 
States citizenship since he has completed the requirement of the physical 
presence.” (Answer to the FORM)  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Another brother-in-law (BIL II) travels “back and forth between Pakistan and 
the United States” with his wife, Applicant’s sister. He is a doctor who knows that the 
U.S. market is very competitive among foreign medical practitioners and, therefore, 
is completing an additional medical program. Upon completion of that program, he 
“can stay permanently in the USA.” (Answer to the FORM) It is unclear, but it 
appears that this brother-in-law was in the United States when Applicant responded 
to the FORM. At that time, this brother-in-law was in the United States to apply for a 
green card. He is also awaiting the transfer of his medical records to the United 
States. It is unknown whether this in-law remained in the United States.  
 
Applicant’s youngest brother-in-law (BIL III) is a doctor who has been issued 
an immigrant visa and is coming to the United States next year to qualify for a 
permanent resident card.  He seeks to start his medical career in the United States. 
He is presently in Pakistan, where he is awaiting his medical credentials to be sent 
to the United States. As with Applicant’s other brothers-in-law, he has monthly 
contact with Applicant. 
 
Although the SOR alleges at 2.b that Applicant has two sisters-in-law, only 
Applicant and one brother are married. There is no indication Applicant’s wife has 
any sisters. No sisters-in-law are noted in Applicant’s security clearance application 
(Security Clearance Application, FORM, Item 4). Only one sister-in-law is noted in 
Applicant’s list of foreign associates (FORM, Item 7#) She is approximately 38 years 
old, a housewife, and has a green card. She and Applicant’s brother recently bought 
a home in the United States. It is their intent to reside in that home permanently 
once Applicant’s brother completes his current linguistic assignment abroad.   
 
Applicant is highly valued for his work. His unique talents and gifts have been 
an asset to his employer and its mission. He is proud to be a citizen of the United 
States.    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
in making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail 
to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 sets out the security concern relating to Foreign Preference: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. 
 
Applicant was issued a replacement Pakistani passport which expired in 
January 2014. Subparagraph 10(a)(1) is applicable:  
 
. . . exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship 
after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (5) possession of a 
current foreign passport.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Here, Applicant was eligible for a Pakistani passport due to his parentage and 
birth in Pakistan. Consequently, he obtained a Pakistani passport while a citizen of 
that country. His parentage and place of birth were also the basis for his dual 
citizenship. He became a U.S. citizen in 2010. In 2013, he received the SOR. 
Recognizing that his Pakistani citizenship and Pakistani passport posed security 
concerns, he formally renounced his Pakistani citizenship and surrendered that 
passport to a security officer. His Pakistani passport, which was never used after he 
became a U.S. citizen, has since expired. In light of these facts, the following 
mitigating conditions from AG ¶ 11 apply:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign 
country,  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship, 
and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 
6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or 
is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target 
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant has various family members who are Pakistani citizens, residents, 
or both. These include two sisters and multiple in-laws. Therefore, I find that the 
following disqualifying conditions arise under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(b) connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information. 
 
In finding these conditions applicable, I specifically note that AG ¶ 7(a) 
requires substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The heightened risk required to 
raise a disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a 
risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. Terrorist groups and 
other criminal organizations operate within Pakistan. They participate in nefarious 
activities. These facts are sufficient to find a heightened risk exists in this case. In 
addition, foreign family ties can pose a security risk even without a connection to a 
foreign government. This is because an applicant may be subject to coercion or 
undue influence when a third party pressures or threatens an applicant’s family 
members. Under these facts, a third party coercion concern potentially exists in 
Pakistan. Therefore, the evidence provided is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S., and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. 
interests. 
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate evidence sufficient to refute or mitigate the 
allegations.  
 
Here, the SOR’s primary concerns are related to an unspecified sister and 
five in-laws of Applicant. The record fails to clearly specify which of these kin are at 
issue, so it cannot be discerned whether the individual facts about certain relatives 
have changed due to their personal circumstances or other considerations. Applicant 
discusses all of his sisters and their husbands. His descriptions, however, are brief 
and reveal little about the individuals. More than one of the individuals appears to be 
 
 
 
 
8 
in flux with regard to residence, citizenship, or both. Moreover, questions remain with 
regard to how close he is to these relations. Consequently, it is as difficult to 
examine Applicant’s foreign family members and their activities as it is to weigh 
Applicant’s closeness to his extended family against his ties to the United States. 
While there is no suggestion of disloyalty on the part of Applicant, more information 
is needed to make a measured assessment under Guideline B. Given these factors, 
I find Applicant’s submissions are insufficient to raise any of the available mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments 
under the two guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old man working in the defense sector. He was born 
and raised in Pakistan, where he earned a bachelor’s degree. He renewed his 
Pakistani passport in 2004 and immigrated to the United States in 2005. He became 
a United States citizen in 2010, and visited Pakistan on his United States passport 
later that year.    
 
Foreign preference security concerns arising from issues related to 
Applicant’s Pakistan-U.S. citizenship, his Pakistani passport, and a 2010 trip to 
Pakistan were readily dispelled by Applicant. He assumed his becoming a U.S. 
citizen invalidated his Pakistani citizenship. When advised that it could be a security 
issue, he executed a formal document explicitly renouncing his Pakistani citizenship. 
He also submitted to his security officer his Pakistani passport, which he never used 
once he became a U.S. citizen. That document has since expired. Foreign 
preference security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Foreign influence security concerns arise from a sister, who allegedly is or 
was a citizen and resident of Pakistan, and three brothers-in-law and two sisters-in-
law who are alleged to be citizens and residents of Pakistan. The basis for these 
allegations is unclear. It is equally unclear whether this is due to a change of 
circumstance amongst the family members in terms of their current immigration 
status and place of residence. Applicant admitted, however, that he has a sister who 
 
 
 
 
9 
is a Pakistani citizen and U.S. resident and another sister who is a U.S. citizen and a 
Pakistani resident.  He also clarified that he has only one sister-in-law, the spouse of 
his one married brother. His descriptions of those individuals, as well as those of his 
brothers-in-law, are scant. Moreover, much of the newer information provided 
regarding these kin are predictions as to their future immigration status and 
intentions. Unrealized expectations are of little weight. Such factors confound 
assessment of these individuals under Guideline B. 
 
When disqualifying conditions are raised, the burden is then placed on an 
applicant to proffer facts and evidence in mitigation of the security concerns raised. 
Here, Applicant’s answers to the SOR and FORM are highly limited and reveal little 
insight into his personal affinity for the kin at issue. Based on the limited information 
provided, I find that Applicant failed to meet his burden and that security concerns 
are unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
