 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 13-00341 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Tuider, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges five delinquent debts, totaling 
$67,162. Applicant made a mistake in a real estate transaction resulting in a $100,331 
non-SOR debt. She had insufficient financial resources to pay her debts. In the last two 
years, she settled and paid three large non-SOR debts and two SOR debts. She 
disputed the other three SOR debts. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. In 
2008, Appellant applied for and received an Iranian National Identification Card (NIC); 
however, she turned in her Iranian NIC, does not have an Iranian passport, renounced 
her Iranian citizenship, and did not go to Iran. Foreign preference concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 12, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 3, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and C (foreign preference). The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On June 22, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived her 
right to a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated 
October 22, 2013, was provided to her on November 17, 2013.1 On December 2, 2013, 
Applicant responded to the FORM and provided a cover letter with 12 enclosures. 
Department Counsel did not object to my consideration of Applicant’s FORM response. 
The case was assigned to me on January 14, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. She 
also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Her admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old linguist.3 She emigrated from Iran to the United States 
in 1987, when she was 18 years old. In 1989, she was awarded a medical assistant 
certificate. She became a U.S. citizen in 1995. She received a real estate certificate in 
2010. She worked in real estate sales from 2002 to 2012. She has never served in the 
U.S. military. In 1992, she married, and her two children were born in the United States 
in 1994 and 1995. Her mother, father, brother, husband, and two children live in the 
United States and are U.S. citizens.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
In 2008, Applicant purchased a foreclosed property at a trustee sale; however, 
she made a mistake in her bid and was required to pay $312,000 instead of her 
intended bid of $145,000.4  She sold the property for $260,000 eight months later, and 
with costs accrued a $100,331 debt. She provided the documentation showing how this 
debt was generated, several substantial payments to the creditor, and her other efforts 
to resolve it. She worked diligently to resolve other debts that became delinquent in 
                                            
1
 The DOHA transmittal letter is dated October 24, 2013, and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
November 17, 2013. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after her 
receipt to submit information.  
 
2
 Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3
 The source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s e-QIP (GE 1). 
 
4
 The sources for the information in this paragraph are Applicant’s Office of Personnel 
Management personal subject interview (OPM PSI) (GE 6) and her FORM response. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2008. In March 2012, she settled and paid a $35,524 credit card debt for $14,500. In 
May 2012, she settled and paid a credit card debt of $92,979 which was used for home 
repairs for $21,500.  In October 2012, she settled and paid a credit card debt of $27,040 
for $9,500.   
   
Applicant’s delinquent debts are consistently described in her e-QIP, OPM PSI, 
responses to DOHA interrogatories, SOR response, and FORM response. 
  
On June 19, 2013, the creditor offered to settle the credit card debt of $17,680 
described in SOR ¶ 1.a for $2,800. (SOR response, Encl. A) She paid this debt on June 
25, 2013. (FORM response, Encl. 6) 
 
On June 19, 2013, the creditor offered to settle the credit card debt of $10,927 
described in SOR ¶ 1.b for $2,500. (SOR response, Encl. B) She paid this debt on June 
24, 2013. (FORM response, Encl. 7) 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the bank debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($20,400); 
however, she disputed the amount of the debt. (SOR response) On March 19, 2011, a 
collection company wrote Applicant indicating that the collection company has assumed 
responsibility for collecting the $22,986 debt and providing various settlement options. 
(SOR response, Encl. C) On April 5, 2011, Applicant wrote the collection company 
seeking verification of the debt. (SOR response, Encl. C) Applicant disputed the 
creditor’s entry on her credit report, and on June 21, 2013, a credit reporting company 
wrote that the original creditor failed to respond to the credit reporting companies’ 
inquiry and the reference to the original creditor was deleted. (FORM response, Encl. 8)   
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the bank debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($11,579); 
however, she disputed the amount of the debt. (SOR response) In 2009, the debt 
became delinquent. (FORM response) In 2011, the creditor sought to dismiss a lawsuit 
pertaining to the debt because the creditor lacked documentation to verify the debt, and 
on June 29, 2011, the court dismissed the lawsuit without prejudice. (SOR response, 
Encl. D; FORM response) 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($6,576); 
however, she disputed the amount of the debt. (SOR response) In 2009, Applicant 
attempted to negotiate a settlement with the creditor; however, she was unsuccessful. 
(FORM response) In July 2012, the creditor filed a lawsuit against Applicant; however, 
on October 1, 2012, the lawsuit was dismissed without prejudice. (SOR response, Encl. 
E) 
 
In sum, Applicant settled and paid the two debts, totaling $28,607 in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
($17,680) and 1.b ($10,927) in June 2013. She disputed the three debts, totaling 
$38,555 in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($20,400), 1.d ($11,579), and ¶ 1.e ($6,576).  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Foreign Preference 
 
Applicant emigrated from Iran to the United States in 1987.5 Applicant is an 
Orthodox Christian of Armenian descent. Her family fled Iran to avoid Iranian 
oppression and persecution.   
 
Applicant has never returned to Iran after immigrating to the United States.6 In 
2008, Applicant’s cousin asked Applicant to attend her wedding in Iran. Applicant 
applied for and received an Iranian NIC and Iranian birth certificate because she 
needed them to obtain an Iranian passport so that she could go to Iran. She did not 
apply for a passport or go to Iran because it took too long for her Iranian passport to be 
approved for her to attend the wedding. (GE 7 at 5) When she had her counter-
intelligence interview, she realized the Iranian NIC might raise a security concern, and 
she offered to surrender it to the Government. The OPM interviewer told her to retain 
the Iranian NIC.  
 
After Applicant received the FORM she sent her Iranian NIC to the Iranian 
Government, and in her cover letter she also renounced her Iranian citizenship.7 She 
promised that she will never visit Iran.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant received two certificates of appreciation in 2013 for providing 
outstanding support to an Army unit in Afghanistan. (FORM response) She “brought a 
significant and direct impact” in effective mission accomplishment. (Jan. 2013 
Certificate; FORM response, Encl. 1). 
 
In November 2013, an infantry colonel currently commanding an Army task force 
in Afghanistan wrote “[i]t is imperative that [Applicant] receives a security clearance due 
to the unit’s current operational environment and mission requirements.” (FORM 
response, Encl. 1) She is “[a] consummate professional and talented translator, [who is] 
continuously in harm’s way with our task force only to return and continue to assist our 
efforts on [our forward operating base].” Id. “Her positive attitude, intellect, and physical 
aptitude sets the standard for all linguists assigned to [the task force]. An invaluable 
linguist who proficiently speaks four languages, [her] value to military units will double 
once her security clearance is approved.” Id.   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
                                            
5
 The source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s FORM response.  
 
6
 Unless stated otherwise, the source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response.  
 
7
 The source for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s FORM response.  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports, SF 86, OPM interview, SOR response, and FORM response.  
 
Applicant’s debts became delinquent when she made a mistake at an auction, 
resulting in a $100,331 debt. Several credit cards became delinquent. Applicant’s SOR 
alleges five delinquent debts, totaling $67,162. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving her debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
to 20(e).8 In March 2012, she settled and paid a $35,524 non-SOR credit card debt for 
$14,500. In May 2012, she settled and paid a non-SOR credit card debt of $92,979, 
which was used for home repairs, for $21,500.  In October 2012, she settled and paid a 
non-SOR credit card debt of $27,040 for $9,500. In June 2013, she settled and paid the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, totaling $28,607.  
 
Applicant disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.e, totaling $38,555. She 
questioned the amounts the creditors were seeking.9 She was dissatisfied with the 
responses received from the creditors and continues to dispute the three debts.  Her 
history of paying her debts lends credibility to her claims that these three creditors were 
not acting responsibly. In any event, they are collection barred due to the state 4-year 
statute of limitations for collections based on contracts.  See Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 
337(1). 
 
The Appeal Board explained that circumstances beyond one’s control can cause 
unresolved debt, and are not necessarily a bar to having access to classified 
information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
                                            
8
 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
9
 15 U.S.C. 1692g(a)(3) states: 
 
“Within five days after the initial communication with a consumer in connection with the 
collection of any debt," a debt collector must send written notice to the debtor containing, 
inter alia, "a statement that unless the consumer, within thirty days after receipt of the 
notice, disputes the validity of the debt, or any portion thereof, the debt will be assumed 
to be valid by the debt collector. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant admitted 
responsibility for and took reasonable and responsible actions to resolve her SOR 
debts, establishing some good faith.10 She established and maintained contact with her 
creditors.11 She used her limited resources to settle and pay two large delinquent SOR 
debts and three large delinquent non-SOR debts. Her financial problem is being 
resolved or is under control. Applicant has learned from her financial mistakes, they are 
unlikely to recur; and they do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. Her efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns. Assuming, financial considerations concerns are not mitigated under 
AG ¶ 20, security concerns are mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.  
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in Applicant’s case.  
                                            
10
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
11
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and  
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant requested and received an Iranian birth certificate and NIC for the 
purpose of obtaining an Iranian passport to travel to Iran to attend her cousin’s wedding. 
She did not actually receive the Iranian passport or travel to Iran. She did not receive 
any benefit from the Iranian birth certificate or NIC. She did not seek Iranian citizenship 
or express an allegiance to Iran or to renounce her U.S. citizenship. Nevertheless, the 
scope of AG ¶ 10 is not limited to the specifically enumerated disqualifying conditions. 
Her conduct is sufficient to raise a foreign preference security concern due to her intent 
to her expressed intention to obtain an Iranian passport and travel to Iran, a nation that 
is a state sponsor of terrorism that has often expressed extreme hostility towards the 
United States and U.S. interests. AG ¶ 10 applies. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: “(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;” and 
“(e) the passport [or in this case the Iranian NIC] has been destroyed, surrendered to 
the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.” 
  
Applicant did not receive any benefits as a result of holding an Iranian NIC. She 
did not travel to Iran after becoming a U.S. citizen and does not intend to do so in the 
future. She returned her Iranian NIC; she wrote Iran that she was renouncing her 
Iranian citizenship; her service with the Army in a combat zone is a powerful 
demonstration of her loyalty to the United States. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) apply and 
foreign preference concerns are mitigated.  
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old linguist, who emigrated from Iran to the United States 
in 1987, when she was 18 years old. She became a U.S. citizen in 1995. In 1992, she 
married, and her two children were born in the United States in 1994 and 1995. Her 
mother, father, brother, husband, and two children live in the United States and are U.S. 
citizens. She has no immediate family living in Iran, has not traveled to Iran since 1987, 
and she does not intend to travel there in the future. If she were to travel to Iran, she 
would probably be persecuted because of her religious beliefs and her allegiance to the 
United States. She is sufficiently mature to understand and comply with her security 
responsibilities.  
 
She deserves substantial credit for supporting the U.S. Government as an 
employee of a contractor and as a linguist supporting the Army in Afghanistan. There is 
every indication that she is loyal to the United States and her employer. There is no 
evidence that she abuses alcohol, uses illegal drugs, violated security rules, or 
committed criminal conduct. A decision to purchase a property at a foreclosure sale led 
to her financial woes. I give Applicant credit for admitting responsibility for her 
delinquent debts in her e-QIP, responses to DOHA interrogatories, OPM PSI, SOR 
response, and FORM response. She received a very strong endorsement from a 
brigade command level commander in Afghanistan recommending approval of her 
security clearance.   
 
 
Applicant’s employment as a linguist in Afghanistan, a U.S.-designated combat 
zone, and important contributions to the U.S. military at personal risk, are important 
factors weighing towards approval of her security clearance. She is willing to continue to 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
serve in Afghanistan in support of U.S. Armed Forces as a linguist, risking her life as 
part of her duties on behalf of the U.S. combat forces in Afghanistan. She is fully aware 
of the risks to herself. These circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will 
recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or 
insurgent group to coerce or exploit her. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 5, 2008). Her desire for employment as a translator and oath of allegiance to the 
United States document her loyalty, trustworthiness, and reliability. 
 
In 2012, Applicant settled and paid $45,500 to resolve three large non-SOR 
debts totaling $155,543.  In June 2013, she settled and paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b, totaling $28,607. She disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.e, totaling $38,555. 
She does not have any collectible, delinquent debts. The Appeal Board has addressed 
a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination). There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant is an intelligent person, and she understands what she needs to do to 
establish and maintain her financial responsibility. There is simply no reason not to trust 
her. Moreover, she established a “meaningful track record” of debt re-payment. I am 
confident she will maintain her financial responsibility.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
