 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 13-00991 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement), G (Alcohol Consumption), J (Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal 
Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 23, 2012. On 
October 1, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines H, G, J, and E. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 9, 2013; answered it on October 25, 
2013; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on December 17, 2013, and the case was assigned to me on 
December 19, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
2 
 
notice of hearing on January 13, 2014, scheduling the hearing for February 19, 2014. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but did not present the 
testimony of any other witnesses or documentary evidence. I kept the record open until 
February 28, 2014, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. He timely submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX A through C are attached to the record 
as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 27, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with 
explanations. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He works as a 
subject-matter expert on submarine tactical navigation systems. He has worked for his 
current employer since April 2012. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 
August 1980 to August 1986 and received an honorable discharge. He worked as a 
project manager for another federal employer from February 1989 to November 2011, 
when he was fired after his urinalysis tested positive for marijuana. He was unemployed 
from November 2011 until he began his current job. He first received a security 
clearance in September 1980, while in the Navy, and he kept it until he was fired in 
November 2011. 
 
 Applicant married in April 1982 and divorced in May 2006. He reconciled with his 
former spouse and they began cohabiting in August 2008. They have two adult children, 
ages 25 and 28, who live with them. (Tr. 28.) 
 
 During a personal subject interview (PSI) in September 2012, Applicant disclosed 
that in approximately October 2002, he was driving after drinking with a friend and he 
collided with an oncoming car while making a left turn. He was arrested and spent two 
days in jail. He was required to complete an eight-week alcohol education course and 
his driver’s license was suspended. (GX 5 at 10.) 
 
 In June 2011, Applicant consumed about six beers while helping a friend move. 
While driving home, Applicant drove into a ditch and hit a tree. He was charged with 
driving under the influence (second offense) resulting in an accident, a misdemeanor. 
He had a concealed weapon with him, and he was charged with a concealed-weapon 
violation because his permit did not allow him to possess a concealed weapon while 
intoxicated. In March 2012, he was convicted of DUI and the concealed-weapon 
violation, and he was sentenced to 90 days in jail, with 60 days suspended, fined $500, 
his driver’s license was restricted for three years, and he was required to complete a 24-
week alcohol education course. (GX 2; GX 3; GX 5 at 9-10.) His concealed-weapon 
permit was revoked for five years. (Tr. 42.) He served his jail sentence on weekends. 
(Tr. 32.) 
 
3 
 
The restricted-license order was modified in July 2012, and Applicant was 
required to install an ignition interlock system on his car. The interlock system was 
installed in September 2012. As a result of an interlock violation in early 2013, Applicant 
was enrolled in an intensive outpatient treatment group, consisting of eight one-hour 
sessions, which he completed in July 2013. (GX 5 at 17-19.) He testified that his alcohol 
consumption is now down to a couple beers after work. (Tr. 34.)  
 
 On November 4, 2011, Applicant tested positive for marijuana. In his PSI and at 
the hearing, he stated that he was notified on a Friday that all employees would be 
tested for marijuana on the following Monday. On Saturday, Applicant’s adult children 
held a party at his house. Applicant attended the party and consumed enough alcohol to 
feel “relaxed and silly.” He testified that on Sunday, his daughter told him that someone 
had brought cookies laced with marijuana to the party. He had consumed about five of 
the cookies.  
 
On Monday, Applicant took the marijuana test, which tested positive. After being 
informed of the positive test several days later, he wrote a letter to his employer, 
claiming innocent ingestion, but his employer terminated him. (GX 1 at 29; GX 4; GX 5 
at 8.) After the hearing, Applicant’s son submitted a statement attributing Applicant’s 
positive urinalysis to a practical joke at the party, aimed at attendees other than 
Applicant. (AX A.) 
 
 Applicant testified that, when his daughter told him that he had been tricked into 
consuming marijuana, it did not occur to him to notify someone at work about his 
innocent ingestion, either before the urinalysis or before the results were received. He 
testified, “I just kind of hoped for the best.” (Tr. 36-37.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he tried marijuana when he was 16 or 17, but he has 
never used marijuana since he enlisted in the Navy, except for the innocent ingestion at 
the party. His 25-year-old son has used marijuana in the past, but there is no marijuana 
in their household. (Tr. 28-29.) 
 
 At the time of Applicant’s DUI in 2002, his normal alcohol consumption was about 
four beers every other night and six to eight on the weekend. (Tr. 30.) He drank more 
moderately after his DUI conviction for about three months, and then resumed his 
previous level of consumption. He has never been diagnosed as alcohol dependent. (Tr. 
38.) 
 
 One of Applicant’s subordinates, who has known and worked with him for 20 
years, submitted a statement describing him as “a solid and trustworthy person. (AX C.) 
A Navy engineer, who has known Applicant since 1999 and for whom Applicant 
provides contractor support, submitted a statement describing Applicant’s expertise, 
dedication, and dependability. (AX A.) He stated: 
 
[Applicant] was and is the sort of person with whom I’ve worked easily and 
comfortably for years. I have and will continue to trust in his ability to 
 
4 
 
support me in the work that I do for the US Navy, supporting the systems 
that he knows uniquely and expertly. I trust him to do his best for his 
company, myself, and the US Navy we both serve. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
5 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The SOR alleges that, on or about November 4, 2011, Applicant tested positive 
for marijuana while holding a security clearance (SOR ¶ 1.a). The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it 
may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 
24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Applicant claims that his positive urinalysis was the result of innocent ingestion of 
marijuana. I found his explanation implausible and unpersuasive. His daughter told him 
about the marijuana cookies the day before the urinalysis, but he gave no cogent, 
plausible, or credible explanation for not telling his supervisors about the innocent 
ingestion before the urinalysis or before the results were received. His positive 
urinalysis establishes the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as ‘the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”;  
 
AG ¶ 25(b): testing positive for illegal drug use;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 26(a) is potentially relevant: “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
 
6 
 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s positive urinalysis was more than two 
years ago and it is the only instance of drug abuse in his record. However, it occurred 
shortly after his DUI arrest, and it was followed by his interlock violation.1 These multiple 
instances of substance abuse, coupled with his implausible explanation for his positive 
urinalysis, cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 26(a) is not established. No other enumerated mitigating 
conditions are established. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant was charged with DUI in June 2011 and 
convicted in March 2012 (SOR ¶ 2.a), and charged with and convicted of DUI in 
October 2002 (SOR ¶ 2.b). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability 
and trustworthiness.”  
 
Applicant’s two DUI convictions establish the following disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant has never been diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
Therefore, no other disqualifying conditions are established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
                                                          
1 The interlock violation was not alleged in the SOR. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered 
to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to 
evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the interlock violation for these limited purposes. 
 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and  
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. 
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 23(a) (“so much time has passed”) focuses on whether 
the conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is 
Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the 
evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Applicant’s arrest for DUI was almost three years ago, but it was followed by his 
positive urinalysis in November 2011 and an interlock violation in early 2013. His 
driver’s license will be restricted until March 2015. He did not complete the additional 
counseling as a result of his interlock violation until July 2013, less than a year ago. I 
conclude that Applicant’s conduct is recent. His DUI was arguably infrequent, because 
his previous DUI was at least nine years earlier. His most recent DUI did not occur 
“under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.” I conclude that AG ¶ 
23(a) is not established. 
 
AG ¶ 23(b) is not fully established. Applicant has acknowledged that he has 
issues of alcohol abuse. He has completed all court-ordered education and counseling. 
He has reduced his alcohol consumption to a moderate level. However, for the reasons 
set out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 23(a), I am not convinced that sufficient time 
has passed to establish a pattern of responsible alcohol use. 
 
AG ¶ 23(d) is not fully established. Applicant has completed all court-ordered 
counseling, education, and treatment, but he has not yet demonstrated a “clear and 
established pattern of modified consumption.” He has not received a favorable 
prognosis from a qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The SOR cross-alleges the conduct under Guidelines H and G under this 
guideline (SOR ¶ 3.a), and it alleges that Applicant was arrested, charged, convicted, 
 
8 
 
and sentenced for a concealed-weapon offense (SOR ¶ 3.b). Applicant’s second DUI 
and the concealed-weapon violation arose from the same incident. The concern raised 
by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses”) and AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted”). Applicant’s DUI convictions and the concealed-weapon conviction 
establish these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
 Neither of these mitigating conditions is established. Applicant’s DUI arrest was 
almost three years ago, but it was followed by his marijuana use in November 2011 and 
an interlock violation in early 2013. His driver’s license will be restricted until March 
2015. His substance abuse has not occurred “under such unusual circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur.” Insufficient time has passed to mitigate his record of substance 
abuse. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The SOR cross-alleges the allegations under Guidelines H, G, and J under this 
guideline. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.” The conduct alleged under Guidelines H, G, and 
J, which is supported by substantial evidence, establishes the following disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
 
9 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s two DUI offenses resulted in collisions 
that could have inflicted serious injury. His concealed-weapon offense involved 
inherently dangerous conduct by combining possession of a firearm with intoxication. 
His use of marijuana while holding a security clearance was a serious breach of trust. 
His offenses are numerous, recent, and did not occur under unique circumstances. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) is not fully established. Applicant has acknowledged his DUIs and the 
concealed-weapon offense. He has not accepted responsibility for using marijuana. He 
has completed court-ordered alcohol education classes, but he has not voluntarily 
sought counseling or any other assistance in moderating his use of alcohol. 
 
 
10 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is partially established. Applicant has been candid about his alcohol 
consumption, but he has not been candid about his marijuana use. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H, G, J, and E in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has held a clearance and served the Navy for many years. He is 
respected for his expertise and dedication. However, his most recent DUI, his interlock 
violation, his use of marijuana, and his implausible excuse for the positive urinalysis 
leave me with doubts about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H, G, 
J, and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on drug involvement, alcohol 
consumption, criminal conduct, and personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has 
not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
