 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These1
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 13-01053
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by her financial problems. She
acted responsibly in addressing her debts, which arose from circumstances beyond her
control. Her current finances are sound. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On October 23, 2013, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns
addressed in the adjudicative guidelines  for financial considerations (Guideline F).1
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The case
2
was assigned to me on December 11, 2013, and I convened a hearing on January 22,
2014. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4, which were
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, presented two witnesses, and proffered
Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - C, which were admitted without objection. I left the record
open after the hearing to receive from Applicant additional relevant information.
Applicant’s timely post-hearing submission was admitted without objection as Ax. D.
DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on February 6, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant had incurred 24
delinquent debts totaling $47,826 (SOR 1.a - 1.x). SOR 1.b (IRS debt for $20,823)
constitutes about 44 percent of the total debt alleged. SOR 1.u alleges a $9,125 debt
remaining after a car repossession. SOR 1.g - 1.m, 1.v, and 1.m allege unpaid medical
bills totaling $4,475. The remaining debts are for credit cards and payday loans.
Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the allegations. In addition to her
admissions, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Before being hired
by her current employer in 2011, Applicant and her husband worked for about 25 years
in the mortgage lending industry. Between 2006 and 2009, their income began to fall as
a result of the collapse of the real estate market and its financial infrastructure.
Applicant last worked in mortgage lending in November 2009, when she became
unemployed for about six months. Before then, her annual income had fallen from about
$150,000 to about $70,000. In April 2010, Applicant found steady work in the hotel sales
industry, but her income was still significantly less than before. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2;
Ax. A; Tr. 49 - 51, 55)
Applicant has been married twice. Her first marriage began in February 1986 and
ended in divorce in February 2000. Applicant and her current husband have been
married since June 2001. He was also in the mortgage lending business and suffered a
similar loss of income when the market collapsed. However, Applicant was making
almost twice what her husband earned when the downturn occurred. He was
unemployed only briefly before returning to work in the trucking industry, where had
worked before his career in mortgage lending. Applicant’s husband now works in car
sales and earns a base annual salary of about $47,000. With commissions, he earned
about $65,000 in 2013. (Answer; Gx. 1; Tr. 51 - 52)
Applicant and her first husband had two children, now adults. Between 2005 and
2010, both children were attending college and relied on Applicant for financial support.
Applicant and her second husband are paying off student loans they obtained for her
children’s tuition and other expenses. Those loans have always been in good standing.
Applicant and her second husband also brought substantial debt to their marriage, as
both had been left with obligations from previous marriages. They were able to resolve
those debts without assistance before the real estate market collapsed and they
experienced their current financial problems. (Gx. 2 - 4; Ax. C; Tr. 53 - 54, 77)
3
Applicant and her family have had numerous health problems. She has had a
stroke and has survived cancer twice. Her younger child took five years to complete
college because of serious illness. Her second husband also had a heart attack.
Applicant’s first husband left when he could no longer deal with the stress of their
medical problems. He did not pay child support as required when their children were
minors. The medical debts alleged in the SOR are for medical expenses that Applicant’s
insurance did not cover. They became delinquent in 2009 and 2010, when Applicant
was unemployed. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 4; Tr. 68 - 70)
Applicant’s financial problems first arose in about 2006 and 2007, when her and
her husband’s incomes were declining. They changed employers several times because
mortgage lending firms often went out of business at the time. They had expenses
associated with their medical problems, as well as her children’s tuition and related
expenses. They turned to credit cards and payday loans to cover their expenses. Most
of the delinquencies alleged in the SOR resulted when they became unemployed in
2009. After once again finding work, Applicant started contacting their creditors to
negotiate resolution of their past-due debts. However, most demanded lump-sum
payments Applicant could not afford. Thereafter, her debts went largely unresolved until
recently, because she was not aware of any programs that would allow her to address
old debts through affordable payments. (Answer; Gx. 2; Tr. 66 - 68)
In December 2013, a friend referred Applicant to a non-profit consumer credit
counseling agency. Applicant was able to establish a 57-month debt management plan
(DMP) to consolidate and repay her past-due debts. Applicant pays $385 monthly for all
of the debts alleged in the SOR except 1.a and 1.b (IRS issues discussed below), and
SOR 1.j, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.q, which total $6,177. SOR 1.j, 1.n, and 1.o were not included
because they could not be verified by the counseling agency. The SOR 1.q debt had
already been included through a different collection agency. (Ax. C; Ax. D; Tr. 44 - 47,
70 - 73)
In 2007, Applicant and her husband left a mortgage lending firm for a better
opportunity at mortgage lender “A.” When they left to join A, they were paid in lump sum
for several pending sales and commissions still in the “pipeline.” Industry practice at the
time called for a new employer (in this case, mortgage lender A) to pay the income
taxes on the pipeline income as an incentive for individuals to change employment.
Applicant and her husband thought A would pay their pipeline taxes after they had
worked there for a year. Applicant worked at A until November 2009, when that firm
went out of business. In 2010, Applicant and her husband received a W-2 form stating
that their income for 2009 included the pipeline income from the employer they left in
2007. This resulted in the $20,823 tax debt to the IRS alleged in SOR 1.b. When
Applicant received the W-2, she and her husband began working with the IRS to verify
their liability for this debt and to establish a repayment plan. Since September 2012,
they have been paying $370 each month to the IRS. As of this hearing, they were
negotiating a revision to the plan that would stop interest accrual and enable them to
repay principal only. (Gx. 2; Ax. C; Ax. D; Tr. 27 - 28, 40 - 44)
 See Directive. 6.3.2
4
As alleged in SOR 1.a, Applicant and her husband did not file their 2009 tax
return on time. They could only explain that it was due to oversight at a time when they
were out of work and trying to straighten out their financial problems. SOR 1.a also
alleged that they were late in filing their 2011 tax return, but Applicant established that it
was timely filed. Applicant and her husband are current in their IRS repayment plan and
in their federal and state tax filing obligations. (Answer; Ax. B; Ax. D; Tr. 56 - 58)
Applicant and her husband have a positive cash flow each month after expenses.
A personal financial statement (PFS) submitted in July 2013 showed they had about
$420 remaining each month after expenses, including their IRS payment. A similar
statement generated through their credit counseling agency in December 2013 reflected
a remainder of about $315 each month after expenses, including the $385 DMP
payment. As of the hearing, Applicant’s income had increased by $500 each month.
She estimates she and her husband now have between $500 and $700 remaining each
month. (Gx. 2; Ax. D; Tr. 74) 
Applicant has an outstanding reputation in the workplace and in her community
for honesty, reliability, and integrity. Her supervisors and co-workers are aware of her
financial problems and her efforts to resolve them. They recommend without reservation
that she be given a security clearance. Applicant’s performance in her current
employment has been excellent. (Ax. A; Tr. 82 - 94)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,2
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.4
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).5
5
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to3
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  4
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.5
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government’s information is sufficient to support the all of the SOR
allegations. The facts established raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances
that is addressed at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
6
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of
not meeting financial obligations), and 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local
income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). Applicant incurred
significant unpaid debt between 2006 and 2012. She also did not file her 2009 tax return
on time. However, as to application of AG ¶ 19(a), Applicant was willing but largely
unable to repay many of her debts.
By contrast, the record also requires application of the following AG ¶ 20
mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant incurred her debts because of a collapse of the industry in which both
she and her husband worked for most of their adult lives. Additionally, most of her debt
stems from an unexpected tax liability and medical issues over the past ten years.
Applicant has been proactive in trying to resolve her financial problems. As soon as she
was faced with additional taxes on her pipeline income, she contacted the IRS and
reached a repayment agreement. She has been making those payments since late
2012. She is still negotiating a reasonable agreement with the IRS that may help her
repay that obligation sooner than expected. Although Applicant only recently embarked
on a DMP for her remaining debts, she had tried, unsuccessfully, to negotiate with her
creditors as early as 2009. Applicant is now engaged with an effective credit counseling
agency to resolve her debts, and she is using a budget to manage her finances. She
and her husband have steady and significant income that yields a positive monthly cash
flow after expenses, which include payments to resolve all but 13 percent of the total
debt at issue here. Their financial improvement will help them avoid a recurrence of the
financial problems reflected in the Government’s information.
7
Based on all of the foregoing, Applicant’s information supports application of AG
¶¶ 20(a) - 20(d). The security concerns raised by Applicant’s past-due debts are
mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a mature, responsible adult. Her
record in the workplace, in her personal life, and in her community all reflect sound
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Applicant did not incur her financial problems
through any misconduct or irresponsible behavior. She has been candid and forthright
about her finances at all times during the current investigation and adjudication of her
clearance suitability. She also has been proactive in her efforts to resolve her debts and
to restore her financial health. The circumstances underlying the adverse information in
her background are not likely to recur. A fair and commonsense assessment of all
available information shows the Government’s security concerns have been satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.x: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
