1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-00703
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on June 18, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 16, 2013, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 4.2
Item 4.3
2
Applicant submitted a notarized, written response to the SOR allegations dated
November 14, 2014, and he requested a decision on the written record in lieu of a
hearing. Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on December 12, 2013. Applicant received the FORM on
December 30, 2013. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a response dated
March 4, 2014. DOHA assigned this case to me on March 14, 2014. The Government
submitted seven exhibits, which have been marked as Items 1-7 and admitted into the
record. Applicant’s response to the SOR has been marked and admitted as Item 3, and
the SOR has been marked as Item 1. His written response to the FORM is admitted into
the record as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - E.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanation, the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a -1.f and 1.h -1.l of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein
as findings of fact. He denied the factual allegation in ¶ 1.g of the SOR.  He also1
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 44 years old, works as a material specialist for a DOD
contractor. He began his current employment 10 years ago. He has not been disciplined
at work.2
Applicant served on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1989 until
December 1996, when he received an honorable discharge. Applicant and his wife
married in October 2000. They have 12-year-old twins.3
The SOR identified 11 purportedly continuing delinquencies as reflected by credit
reports from 2009, 2010, and 2013, totaling approximately $16,726. Some accounts
have been transferred, reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection agents. Other
accounts are referenced repeatedly in the credit reports, in many instances duplicating
other accounts listed, either under the same creditor or collection agency name or under
Items 6 and 7.4
3
a different creditor or collection agency name. Some accounts are identified by
complete account numbers, while others are identified by partial account numbers, in
some instances eliminating the last four digits and in others eliminating other digits.
After reviewing the credit reports (CR) dated September 17, 2009, March 11,
2011, June 21, 2013, and the SOR, I have compiled a list of 11 debts allegedly owed,
and the current status of each. Appellant’s debts are as follows:4
SOR ¶ CREDITOR AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE
1.b Phone $    841.00 Paying; balance
$586
Item 3; AE D
1.c Credit card $    684.00 Paying; balance
$244
Item 3; AE D
1.d Credit Union $    246.00 Paid October 2013 Item 3; AE D
1.e Cell Phone $    821.00 Paying; balance
$412
Item 3; AE D
1.f Bank $    454.00 Paying; balance
$254
Item 3; AE D
1.g Collection $ 5,208.00 Disputing; paying;
balance $5,050
Item 3; AE D
1.h Credit Union $ 1,091.00 Paying; balance
$761
Item 3; AE D
1.I Banking $    117.00 Paid September
2013
Item 3; AE D
1.j Collection $    289.00 Paid August 2010 Item 3; AE D
1.k` Collection $    450.00 Paying; balance
$225
Item 3; AE D
1.l Education loans $ 6,732.00 Current; deferred; 
balance $6,600
Item 3; AE D
Applicant relates six of his SOR debts to fraud by a family member. The family
member used his name to open accounts and did not pay the debts. Applicant has
accepted responsibility for the debts and is paying the debts under a payment plan. He
acknowledged all but one of the remaining SOR debts. He included the acknowledged
Item 3.5
AE A - AE E.6
Item 1; Items 5-7; AE D.7
Items 1 and 3. 8
4
debts in his payment plan. His 2009 and 2013 credit reports have a security alert
statement.5
 
Applicant retained the services of a debt resolution company on March 3, 2013.
He agreed to an initial payment of $195 followed by weekly payments of $45 for
approximately 6 years. He provided a spreadsheet prepared by this company in
February 2014. The spreadsheet lists all his SOR debts and shows the current balance
on each debt. He paid two debts in full, with one debt paid in 2010, and has paid
approximately $2,000 on his other debts. On July 30, 2013, Applicant signed another
agreement with a credit monitoring company, agreeing to pay monthly service fee of
$99 to have his credit monitored. The February 2014 monitoring report did not indicate
any changes in his credit report.6
SOR allegation 1.l identifies Applicant’s deferred education loans as a security
concern. Because these loans are deferred, the credit reports list the status of payment
“as agreed”. Despite the deferred status of his education loans, Applicant included the
education loans in his payment plan and is paying month on these debts. Applicant
denied the $5,200 debt in SOR allegation 1.g. While he does not know the source of
this debt and he is disputing it, he is also paying on the debt while he tries to negotiate a
resolution of it.7
Applicant did not provide a budget or copies of his earnings statements. I am
unable to claulate his income and expenses. He acknowledged filing a Chapter 13
bankruptcy petition in 2006 on the recommendation of an attorney without expertise in
bankruptcy law. He also stopped paying his debts and eventually dismissed his
bankruptcy case on the advice of the attorney.8
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
5
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
6
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems after filing a Chapter 13
bankruptcy petition in 2006. Most of the debts have not been resolved. These two
disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Some of Applicant’s financial problems arose because a family member
fraudulently used his name and personal information to open six accounts in Applicant’s
name. This is a factor beyond his control. Four other debts became delinquent when he
filed for bankruptcy, and upon the advice of his attorney, he stopped making his monthly
payments. He later learned that the attorney gave him incorrect advice. This is also a
factor beyond his control. Applicant has established a payment plan for his debts and is
slowly paying his past-due debts. Thus, he has acted reasonably. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.
Applicant retained a debt resolution company one year ago, and nine months
ago he retained the services of a credit monitoring company to keep watch on his credit
reports for unusual activities. In the last year, he has resolved two small debts and paid
monthly on his remaining debts, including the debt he disputes. His past debts are
under control; he has not incurred new debts; and no new fraudulent accounts have
occurred. AG ¶ 20(c) applies
Applicant’s evidence reflects that through the debt resolution company, he is
paying his debts regularly after the company contacted the creditors. While he has not
personally contacted his creditors, the debt resolution company has done so on his
behalf. Applicant’s decision to retain to a debt resolution company to help him resolve
7
his debts, the contacts made by this company to his creditors, and his compliance with
a payment plan reflect a good-faith effort by Applicant to resolve his past-due debts. AG
¶ 20(d) applies.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
8
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
financial problems began at least as early as 2006. Upon the advice of an attorney,
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, stopped payments on his credit cards,
and then dismissed the bankruptcy petition. Instead of resolving his financial problems,
these actions created financial problems for him. Applicant’s financial problems were
exacerbated when a family member used his name and personal information to open
accounts in Applicant’s name, which were not paid. To his credit, Applicant has
accepted responsibility for these accounts and has begun paying the debts. 
Applicant has developed a payment plan for his past-due debts and with the
assistance of a debt resolution company, he is paying these debts. He has established
a track record over the last year for payment of his debts. His education loans are being
paid through the debt resolution company, even though the loans were not in default.
Applicant is not required to be debt free to hold a security clearance. He is required to
pay his bills and manage his income and expenses.
The record evidence reflects most significantly that Applicant has taken
affirmative action to pay or resolve most of the delinquent debts raising security
concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(6).) Although he disputes the $5,200 debt because the
creditor is unknown to him, he has made small payments on the debt. His past-due
debts do not reflect on his judgment and trustworthiness nor can his past-due debts be
a source of improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all
his debts are paid: it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his
fitness to hold a security clearance. While some debts remain unpaid, they are
insufficient to raise security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)  Applicant has shown that his
finances and past debts are under control.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.          
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
