 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00629 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 16, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (Item 4). On September 18, 2013, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DoD could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him.  
 
 Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on October 10, 2013, and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 3.) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 
20, 2013. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Government Items (Items 1-7), was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.   
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on December 18, 2013, and returned it to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). In response to the FORM, he timely submitted documents that I marked as 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, and admitted into the record without objection from 
Department Counsel. DOHA assigned the case to me on January 16, 2014. 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice (AN) of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan (FORM). She provided nine supporting documents to show 
detail and context for those facts (Items I-IX). Applicant did not object to the request or 
documents, and Department Counsel’s request was granted.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h, with 
explanations. His admissions, including those made in an August 11, 2010 
Counterintelligence Focused Security Screening Questionnaire and Interview, and in a 
November 1, 2012 Counterintelligence Focused Security Screening Questionnaire and 
Interview, are incorporated herein as findings of fact. (Answer; Items 3, 6.)  
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan in 1968 and is 45 years old. At age 14, he and 
his mother fled Afghanistan after the Russian invasion and went to Pakistan. Sometime 
in 1990 he purchased fraudulent U.S. travel documents. On August 10, 1990, he flew to 
the United States and upon entry requested political asylum. He was granted temporary 
residency while his request was processed. In November 1998 he was granted political 
asylum. In 2006 he obtained permanent residency. On May 3, 2012, he became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. He stated that he would have become a citizen sooner but 
documents pertaining to his asylum request were lost, delaying receipt of permanent 
residency. (Item 6; AE A.)  
 
After entering the United States, Applicant worked in the fast-food industry for a 
year and then as a taxi driver for a couple years. In May 1995 he moved to another 
state where he attended college and worked in automobile sales. He later started an 
Afghan restaurant and by 2003 employed ten people. He continued pursuing an 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
education and obtained a real estate license in January 2006. From then until July 2010 
he worked as a real estate broker.  
 
In August 2010 Applicant began a linguist position with the U.S. Army, and 
worked there until December 2011. He was then unemployed until October 2012 when 
he started another contract position with the Army, where he remains currently. He 
noted that he used his savings to live while unemployed for those months between jobs. 
According to budget documents, he had approximately $115,000 in savings remaining 
in November 2012. (Item 6.) He asserted during his November 2012 interview that the 
United States is his country and he “vowed to protect” it. (Item 6.) He has several good 
friends who are U.S. citizens. His roommate is also a linguist for the U.S. Army. (Item 
6.) 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Afghanistan. His father died in 2011. He was a 
businessman and owned three properties with four brothers. When his father died, he 
bequeathed his portion of the real estate to Applicant’s mother; however, to-date his 
uncles have not legally released ownership of the properties to his mother. Applicant 
estimated that the value of the three properties, co-owned by his father and uncles, 
totaled over $1 million. He does not know what will happen to his mother’s inheritance. 
(Items 3, 6.) He noted that any inheritance he may receive would be shared with his 
nine siblings, four uncles, and cousins. (AE A.) 
 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. She previously 
resided in Pakistan, but returned to Afghanistan in May 2011. Since arriving in the 
United States, Applicant has sent his mother money for living expenses several times a 
year. He estimated that he sends her about $5,000 per year. He stated in his November 
2012 Interview that he contacted his mother weekly. (Item 6.) In his response to the 
FORM, he said he contacts her monthly now because of his work. (AE A.) 
 
Applicant has eight brothers and one sister. Six brothers and his sister were born 
in Afghanistan. His sister is a resident and citizen of Afghanistan. Six brothers are 
citizens and residents of the United Kingdom. Two brothers were born in Pakistan and 
are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. One of them works as an engineer for the 
Afghan government and the other brother is a student. He contacts those two brothers 
quarterly. He also has a sister-in-law who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan whom 
he contacts annually. (Items 6, 7.) It is not known from this record whether Applicant’s 
family is aware of his work with the Army. 
 
In December 2011 Applicant became engaged to a woman who is a citizen and 
resident of Afghanistan. He did not know her at the time of his engagement. In May 
2012 he met her for the first time when he went to Afghanistan. From May through 
August 2012, he rented a house in Afghanistan where he stayed while visiting his family 
and becoming acquainted with his fiancée. They will marry when she is able to come to 
the United States. After meeting, he began sending her between $200 and $1,000 
annually for support. He previously contacted her daily, but now contacts her monthly. 
He intends to sponsor her, his mother, and two brothers for immigration to the United 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
States in the future. (AE A.) Applicant did not submit any information about his future in-
laws. The record does not indicate whether they are aware of his current work. 
 
Applicant stated that as a linguist he has been embedded with the U.S. Army on 
numerous assignments and combat patrols. He has helped with the reconstruction of 
villages in various provinces and districts. (AE A.) He provided evidence concerning the 
quality of his professional performance and track record with respect to handling 
sensitive information and observation of security procedures. In December 2013 a 
special agent with another Defense agency wrote that Applicant is a “trusted member” 
of his team, who is “regularly around sensitive information.” (AE B(1).) He stated that 
Applicant is the only linguist on his team whom he trusts to handle complicated 
information. He has “full confidence in [Applicant] and believes him to be a truly 
dedicated American in support of Operation Enduring Freedom.” (Id.) Applicant’s staff 
sergeant wrote in May 2013 that Applicant “has done an outstanding job and has never 
had any issues.” (AE B(2).) Applicant’s commanding officer wrote in March 2013 that he 
had worked with Applicant since October 2012. He stated that Applicant “exercises 
diligence, patience and determination during each of his translations, and is well 
respected by the command group.” (AE B(3)). His commanding officer from April 2013 
to August 2013 stated that Applicant “excelled as an interpreter” as a consequence of 
his knowledge of the local culture. (AE B(4).) 
 
In November 2011 an Army captain wrote that Applicant “was one of the best 
men I have ever worked with.” (AE B(5).) He stated that Applicant was fluent in four 
languages and very valuable in the Army’s work in hostile environments. He noted that 
Applicant “is extremely fearless; he never hesitated in dangerous situations and made 
himself available to translate in the tensest scenarios we faced.”(Id.) Applicant 
submitted three additional letters of recommendation from 2011, praising his abilities 
and work. (AE B(6-8).) All authors of the letters are highly supportive of Applicant’s 
efforts and recommend him for any position of trust. (AE B.) 
 
Afghanistan 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents (FORM) concerning Afghanistan, which are incorporated herein by 
reference. Of particular significance are Afghanistan’s history of political unrest, and the 
presence of the Taliban and al-Qaeda terrorist organizations, which continue to assert 
power and intimidation within the country and bordering countries including Pakistan. 
Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target United 
States interests in Afghanistan by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-
jacking, assaults, hostage taking, and drug trafficking. At this time, the risk of terrorist 
activities remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains poor and 
violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, 
insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western 
nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. Few sections of Afghanistan are safe or 
immune from violence, and the government has difficulty enforcing the rule of law.  
 
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Analysis 
 
 Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere circumstance of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires the presence of family members (or business or professional 
associates, friends, or other persons), who are citizens and/or residents of a foreign nation, 
and substantial evidence of a heightened risk. Applicant’s fiancée, mother, sister, and two 
brothers are all citizens and residents of Afghanistan. The heightened risk required to raise 
one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. Afghanistan is a country known to 
have significant terrorism problems, particularly against people with U.S. connections, and 
engages in human right abuses. These factors create a heightened risk. Applicant’s 
brother’s engineering position with the Afghan government also raises a heightened risk 
through those family ties. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(a) with respect to 
Applicant’s fiancée, mother, sister, and brothers. Since arriving in the United States 
Applicant has consistently sent financial aid to his mother, and more recently to his fiancée. 
That assistance also raises security concerns under AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
Applicant’s connections to his brother, an engineer for the Afghan government,  
creates an additional potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and his desire to help his brother or other family 
members by providing that information. AG ¶ 7(b) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 7(e) requires the presence of a substantial business, financial, or property 
interest in a foreign country, and evidence of a heightened risk associated with that foreign 
interest. At this time any such interest that Applicant may inherit as a consequence of his 
father’s death appears to be speculative. His mother remains alive and has yet to receive 
monies owed to her from her husband’s siblings. In the event of his mother’s death, her 
property will be divided amongst him, his nine siblings, and other relatives. Although the 
estate may have a value over $1 million, Applicant’s potential share will be much less. It 
does not represent a “substantial business, financial, or property interest,” at this time and 
any future ownership by Applicant is uncertain. AG ¶ 7(e) does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Those with potential application in mitigating the security concerns in this 
case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) cannot be applied with respect to Applicant’s family 
members living in Afghanistan. Applicant has a strong emotional bond with his fiancée, 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
mother, sister, and two brothers, who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan, as 
demonstrated by his regular and ongoing contact with them since arriving in the United 
States. His financial support for his mother and fiancée further establishes his close 
relationship with them. Applicant’s loyalty and close relationship to his family, 
particularly his mother and fiancée, in Afghanistan are positive character traits. 
However, for security clearance purposes, those strong relationships raise security 
concerns under this guideline. The fact that one brother works for the Afghan 
government further negates the application of these mitigating conditions as to that 
brother.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) has some application. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has 
established some longstanding connections to the United States. He has been in the 
United States since 1990 and is now a citizen. He has attended some college. He has 
worked hard and successfully since arriving. He owned and operated a business for a 
couple years and employed ten people. He became a licensed real estate broker in 
2006. He provided excellent service to the U.S. Army in Afghanistan from August 2010 
until December 2011. He has subsequently been there since November 2012, earning 
additional commendations and praise from his supervisors. He strongly asserted his 
loyalty to the United States, as did the authors of letters of recommendation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my 
whole-person analysis. 
 
There are factors that weigh in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. 
He established some strong connections to the United States, including residency here 
since 1990. He has, however, only been a U.S. citizen since 2012. He has attended 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
college here, and, owned and managed businesses over the years. He has friends who 
are U.S. citizens. His roommate is a linguist for the U.S. Army. He has financial 
accounts in the United States.   
 
Applicant has worked with the U.S. Army as a linguist in Afghanistan from August 
2010 until December 2011, and since November 2012. In total, he has successfully 
worked with the Army for more than 30 months, including a period of time during which 
he was not a U.S. citizen, according to this record. He submitted independent evidence 
from his Army command establishing that he has demonstrated ongoing compliance 
with security procedures during these positions, and that he has made significant 
contributions to the Army’s mission under hostile circumstances. His commanding 
officers have written about his talents and dedication in difficult and tense situations. 
The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the 
United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a 
Guideline B case.” See ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). In this case 
that evidence gives some credibility to Applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon 
to resist a foreign power’s attempts at coercion. 
   
However, there are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s 
history of connections to Afghanistan that weigh against granting him a security 
clearance. Applicant was born in Afghanistan and spent his early years there. His 
mother, sister, two brothers, and fiancée are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. He 
has maintained contact with his immediate family since 1990 and with his fiancée since 
2012. He spent the summer months of 2012 in Afghanistan to visit his family and 
become acquainted with his fiancée. One of his brothers is an engineer for the Afghan 
government, but there is no information indicating for what agency he works or the 
position he holds. There is little information about his other brother. In December 2011 
Applicant became engaged to a woman who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. He 
did not submit any information about her or her family’s background or employment, or 
whether they have knowledge of his position. He sends financial aid to his mother and 
fiancée. These factors demonstrate Applicant’s deep and ongoing attachments to 
Afghanistan. Additionally, his current work with the U.S. Army creates a greater risk of 
potential coercion, should terrorists learn of his work and family members residing in 
Afghanistan, including a brother who works for the government. There is no evidence 
that he has any family living in the United States. 
 
At this time, the mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept and the 
adjudicative guidelines is not sufficient to warrant access to classified information. The 
quality of Applicant’s performance with the Army makes the outcome of this case a 
close call. However, without more details about Applicant’s fiancée, her family, and his 
brother’s position with the Afghan government, the record leaves me with unanswered 
questions as to Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Given that, this Decision 
must be resolved in favor of national security. Applicant has not sufficiently carried his 
burden to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
  10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:               AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:      Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
