1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-00975
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on February 24, 2009. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 23, 2013, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The issuance of this decision was delayed to correct a problem created by the issuance of earlier Adjudicative1
Guidelines to Applicant, not the most recent Adjudicative Guidelines. The correct Adjudicative Guidelines were
mailed to Applicant on January 17, 2014. She was given 30 days from the date of the letter to review the
Adjudicative Guidelines, and if she chose, to submit additional information. Since Applicant is working
overseas, she did not receive the letter until February 2, 2014. The record was held open until March 4, 2014
to give her 30 days to submit any additional information after a review of the correct Adjudicative Guidelines.
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient2
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Items 5 and 6.3
2
  Applicant received the SOR on October 3, 2013. She submitted a notarized,
written response to the SOR allegation dated October 24, 2013, and she requested a
decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on November 18, 2013. Applicant received the FORM on
November 25, 2013. She had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She did not submit a response.
DOHA assigned this case to me on January 15, 2014.  The Government submitted1
eight exhibits, which have been marked as Items 1-8 and admitted into the record.
Applicant’s response to the SOR has been marked and admitted as Item 4, and the
SOR has been marked as Item 1.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the single debt factual allegation in ¶
1.a of the SOR.  She also provided additional information to support her request for2
eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence
of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 54 years old, works as a linguist for a DOD contractor.
Applicant began her current position in February 2009 and works overseas. Applicant
did not work for four years before she accepted this position.  3
Applicant was born in Iraq. She completed an associate’s degree in Iraq in 1979.
She fled Iraq in 1990 with many of her family members. She lived in Turkey for more
than two years. She then moved to Canada as a refugee, where she lived until she
married in October 1995. She moved to the United States when she married and
Items 5 and 6.  4
Item 6.5
Items 5 and 6. 6
Item 4; Items 7 and 8.7
3
became a U.S. citizen in 2001. She has a 15-year-old son, who was born in the United
States and resides in the United States. Applicant and her husband are separated.4
Around 2004, Applicant’s husband became disabled from working due to back
injuries. Prior to this, her husband operated a small machine repair shop. He has not
worked since 2004, and Applicant worked only one year between 2004 and 2009.
During this time, social security provided income to her and her family, who lived with
her husband’s sister. During this time, Applicant and her husband developed financial
problems.5
When Applicant completed her e-QIP on February 24, 2009, she acknowledged
past-due debts. She listed six credit card debts and advised that she would pay these
debts as soon as she was financially able. The December 2010 credit report reflects
that all six accounts listed on her e-QIP were paid. The credit report also showed that
two other credit card debts were paid. The $16,000 judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a is listed on
this report, but the debt is not listed on the credit report. The judgment is not shown as
paid. When she met with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on
December 28, 2010, Applicant advised the OPM investigator that this debt had been
paid, but she has not provided documentation showing that this debt is paid.6
By denying the factual allegation that she owed the $16,000 judgment, Applicant
asserted that she had paid the debt. Her receipt of the SOR and FORM should have put
her on notice that additional documentation was needed to establish the judgment had
been paid or was being paid. No documentation was received.
 
Applicant has not provided a budget, but she did submit two earnings statements
from February 2013 and one from September 2013. She also provided a document from
her payroll office, indicating that it had received a garnishment notice for $3,312 plus
interest. The court case triggering this garnishment is not identified. The earnings
statements show that her wages are being garnished and that by September 2013, she
had paid $2,814 towards the garnished debt. The two credit reports in the record do not
reflect any outstanding debts, except the SOR judgment.7
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
4
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
5
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems when her husband became
disabled. She was unable to pay her debts for sometime, and one debt remains
outstanding. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
The SOR identified only one unpaid debt, a $16,000 judgment. Applicant’s
financial problems started when her husband became disabled from working and she
was not working. Her husband’s disability and subsequent loss of income is a factor
beyond her control. Once she returned to full-time employment and as she stated,
Applicant paid all her past-due credit card debts, which are not listed in the SOR. She
acted reasonably towards these debts. She advised the OPM investigator that she had
paid the $16,000 judgment, but she has not provided proof that this debt is resolved.
While she showed that her wages are being garnished, she has not shown that the
garnishment is for the SOR judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are clearly
applicable to the non-SOR debts, but given the lack of documentation to show that the
judgment is paid, she has not mitigated the security concern raised by the SOR. 
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
financial problems began when her husband became disabled from working around
2004. When she returned to full-time employment, she kept her promise and paid all her
past-due debts as shown by her credit reports. She told the OPM investigator that she
paid the judgment, but the record lacks any documentary evidence that this debt has
been paid. The 2013 credit report does not reflect that a release has been filed with the
court, stating that the debt is paid. The documents related to the garnishment of her
salary do not reflect that the garnishment is for the judgment listed in the SOR, given
that the amount of the garnishment is far less than the amount of the judgment. While
Applicant clearly took responsibility for the debts listed in her e-QIP, the documentation
in the record does not support a finding that she has resolved the $16,000 judgment
listed in the SOR. A security concern remains.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her finances under
Guideline F.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
