 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00610   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant is a naturalized U.S citizen 
originally from Afghanistan. Her relationships with her husband and son-in-law, who are 
both U.S. citizens, are not indicative of a foreign preference. Applicant’s relationship 
with her sister-in-law, a citizen and resident of Afghanistan is not a source of influence, 
vulnerability, or exploitation. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 6, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing 
convened on December 9, 2013, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
without objection. Applicant did not submit any documents. I received the transcript (Tr.) 
on December 17, 2013. 
 
Procedural Issues 
  
Waiver of Notice Requirement 
 
 Applicant received less than 15 days written notice of the time and place of the 
hearing as required under Directive ¶ E.3.1.8. Applicant waived the notice requirement, 
electing to proceed with the hearing as scheduled.3  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object to the request, and it was 
granted. The written summary, along with its attachments, is appended to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 59, has worked as a linguist for a federal contractor since February 
2012. As part of her employment, Applicant completed a U.S. Army counter-intelligence 
(CI) interview in May 2012. During the interview, Applicant discussed the citizenship and 
employment status of her family members, her immigration to the United States, and the 
political activities of her husband. Based on the interview, the Army found no CI or 
foreign preference risk based on Applicant’s relationships or with her husband’s political 
activities. At the hearing, Applicant provided testimony consistent with that of the CI 
interview.5  
 
 Originally from Afghanistan, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 
2003. Applicant’s husband and their three oldest children are also naturalized U.S. 
citizens. At the time of her CI interview, Applicant listed her son-in-law as being a citizen 
of Afghanistan, residing in the United States. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
                                                          
2 The letter from the Chief Administrative Judge regarding the Applicant’s rights and obligations in a 
DOHA proceeding is appended to the record as Appellate Exhibit (AP E) I. 
 
3 Tr. 6-8.  
 
4 Tr. 17-19. 
 
5 GE 1, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
sometime in 2012, after Applicant completed her CI interview. Applicant’s youngest 
child and her three grandchildren are U.S. citizens by birth. All live in the United States.6 
 
 Applicant and her family fled Afghanistan for Pakistan in 1981 after the former 
Soviet Union invaded the country. Applicant’s husband, then a journalist, was politically 
active, speaking against the invasion. From 1981 to 1988, Applicant’s husband was a 
member of the National Afghan Islamic Front. He served as the leader of the Radio 
Voice of Afghan Mujahedeen from 1984 to 1987. During this time, Applicant’s husband 
was jailed for his activities. Applicant and her family remained in Pakistan until 1988 
when they immigrated to the United States as refugees. Since immigrating to the United 
States, Applicant’s husband has remained active as a journalist and political pundit in 
the expatriate Afghan community, voicing opposition to the Taliban and al-Qaeda. He 
does not participate in any organized political groups. Applicant denies the SOR 
allegations that her family has received threats from Taliban and al-Qaeda supporters 
because of her husband’s activities. In 2006, Applicant’s husband held a security 
clearance while he worked as a linguist for a federal contractor. He was fired from the 
position for some unspecified misconduct. Applicant’s husband now works as a truck 
driver.7 
 
 Applicant does not own any property or have any bank accounts outside the 
United States. In addition to immediate family, her mother and six siblings are also 
naturalized U.S. citizens. Three of her brothers have held security clearances, working 
as linguists for federal contractors. Only one of her brothers continues to work as a 
linguist. Currently, Applicant has one relative, a sister-in-law, who is a citizen and 
resident of Afghanistan. Applicant does not consider this a close relationship and has 
not had contact with her sister-in-law since 2007. The Army CI report did not find any 
risk associated with this relationship.8 
 
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is located in southwestern Asia. Pakistan borders it on the east and 
the south. Iran borders it on the west and Russia on the north. It is a rugged and 
mountainous country, which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. It 
has about 18 million people. Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic that has had a 
turbulent political history, including an invasion by the Russians in 1979. After an Accord 
was reached in 1989 and Russia withdrew from the country, fighting continued among 
the various ethnic, clan, and religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to 
power and controlled 90% of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies. 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. In May 
                                                          
6 Tr. 20-23, 29-31, 53-54; GE 1, 3; Answer.  
 
7 Tr. 21, 39-47; GE 3. 
 
8 Tr. 23-26, 36-39, 54-55; GE 3.  
 
4 
 
2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed the Enduring Strategic Partnership 
Agreement between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United States of 
America, memorializing a ten-year commitment from the United States to strengthen 
Afghanistan’s sovereignty, stability, prosperity, and continue cooperation to defeat al-
Qaida and its affiliates.9 
 
The country’s human rights record remains poor. Problems include: extrajudicial 
killings; widespread official impunity; official corruption; violence and societal 
discrimination against women. Violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the 
U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of 
Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of 
Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
9 HE 1. 
 
10 HE 1. 
 
5 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts . . . may be a security concern if the individual has divided 
loyalties . . ., may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”11 The SOR identifies three of Applicant’s 
relationships that may indicate a foreign preference, specifically, Applicant’s relationship 
with her husband, her son-in-law, and her sister-in-law. Because Applicant’s son-in-law 
is now a naturalized U.S. citizen living in the United States, this relationship is no longer 
a security concern. However, Applicant’s relationship with husband and her sister-in-law 
requires further scrutiny.  
 
Applicant’s sister-in-law is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. A close 
relationship with a person who is a resident and citizen of a foreign country can be 
disqualifying if the contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion;12 or if the relationship could create a potential 
conflict of interest between the applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and her desire to help a foreign person.13 Although a heightened risk exists 
in this case given the perilous conditions inside Afghanistan, Applicant’s relationship 
with her sister-in-law is not likely a source of vulnerability or exploitation. There is no 
evidence that Applicant’s sister-in-law is associated with or dependent upon the Afghan 
government.  As such, it is unlikely that Applicant will be put in the position of having to 
choose between the interests of her relative in Afghanistan and those of the United 
States.14  Furthermore, Applicant’s relationship with her sister-in-law is not particularly 
close as the two have not had contact in almost seven years.15  
 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 6.  
 
12 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
13 AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
14 AG ¶ 8(a). 
 
15 AG ¶ 8(c). 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s relationship with her husband, a naturalized U.S. citizen, raises a 
security concern, despite his citizenship status, if their relationship creates a heightened 
risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.16 The SOR alleges that 
Applicant’s husband’s political activism in the 1980s creates heightened risk. It does 
not. Applicant’s husband political activities and associations in the 1980s are too remote 
in time and unrelated to the current political situation in Afghanistan to be relevant to a 
current heightened risk analysis. The SOR also alleges that Applicant’s husband’s 
current work as a journalist and political pundit opposing the Taliban creates a 
heightened risk because his activities have led to threats against Applicant’s family by 
Taliban sympathizers. This allegation is not supported by the record. Applicant states 
that she is unaware of any threats made against her family. There is no information in 
the record to contradict her statements.  Additionally, the Army CI assessment found no 
foreign preference or counter-intelligence risk associated with Applicant’s husband’s 
activities.  
 
Based on the record, it is unlikely that Applicant will be put in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of her relatives and the United States. Applicant and 
her family entered the United States 26 years ago as refugees. She is firmly rooted in 
the United States by the presence of her husband, children, grandchildren, siblings, and 
mother. Viewed in totality, these factors lead me to the conclusion that Applicant can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered the whole-
person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s does not have divided loyalties 
between the United States and Afghanistan.  Based on the evidence, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.                                              
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
16 AG 7(d). 
