 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 13-00808 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 18, 2013, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP; SF 86). On August 28, 2013, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 18, 2013. She 
answered the SOR in writing on October 2, 2013, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the 
request on October 7, 2013. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
November 5, 2013, and I received the case assignment on November 7, 2013. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on November 27, 2013, and I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled on December 16, 2013. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through H, 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 23, 
2013. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until January 16, 2014, to 
submit additional matters.  On January 16, 2014, she submitted Exhibits I to W, without 
objection. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
At the hearing, Applicant’s attorney stated the Notice of Hearing was sent to his 
former law firm and he did not receive it in the time allowed by the Directive. (Tr. 7) I 
advised Applicant of her right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before 
the hearing. After consulting with counsel, Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 15 
days’ notice. (Tr. 7)  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶ 1.g, alleging 
Applicant is currently being sued as the guarantor for approximately $2 million on the 
business debt owed by the family company, and as of the date of the hearing, 
December 16, 2013, the lawsuit remains outstanding (Tr. 86-90). Applicant’s counsel 
objected to the motion, arguing that Department Counsel had not shown good cause for 
failing to raise the allegation sooner and that the lack of notice denied Applicant the 
opportunity to prepare to respond to the allegation at the hearing. I informed 
Department Counsel that, if the motion to amend were granted, I would give Applicant 
until January 17, 2014, to respond to the new matter, as required by ¶ E3.1.17 and ¶ 
E3.1.4 of the Directive (Tr. 94). Her counsel did submit written argument on the issue. 
Department Counsel had until January 24, 2014, to make her reply. I did not receive 
any document containing a counter-argument. The record closed at that time. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f of the SOR, with explanations. She denied the factual allegations in 
¶ 1.d of the SOR. Applicant made no admission or denial of the amended ¶ 1.g (Tr. 55, 
92). However, her testimony, her e-QIP, and answers to DOHA interrogatories indicated 
and admitted there was a deficiency in the amount owed under the guarantees.. She 
also provided additional information to support her request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old, married, and has two daughters. She and her husband 
owned and operated a business for about 28 years making plastic components for the 
auto and defense industries. They owned 30% of the business, with his other family 
 
3 
 
 
members owning the remaining 70%. The business was adversely affected by the 
economic downturn in 2007 and 2008 to such an extent that their lending bank would 
not renew their business loans. Applicant was forced to sell the business after closing 
part of it. At one time they had over 200 employees in four factories around the United 
States. (Tr. 19-23, 29, 67, 68; Exhibits 1-5)   
 
 Applicant owes over $2 million in business and corporate loans, according to the 
SOR allegations. She has repaid some of those debts and negotiated legal settlements 
for the larger loans that originated from the operation of her husband’s business and the 
construction of their former home. (Tr. 21, 24-28, 39-58; Exhibits 1-5, A-H, K-S) 
 
 Applicant owes a medical provider $251 (Subparagraph 1.a). This debt is paid 
and the matter resolved. (Tr. 24; Exhibit D)  
 
 Applicant owes another medical provider $534 (Subparagraph 1.b). This debt is 
paid and the matter resolved. (Tr. 24; Exhibit C) 
 
 Applicant owes a bank $1,839 on a judgment dating from November 2011 
(Subparagraph 1.c). This debt is part of the debt alleged in Subparagraph 1.e for 
$21,000 owed to the same bank. The entire debt was negotiated for a sum of $25,000. 
Applicant is repaying this debt at the rate of $500 monthly on a total judgment of 
$25,000. She has paid $4,000, in addition to the monthly installment payments that now 
total $1,500. This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 25, 26, 39-42; Exhibits 1-5, B, H) 
 
 Applicant owes the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $103,000 on a tax lien 
(Subparagraph 1.d). This tax lien pertains to the tax years of 2006 to 2008, and 2010. 
Applicant filed her tax forms but did not have sufficient income or financial resources to 
pay the tax at the time. She has paid $58,000 through direct payments, tax refunds 
seizures, and tax loss carry forward allowances under the IRS Code. She now owes 
$32,000. She negotiated an installment payment agreement with the IRS in October 
2012. She is paying this debt at the rate of $750 monthly by automatic debit from her 
checking account. This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 25, 26, 28, 43-48; Exhibits 1-5, A)  
 
 Applicant owes a debt collector $896 for a debt originating with a resort hotel 
(Subparagraph 1.f). She paid this debt on September 23, 2013, by check. This debt is 
resolved. (Tr. 27; Exhibits 1-5, E) 
 
 Applicant is currently being sued as the guarantor for approximately $2 million on 
a business debt owed by their family owned company, and as of the date of the hearing, 
December 16, 2013, the lawsuit remains outstanding (Subparagraph 1.g). Applicant and 
her husband signed a guarantee, as did his brother and wife, and another member of 
the family. These documents were signed in March 2007. All of them were sued by the 
bank in August 2013. The legal issues are being discussed by the respective attorneys, 
including the defense raised by Applicant that the bank asked for their cooperation in 
selling the foam fabricating business in return for not suing for any deficiency or on the 
 
4 
 
 
guarantees. The entire matter is in litigation. It is not resolved and will not be for some 
time. (Tr. 23, 34-37, 75-83; Exhibits 1-5, I-T) 
 
Applicant is also being sued as the guarantor on a loan for $600,000 on a real 
estate transaction in 2007. Her husband testified that they took out a mortgage in that 
amount to build a home on property they bought and paid for over a ten year period. 
The mortgage eventually grew to $1.2 million with interest. The bank eventually 
foreclosed on the property when Applicant ceased making payments because of the 
lack of income from her husband’s company in 2009. The bank accepted a deed in lieu 
of foreclosure. The deficiency of $685,562.64 was settled for $5,000 with Applicant 
paying $1,000 monthly to resolve this debt. The documents pertaining to this 
arrangement were submitted by Applicant. She asserts that under the Mortgage Debt 
Relief Act of 2007 there is no tax liability for this debt forgiveness by the lending bank. 
This debt is not alleged in the SOR but became known during the hearing from 
testimony. (Tr. 49-60, 71-84; Exhibits 1-5, I-V)  
 
Applicant also owes about $12,000 in state income taxes for the tax years 2004 
to 2007. She is paying this debt on the installment basis at $250 monthly. This debt is 
being resolved. This debt was not alleged in the SOR but became known during 
Applicant’s testimony. (Tr. 44-48; Exhibits 1-5)  
 
Applicant and her husband are currently renting a home purchased by their 
daughter. Their credit rating was not good enough to allow them to purchase a home on 
their own. (Tr. 69) 
 
Applicant is the president of a financial and accounting company she and her 
husband founded after the foam fabricating company was sold. Her husband is vice 
president. Their company is also involved in audit readiness preparation and internal 
financial control reviews. They have 10 employees in Washington, D.C. and four 
employees (themselves and their daughters) in the local area. Applicant does not have 
a security clearance. Her husband recently obtained his clearance. (Tr. 17, 18, 32, 33, 
71) 
 
Applicant does not currently have any credit card debt. She is paying her house 
rent on time and all her utility costs regularly. She and her husband have a Section 
401(k) retirement account with about $50,000 in it that they offer to use to pay any debts 
they cannot pay out of regular monthly income. They used part of that account 
previously to make debt payments, leaving them with the current balance. Applicant did 
not introduce any evidence of financial counseling. She did testify that neither she nor 
her husband want to file bankruptcy for the business debts because they believe they 
should pay their debts. They have paid credit card debts during the past five years 
leaving only the one alleged in the SOR. They paid business creditors as much as they 
could. Their lending bank did not work with them during the financial crisis of 2007 to 
2009 to save their business as their previous business lender, which they used until 
2007, did. (Tr. 56, 57, 76, 78, 81-83; Exhibit 3) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant and her husband were credible witnesses. Their exhibits are detailed 
financial documents which support the assertions they made at the hearing. They 
explained their business problems and the efforts they make to resolve the financial 
problems resulting from the termination of their foam fabricating business. All of it was 
interrelated.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated over $2 million in delinquent debt from 2007 to the 
present time that remains unpaid. Most of the debt resulted from the business Applicant 
and her husband operated over 28 years being dissolved or sold in the 2007 to 2009 
period because of pressure from their lending bank to cut their losses at that time.  
Applicant has seven delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Five conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
   
 
7 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications the problem is being resolved or is under 
control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems happened five years ago. They occurred under 
unusual circumstances resulting from the economic condition of the United States at 
that time. She and her husband lost their long-time business in a severe economic 
downturn. Applicant acted responsibly to negotiate settlements or enter installment 
payment agreements with her business creditors. She and her husband gave a deed in 
lieu of foreclosure and paid a $5,000 settlement on their house mortgage loan 
deficiency with that bank. She did not walk away from any of her debts but tried to pay 
them in a responsible manner. AG ¶ 20 (a) and (b) apply to the totality of her efforts 
regarding her debts.   
 
Applicant testified to all the efforts made by her and her husband over the past 
five years to pay business creditors from the foam fabricating business they operated 
for over 28 years. She also showed by various documents the efforts she made to 
resolve her tax debts by installment payment agreements and negotiations with tax 
authorities. These financial matters are under control. The only debt subject to litigation, 
for which Applicant contends she has a meritorious defense, is the loan guarantees on 
which the lending bank sued in August 2013. It is too early in the legal process to 
resolve these guarantees. There are four other family members who are also liable on 
the guarantees so any final judgment would be joint and several liability according to the 
terms of the agreement. Based on Applicant’s record to date of paying her debts, it is 
likely there will be a negotiated settlement of this issue to terminate the litigation 
sometime in the future. Therefore, there are clear indications from the evidence she 
presented that the financial problems are under control and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) 
applies.  
 
Applicant paid three debts alleged in the SOR in an orderly manner. They are the 
debts listed in Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.f. The other debts she is paying on the 
installment payment basis. One debt that was amended into the SOR at the hearing 
(1.g) is the subject of a lawsuit over the guarantees she and her husband signed for 
business loans in 2007. There are also guarantees on a loan to their real estate 
company for the construction of their former home that might later be the subject of a 
separate lawsuit. Her relatives also signed separate guarantees and are being sued 
also. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant also has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the guarantee 
debt, in whole or in part. She contends the bank made representations that with their 
cooperation in selling or closing the business it would forgive or renegotiate the loan 
guarantees for the family. Applicant submitted copies of email correspondence with the 
lending bank or its attorneys about those issues. AG ¶ 20 (e) applies.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a business person who 
recognized that the 2007 to 2009 economic downturn in the United States was 
adversely affecting her family business. With her husband, she acted responsibly to 
resolve her debts as stated in the analysis of the applicable guideline. This entire 
situation was a one-time occurrence not of Applicant’s making or her fault. She and her 
husband’s family closed that business. They have now started another one of a different 
kind so that they can support themselves.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
