KEYWORD: Guideline J; Guideline D; Guideline B
DIGEST: Army CID report is an official record for the purposes of E3.1.20 of the Directive. 
Because such a report is admissible without an authenticating witness, Applicant was not denied
any right of confrontation under E3.1.22 of the Directive. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-06496.a1
DATE: 06/25/2009
DATE: June 25, 2009
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-06496
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Claire Shapiro, Esq.
The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline B are not at issue in this appeal.1
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 22, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline
D (Sexual Behavior), and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 31, 2009,
after the hearing, Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to comply with the
Directive in admitting an Army criminal investigation report and whether the Judge erred in her
weighing of the evidence.   Finding no error, we affirm.1
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a 43-year-old network
engineer employed by a Defense contractor in a foreign country (Host Nation).  He has resided in
that country since 1993.  He married his wife in 1995, and he and his wife had a daughter in 1998.
His wife is a national of a third country and the daughter was born there.  
In December 2002 Applicant and his family traveled to the U.S. to visit Applicant’s parents.
Toward the end of the visit, Applicant’s wife insisted that they stay at a hotel rather than with the
parents.  Applicant checked his wife and daughter into a hotel, but he stayed with his parents.  The
next morning Applicant visited them, and, while he went to an ATM machine to get money, the wife
and daughter checked out of the hotel.  Applicant returned to the Host Nation and continued his
employment for the defense contractor.  Applicant stated at the hearing that he did not know where
his family went, or where they had been since that day.  In early 2003 he was informed by a
representative of the local office of the Staff Judge Advocate that his wife had made allegations
against him.  These allegations were that Applicant had raped and assaulted his wife and that he had
physically and sexually abused his daughter, and some of those alleged incidents occurred in the
Host Nation where Applicant accompanied the Army.  The Judge stated, in a footnote, that it “is
unnecessary to describe in detail the sexual conduct, other than to find the conduct was inappropriate
and would constitute physical and sexual assaults and indecent acts with a child.”  Decision at 6.
The wife and daughter were interviewed by the protective services system (PPS) of State A.  PPS
prepared a report, included as part of Government Exhibit 2, Army Criminal Investigation Command
(CID) Report.  The wife also filed for custody of the daughter, alleging physical and sexual abuse
of the daughter as well as abandonment.  The Judge’s findings quote at length a signed, sworn
statement by the wife describing abuse alleged to have been inflicted by Applicant upon the wife and
daughter.  The abuse is of an emotional, physical, and sexual nature.   
Department Counsel’s case rested chiefly on the contents of the investigative report prepared
by the Army CID in the Host Nation.  Applicant contends that this report was not admissible,
because it contained statements adverse to Applicant without providing him the opportunity to cross-
The CID Command “is the sole agency within the United States Army responsible for the investigation of2
felonies[.]” Army Regulation (AR) 195-2, Criminal Investigation Activities, October 30, 1985, ¶ 1-5(a).  The CID
exercises the Army’s investigative authority under ¶ 3-1 of this regulation.
AR 195-2 ¶ 3-1.  In this regard, Applicant argues that an Army interest exists for investigative purposes “only”3
where the circumstances fall in one of the five criteria in subparagraph 3-1b.
  
The Board notes that, although Applicant was not subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice, he was4
subject to 18 U.S.C. § 1361, which establishes extraterritorial criminal jurisdiction over persons serving with the Armed
Forces outside the United States.  This jurisdiction extends to Defense contractors.  The applicable Status of Forces
Agreement provides that the U.S. military authorities have the right of criminal jurisdiction over, inter alia, “civilian
persons . . . who are in the employ of, serving with, or accompanying the United States armed forces . .” 
3
examine the makers of the statements.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.22.   Applicant also argues that the CID
report did not satisfy the requirements of Directive ¶ E3.1.20, which permits the admission, without
authenticating witnesses, of “[o]fficial records or evidence compiled or created in the regular course
of business.”  Regarding the latter argument, Applicant contends that the CID investigation was
outside the scope of authority of the CID.   Applicant relies upon AR 195-2, apparently in effect at2
the time of Applicant’s case, in its description of circumstances in which an Army interest in
investigation will generally be said to exist.  These circumstances do not explicitly include those of
Applicant.   However, the regulation does not limit CID investigative authority to those five criteria3
set forth therein–the language of the regulation is illustrative, not exhaustive.  Construing the
regulation in its entirety, its plain meaning would include circumstances, such as these, where a
holder of a security clearance is accused of committing felonies while accompanying the Armed
Forces overseas.  The record demonstrates that the PPS of State A, aware that Applicant was
overseas working with the Army, notified DoD Family Advocacy officials in Arlington, VA of the
wife’s complaint.  DoD Family Advocacy, in turn, forwarded the information to Army officials in
the Host Nation.  Upon receipt, CID agents interviewed the wife in State A, interviewed Applicant
in the Host Nation, and compiled the evidence in the investigative report at issue here.  This report
states that, prior to issuance, CID officials coordinated with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
with the office of the servicing Staff Judge Advocate.  The Board notes that federal agencies are
entitled to a presumption of good faith and regularity in the performance of their responsibilities.
Sierra Club v. Costle, 657 F.2d 298, 334 (D.C. Cir. 1981); Broderick v. American General Corp.,
71 F.2d 864, 869 (4  Cir. 1934); Glisson v. United States Forest Service, 876 F. Supp. 1016, 1023-4th
(S.D. Ill 1993).  The record as a whole does not sustain a conclusion that Applicant has rebutted the
presumption of good faith and regularity as regards the activities of the DoD or Army officials in his
case.  There is nothing on the face of the report or in its contents to suggest that it was not an official
CID record or that it was prepared and maintained other than in the regular course of CID business.4
Therefore, the report satisfied the requirements of Directive ¶ E3.1.20.   
Applicant states that the report is not complete, insofar as some of the exhibits listed as
attachments were not submitted into evidence at the hearing.  Applicant does not allege, nor does
the record suggest, that Department Counsel withheld relevant documents that were in his
4
possession.  A review of the list of these attachments, included in the CID report, provides no reason
to conclude that any of them not admitted at the hearing were exculpatory or that, had they been
admitted, the Judge would have decided the case differently.   Accordingly, the Board resolves the
assignment of error under Directive ¶ E3.1.20 adversely to Applicant. 
Applicant also cites Directive ¶ E3.1.22, which forbids the admission of oral or written
statements adverse to Applicant unless there is an opportunity for cross-examination.  However, as
Applicant’s brief acknowledges, this provision does not establish a blanket right of confrontation but,
rather, is qualified by other provisions of the Directive.  See, for example ISCR Case 03-06770 at
3-4 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2004), which upheld a Judge’s admission of a police report under ¶ E3.1.20,
despite the fact that the maker of the report was not available for cross examination.  The Board
stated that “DOHA proceedings are civil, administrative proceedings in which strict rules of evidence
need not be applied . . . [I]t is well-settled that hearsay evidence can be admitted and considered in
federal administrative proceedings, including security clearance adjudications” (internal citations
omitted).  The Board also stated that, in any event, police reports are admissible as an exception to
the hearsay rule, for example as public records under Federal Rule of Evidence (FRE) 803(8).  See
also ISCR Case No. 98-0265 at 7 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 1999).  Because ¶ E3.1.22 does not require
exclusion of statements that are admissible under ¶ E3.1.20 or as exceptions to the hearsay rule under
the FRE, and because the CID report was admissible as an official record under the Directive,
Applicant was not denied a right of confrontation.     
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in the weight she assigned to the evidence contained
in the CID report, insofar as it was hearsay and was, in Applicant’s view, uncorroborated.  The Board
has considered the Judge’s decision in light of the record as a whole, finding therein no basis to
conclude that her weighing of the evidence was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law or that her
decision contravened the weight of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3
(App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).   The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory
explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the
choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co.,
463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly in the interests of national security to grant
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance” is sustainable on this record.  Decision at 19.  See also
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The general standard is that a clearance
may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security’”). 
5
 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple            
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
