1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 06-21972
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ronald P. Keller, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his most recent Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on
December 2, 2004. On June 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 15, 2008 and answered it on
the same day. He requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge through Counsel.
I received the case assignment on March 16, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
April 6, 2009, scheduling the hearing for May 8, 2009. Counsel for Applicant moved for
a continuance. I granted the continuance. An amended notice of hearing was issued on
May 7, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 2, 2009. The
1
W itness testimony was received via video-teleconference and telephone. Counsel for Applicant did not object.
2
At the hearing, Applicant’s Counsel objected to the Government calling Applicant as a witness  based on the
fact that the Government did not notify Applicant. Applicant’s Counsel did not plan to have Applicant testify
at the hearing. Applicant had a prepared statement to submit for the record. Department Counsel objected
and Applicant’s Counsel agreed to have Applicant adopt his prepared statement as testimony. Department
Counsel was then given the opportunity to cross-examine Applicant (Tr. 146-150). 
2
government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 12, which were received without objections.
The Government called three witnesses.  Applicant testified on his own behalf.  He1 2
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through L, without objections. DOHA received the transcript
of the hearing (Tr.) on June 9, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
On June 1, 2009, Counsel for Applicant requested a waiver of the scheduled
hearing. Applicant wished to submit the matter based upon written documents (in
essence a review on the record or FORM). Department Counsel objected to Applicant’s
request based on timeliness. I denied Applicant’s request.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.c
of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility
for a security clearance. 
Applicant is 55 years old. He is divorced and has no children (Tr. 191). He
obtained his undergraduate degree in 1975 from one of the U.S. military academies.
After receiving two master’s degrees, he received his Ph.D in computer science and
engineering in 1989. He retired from the military at the officer paygrade of O-5 in 1999.
He held a top secret security clearance during his military and civilian career. He has
been with his current employer since 2004 (GE 7).
Applicant held civilian research positions on various military installations from
1999 until 2002 after his lengthy military career (GE 2). In 2003, he was working as a
senior research scientist at a military base. He was, at the time, a probationary
employee in federal service (GE 6). 
Applicant’s supervisor determined that Applicant displayed inappropriate
behavior in the workplace in November 2003, when the supervisor observed Applicant
in his office sitting at his desk preparing to fill a syringe with an unknown substance from
a vial (Tr. 33). Applicant’s supervisor was surprised and questioned Applicant. He asked
Applicant if he was a diabetic and Applicant stated that he had an antibiotic and was
preparing to inject it. Applicant had banged his head a week before and had a bandage
on his forehead (Tr. 33). Applicant had a tumor removed years ago and said that when
3
he sustained a cut, he had to take antibiotics to avoid an infection (Tr. 34).  He further
explained that he had received the antibiotics and the syringe from the military medical
unit (Tr. 37).
The supervisor conferred with his deputy who is a physician and was told that
this did not make sense. Since this involved a medical issue and possible privacy
concerns, the supervisor checked with a personnel specialist about what he could
legally ask Applicant. After that, the supervisor asked Applicant for a copy of the
prescription to confirm Applicant’s explanation for the syringe and vial. (Tr. 38).
Applicant never produced a prescription and he changed his explanation several times
(Tr. 41). 
Applicant’s supervisor met with him and determined that his responses
concerning the November 2003 incident were not credible and decided to terminate him
(Tr. 48). The deputy was also at the meeting. Applicant’s supervisor prepared a
memorandum of record (GE 4) discussing the incident which told Applicant about his
right to request a review by the division chief (GE 4). The memorandum was dated
December 15, 2003 and the effective date of termination was December 19, 2003. The
supervisor did not have a written acknowledgment of the termination (Tr. 52) and he
acknowledged that he had never terminated anyone before this incident. He also
acknowledged that it was possible that Applicant did not take the memorandum with him
when he left the meeting (Tr. 82).
The Memorandum - Subject- Termination During Probationary Period, dated
December 15, 2003 refers to “inappropriate behavior” as a basis for termination.
Applicant’s supervisor elaborated in the memorandum that Applicant’s responses and
explanations to requests and questions have not been credible. He states that “the
inference, I have drawn is that the substance in the vial I observed on 20 November
2003 was non-prescription, and inappropriate”(GE 4). “This behavior has resulted in a
lack of confidence and trust ... and serves as the basis for termination during your
probationary period.”
At the hearing, Applicant’s supervisor testified that when he walked into
Applicant’s office, Applicant put the syringe and vial in his left hand and lowered them
out of view (Tr. 35). Applicant’s supervisor acknowledged that he wrote the
memorandum of record, which was merged with other information from Personnel. He
further explained that he met with Applicant and explained to him that he was being
terminated since he did not provide documentation concerning the syringe and the vial
(Tr. 47). Applicant’s supervisor did not see the final paperwork that Applicant signed.
Therefore, the supervisor did not write or provide any “remarks” to indicate additional or
conflicting reasons for Applicant’s resignation ( Tr. 63-64).
Applicant’s supervisor knew that the division chief had the authority to override
his decision. He learned later from the division chief that Applicant met with him and
provided results from a drug test that showed he was not using drugs (hair sample).
However, the termination proceeded. Applicant’s supervisor also admitted that until a
4
few days ago he did not know that Applicant had resigned a few hours before being
terminated (Tr. 47).  
Applicant signed an SF 52 (Request for Personnel Action) on December 19,
2003. The Request For Action is Resignation and Applicant listed “Personal Reasons”
for the resignation (GE 5). Under Part F (Remarks) directly below his signature he
corrected his forwarding address with his initials. The Agency Finding was directly below
that line and stated: Employee resigned after receiving written notice on 15-DEC-2003
of termination during probationary period for inappropriate behavior (GE 5). An SF 50
(Notification of Personnel Action) confirms a resignation for personal reasons and also
lists the Agency Finding of resignation after receiving written notice of termination during
probationary period for inappropriate behavior (GE 6).
Applicant’s work performance was very good and there were no problems with
security breaches. His supervisor testified that he hired Applicant and had respect for
him (Tr. 70). He had not seen any erratic behavior before the November 2003 incident.
On December 2, 2004, Applicant completed a security clearance application. He
answered “no” to question 20 concerning his employment record in the past seven
years. He did not acknowledge that he had “quit a job after being told [he would be] fired
or that he left a job for other reason under unfavorable circumstances. 
In March 2006, a special agent from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
interviewed Applicant (GE 10). She prepared a report of the investigation. She testified
at the hearing that Applicant when questioned during the interview did not report
anything about a syringe and vial and his former supervisor (Tr. 92). Applicant did not
disclose that he had been terminated in 2003. He did state that he had not used illegal
drugs and that his former supervisor had made allegations concerning illegal drug use
(Tr. 100). The agent also reviewed Question 20 with Applicant concerning previous
employment (Tr. 111). She explained that she asked him if he had been fired or
resigned under adverse conditions and he said “no” (Tr. 114).
In 2007, Applicant was interviewed by a field agent. She prepared a report
concerning the investigation. Agent B testified at the hearing that she confronted
Applicant specifically about the November 2003 incident that his supervisor described
concerning a syringe and a vial. Applicant claimed that he did not know anything about
such an incident (Tr. 137). He denied that he was going to be terminated and that he
explained he was never asked why he left the employment.
In 2007, Applicant was investigated for sensitive compartmented information
(SCI) access (GE 8). Information concerning the November 2003 incident was
reviewed. Applicant declined to answer an interrogatory explaining the situation (GE 9). 
In March 2008, Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories with a prepared
statement and enclosures (GE 10). He commented on the accuracy of the agent’s
interviews. He focused on the fact that he presented a negative hair drug screen to his
5
employer in 2003. He stressed that he did not use illegal drugs or abuse legal drugs. He
further explained that “he was certain that he intended to quit” and that is why he did not
discuss being fired. He admitted that he had no evidence or paperwork to substantiate
his recollection. He stressed that he did not have the time or energy to fight “false
observations, conclusions, statements, or whatever they were” due to his ex-wife’s
grave medical condition. He stated that he was willing to take a lie detector test. 
At the hearing, Applicant did not wish to testify. He adopted his written statement
(AE K), and answered questions on cross-examination. He again denied all allegations.
He did not recall any incident with a syringe or a vial (Tr. 159). He explained that he
never received a notice of termination. He had no recollections of any conversations
with his supervisor after the first day (Tr 159). When asked if the ”first day” was
November 13, 2003, he answered that he had no reason to dispute it (Tr. 160). He did
not recall any meeting with his supervisor where he was told that he would be
terminated for inappropriate behavior. He said he looked through his paperwork and he
has no copy of the notice of termination (Tr. 161). He did not recall meeting with his
division chief. He did recall that although “his recollection was extremely hazy”, he had
the impression that his supervisor was worried about Applicant’s illegal drug use after a
conversation that took place (Tr. 162). Applicant explained that he had a hair sample
done that was negative for drugs. He wanted to resign as soon as possible given the
allegations. He agreed that he signed the SF 52 but did not see the Agency Finding
concerning termination. He testified that he did not recall seeing that line (Tr. 166).
Applicant stressed that he left the position for personal reasons. “I would have
left even if I had been asked to stay in the position” (AE K). By marking “yes” to question
20 on the security questionnaire, I would have been implicitly admitting that one of the
conditions was true. By my knowledge at the time, none of the conditions were true” (AE
K). As regards the first allegation, I deny having in my possession a termination notice
and I deny knowing of a termination notice” (AE K).
Applicant testified at the hearing that he had no problems on the job, but he had
problems with his supervisor (Tr. 170). He explained that his supervisor made an
allegation that he was using illegal drugs, and Applicant did not respect his research (Tr.
170). Applicant stated that he does not have a clear recollection of a conversation but
when he left “that meeting” he did not know if his supervisor told him he would be fired
(Tr. 171). When asked about what he wrote in his March 2008 interrogatories
concerning his intention to quit as soon as possible, he said he did not want to be
delayed by some minimal number of days notification problem. Applicant explained that
he was not referring to the termination notice (Tr. 177). When asked again, Applicant
said “no” .. I will leave it at that time. I don’t want to say too much” (Tr. 178).
Applicant summed up his testimony by stating that he did not know of any
termination action against him. “At the time I resigned, I thought, given the negative
drug screen, I’m getting out of here for personal reasons and this situation’s over and
closed” (Tr. 193).
6
Applicant submitted numerous character references (AE A-I). He is described as
a person of high moral character who demonstrates trustworthiness and honesty. He
takes his professional and personal duties seriously (AE C). His actions have never
been rash or impulsive (AE F). He is a thoughtful, careful, and painfully honest analyst
offering his well thought out and truthful views in a respectful but brutally honest manner
(AE G). A colleague who has known Applicant for five years wrote that “Applicant can
be trusted to protect the national security interests of the U.S. and should be granted a
clearance” (AE L).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
7
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicting that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information is another disqualifying
condition; and
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
8
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s
professional, or community standing. 
Applicant completed his 2004 security clearance application. He answered “no”
to Question 20 concerning his employment record, which asked about leaving prior
employment for various reasons, including, after being told he was fired or under
unfavorable circumstances. I find that he deliberately falsified a material fact with that
response.
The Government established by substantial evidence that Applicant’s supervisor
told him in November 2003 that he would be terminated for inappropriate behavior
despite that Applicant maintained that he never received a notice of termination.
Applicant by his own acknowledgment stated that there were allegations of illegal drug
use by his supervisor. He could not recall a meeting but did not dispute it. He stated that
he resigned after that and listed personal reasons on the SF 52. It is not credible that
Applicant did not see the agency finding on the SF 52 when he signed it and even
corrected his address. He is a seasoned professional and sophisticated man. 
Applicant’s testimony did not refute the allegations despite his denials. He could
not recall or remember and did not want to say too much. Applicant’s own testimony
hearing that he believed by presenting the negative drug screen- the “situation is over”
acknowledges that there were some unfavorable circumstances or allegations. The fact
that the allegations may not have been true concerning illegal drug use is not relevant
for an honest answer to Question 20. Thus, AG ¶16(a) applies in this case. 
Applicant’s 2006 and 2007 interviews with two agents are not as clear concerning
a deliberate falsification due to the nature of the questioning in the interviews. I find for
Applicant as to allegation 1.b. Thus, AG ¶ 16(b) does not apply.
Under AG ¶ 17, the following conditions could mitigate the government’s security
concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
9
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
I find that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns. Applicant has
consistently denied all allegations but he has not been forthright and open. He was not
credible in his non-recollections at the hearing. Although the incident occurred in 2003
and the questionnaire was completed in 2004, Applicant has not mitigated the
falsification of his security clearance application. He was not credible in his explanations
concerning the termination and resignation.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has served his country
admirably for 35 years. He was a cadet at a military academy and was an officer in the
military until 1999. He retired as an officer. He obtained his Ph.D. in computer science
and worked in various research capacities for the military from 1999 until the present.
He held a top secret clearance during his military and civilian career. He had no
problems with handling classified information.
Applicant falsified his 2004 security clearance application when he responded
“no” to Question 20 concerning prior employment. He omitted the fact that he had
resigned before a termination or at least that he left under unfavorable circumstances.
The fact that Applicant admitted that there were allegations of illegal drug use supports
the fact that his resignation for “personal reasons” was not the entire truth. Even if
allegations were not true, an honest answer would require that Applicant list the incident
and explain the situation. Applicant’s reliance on the fact that he did not have the notice
of termination in his paperwork or the fact that he did not recall being told he would be
fired is not credible, or sufficient to rebut the Government’s case. 
.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all these
10
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from
personal conduct.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied .
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
