 
1 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )           
                                                                         )  ISCR Case No. 07-17470 
                                                                      )                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hofffman, Esquire,  Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption, but she failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Her eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(EQIP) on November 18, 2005. On August 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On September 17, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing, provided 
additional information, and requested that her case be decided on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing before an administrative judge. Pursuant to ¶ E3.1.7., Enclosure 3, 
Additional Procedural Guidance, of the Directive, Department Counsel requested a 
hearing in the matter. The case was assigned to me on April 2, 2009. I convened a 
hearing on May 4, 2009, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called 
no witnesses and introduced seven exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 7 and 
admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant testified on her own behalf, called no 
other witnesses, and offered no exhibits for admission to the record.  
 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on May 18, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains six allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG J, Criminal 
Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.), four allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG 
E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.d.), and one allegation of disqualifying 
conduct under AG G, Alcohol Consumption (SOR ¶ 3.a.). In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted all eleven allegations in the SOR and provided additional 
information. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and divorced. In 1994, she earned a bachelor’s degree 
in mass communications. From approximately February 2001 until December 2003, 
Applicant worked for a defense contractor as a software trainer specialist. From 
December 2003, until the present, she has been employed by a government contractor 
in a senior position. In her current duties as an information technology manager, she 
leads and manages a team of 18 junior-level staff in two geographical locations. The 
team is responsible for installing new software systems for U.S. government civilian and 
military clients. Every two months, Applicant travels to supervise and manage one of her 
units in another state. She seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Ex. 1; Tr. 32-35, 
105-107.) 
 
 In January 2001, Applicant was arrested for Driving Under the Influence of 
Alcohol (DWI). She pled guilty to the charge and was convicted. The court sentenced 
her to 30 days confinement, which was suspended, and a $300 fine, plus court costs. 
Additionally, she was required to attend a one-week alcohol safety awareness program 
and, over a period of three months, to attend nine meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous. 
Her driver’s license was restricted for one year. (SOR ¶ 1.f.; Ex. 1; Ex. 6; Ex. 7; Tr. 42-
49.) 
 
 Applicant completed the alcohol awareness program and attended the required 
Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. She stated that she did not consider herself to be in 
as much danger from the use of alcohol as others in the program. She learned that a 
person of her weight and body size could safely handle no more than two or three 
 
3 
 
 
drinks of alcohol at a time. She said that from the alcohol awareness program she 
learned “not to go overboard” in consuming alcohol. (Tr. 44-48.)  
 
 On October 26, 2002, Applicant was married for the first time. In December 2002,    
she and her husband were arrested for domestic violence after she called the police 
during a dispute with her husband. A magistrate ordered Applicant and her husband to 
remain apart for 24 hours. In January 2003, Applicant and her husband appeared in 
court and the charges against them were dismissed. They paid court costs of about 
$100. (SOR ¶ 1.e.; Ex. 4; Ex. 5; Tr. 49-50.) 
 
 Later in January 2003, Applicant and her husband were again arrested for 
domestic violence. This arrest occurred after they had consumed alcohol in their home 
during a party. Applicant had consumed approximately six to seven mixed drinks and 
beer over a period of six to seven hours. The couple spent the night in jail and was 
released on bail. In February 2003, the court ordered Applicant and her husband to 
complete anger management counseling and to mark two years without another 
incident of domestic violence. Applicant and her husband attended the required eight-
week courses in anger management and successfully complied with the court’s order. 
The charges against them were dismissed in February 2005. (SOR ¶ 1.d.; Ex. 2 at 11; 
Ex. 4; Ex. 5.) 
 
 In addition to the court-ordered anger management training, Applicant and her 
husband sought additional joint counseling to understand one another and to improve 
their marriage. Additionally, in 2002, Applicant suffered a miscarriage and lost twins.  
From January 2003 until October 2004, they consulted two therapists on a weekly or bi-
weekly basis. Applicant was also diagnosed and treated for depression by an aunt, who 
is a medical doctor and a psychiatrist. The aunt prescribed the anti-depressant 
Wellbutrin for Applicant during 2003 and 2004. Applicant spoke on the telephone with 
her aunt approximately every two weeks from about 2002 to 2005 but did not receive 
any formal therapy from her. The aunt did not refer Applicant to another therapist for 
treatment.  (Ex. 2 at 13-14; Tr. 84-91.))   
 
 Applicant also consulted with a third therapist in the period beginning January 
2005 and continuing until the summer of 2005.  She undertook this counseling because 
she was planning to testify in a criminal trial affecting one of her siblings.  (Ex. 2 at 14; 
Tr. 93-95.)   
 
 In the summer of 2005, Applicant decided to end her marriage and file for 
divorce.  Her parents learned of her plan, and they invited Applicant and her husband to 
their home to discuss their marriage and Applicant’s personal behavior.  Applicant 
became angry during the discussion when her husband discussed private details of 
their marriage with her parents. She said to her husband: “I could kill you for opening 
your mouth.” She picked up a framed picture of her family and threw it. Applicant’s 
parents called the police, who came to the parents’ home and arrested Applicant. The 
police escorted her to a hospital, where she was interviewed by a social worker and 
admitted to a psychiatric ward, where she remained for 48 hours. She was 
 
4 
 
 
subsequently evaluated and released. This incident contributed to Applicant’s alienation 
from her parents.  She no longer has contact with them. (SOR ¶ 1.c.; Ex. 3 at 4: Tr. 61-
69.) 
 
 In September 2005, Applicant returned home after an evening out with a female 
friend. She and the friend had been consuming alcohol, and the friend entered her 
home with her. Applicant and her husband quarreled, and Applicant’s husband called 
the police, who subsequently issued Applicant a Warrant of Arrest for Misdemeanor 
Assault and Battery on a family member and granted Applicant’s husband a Protective 
Order against her. Applicant appeared in domestic relations court to answer the charge.  
The case was dismissed when Applicant’s husband refused to proceed.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
and 1.b.; Tr. 69-72.)   
   
 Applicant filed for separation from her husband in September 2005. The 
Protective Order granted to Applicant’s husband expired in November 2005. Applicant’s 
divorce from her husband became final in March 2007. Applicant denies having an 
anger management problem. She believes her ex-husband drove her to bad behavior. 
DOHA alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. that the criminal conduct recited at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.f. also constitutes, under AG ¶ 15, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that] can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information.” (Tr.  71-79.) 
 
 On November 18, 2005, Applicant completed and certified her e-QIP.  Section 23 
on the e-QIP asks that an applicant answer questions about his or her police record, 
and report any required information. If an applicant answers “yes” to a question in 
Section 23, he or she must provide an explanation for the affirmative answer.  Section 
23(f) reads: ‘In the last 7 years, have you been arrested for, charged with, or convicted 
of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, c, d, or e above? (Leave out traffic fines 
of less that $150 unless the violation was alcohol or drug related.)” 
 
 In response to Section 23(f), Applicant answered “yes” and reported she had 
been arrested for Domestic Assault and Battery in January 2003.  She identified that 
action taken as: “Attended Anger Management class. Upon completion of class, as 
mandated by court, the charge was placed in “unknown” status.  Both my husband and I 
are in good standing for two years with court/county.”  (Ex. 1 at 26.) 
  
 In answering Section 23(f), Applicant failed to identify and discuss the fact that in 
September 2005, she was issued a Warrant of Arrest for Misdemeanor Assault and 
Battery on a family member. This charge was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. and admitted by 
Applicant in her Answer to the SOR and at her hearing. Applicant also failed to list her 
arrest in July 2005 and subsequent incarceration in a hospital psychiatric ward for 48 
hours, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. and her arrest in December 2002 for domestic violence, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. DOHA alleged at SOR ¶ 2.b. that Applicant’s failure to provide 
this information was a deliberate falsification of her e-QIP. (Ex. 1; Answer to SOR; Tr. 
75-83.)  
 
5 
 
 
 Section 21 on the e-QIP reads: “In the last 7 years, have you consulted with a 
mental health professional (Psychiatrist, psychologist, counselor, etc.) or have you 
consulted with another health care provider about a mental health related condition?” 
 
 Applicant responded “yes” to the question at Section 21.  She listed her marriage 
counseling therapy with two therapists in 2003 and 2004. She failed to list her 
incarceration in a psychiatric ward and consultations there with mental health 
professionals, which was alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. In SOR ¶ 2.c., DOHA alleged that this 
omission constituted deliberate falsification of Applicant’s e-QIP. (Ex. 1; Answer to SOR; 
Tr. 82-84.)  
 
   Applicant also failed to disclose that, from 2002 to about 2005, she consulted 
with her aunt, who is a medical doctor and psychiatrist, and the aunt concluded she was 
suffering from depression and prescribed the anti-depressant drug Wellbutrin, which 
Applicant took from 2003 to 2004.  In SOR ¶ 2.d., DOHA alleged that Applicant’s failure 
to disclose this information constituted deliberate falsification of her E-QIP. Applicant 
said she did not list the treatment from her aunt because she communicated with her 
aunt mainly by telephone, and she considered the consultations to be informal. She 
stated that she was also prescribed Wellbutrin between 2006 and 2007 by her 
gynecologist. (Tr. 95-96.) 
 
 DOHA alleged under SOR ¶ 3.a. that the criminal conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a., 1.d., and 1.f. also constituted disqualifying conduct under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption. 
 
 When the conduct alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c. occurred, Applicant was 
working for her current employer. She did not tell her facility security officer about these 
events, nor did she inform her supervisor. She does not believe that anyone in her 
workplace knows of the SOR allegations. She did not reveal or acknowledge the 
conduct alleged in the SOR until she met with an authorized investigator for a personal 
subject interview on May 31, 2007. Her direct supervisor was not aware that she was 
appearing at her DOHA hearing. None of her supervisors have asked her if she had 
issues that could make her vulnerable as a leader in the organization. (Tr. 80-83,104, 
107.) 
 
 Since separating from her husband in September 2005, Applicant has not had 
any arrests for criminal conduct or alcohol-related conduct.  She is in a relationship with 
a man with whom she hopes to have children. He does not drink alcohol at all. She is 
undergoing hormone treatments in anticipation of pregnancy. She has not taken 
Wellbutrin since 2007.  (Tr. 27-29, 109, 115-120.) 
 
 Applicant stated that her most recent use of alcohol occurred one month ago 
when she had one glass of wine.  The last time she was drunk was in December 2008. 
She does not believe that she has a problem with alcohol.  (Tr. 40-41.) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel asked Applicant this question: “If you 
started to feel like you were losing control again, would you want to check with the 
doctor and get back on the anti-depressant?” 
 
Applicant responded: “I don’t know. I don’t know.” 
 
(Tr. 99.) 
 
                                                           Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
7 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
            Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Criminal Conduct guideline “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
AG ¶30. 
 
  Applicant admits a criminal history that that includes a DWI in 2001 and arrests 
for domestic violence and assault in 2002, 2003, and 2005.  In 2005, after threatening to 
kill her husband, she was arrested and incarcerated in a hospital psychiatric ward for 48 
hours. She has not been arrested for any criminal behavior since her separation from 
her husband in September 2005.  
 
 In addition to her criminal history, Applicant admits deliberately falsifying her e-
QIP in November 2005 by concealing her criminal conduct and mental health treatment 
history. Applicant’s criminal history and her deliberate falsification of that history on her 
security clearance application raise concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) and AG ¶ 31(c). AG ¶ 
31(a) reads: “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.” AG ¶ 31(c) reads: 
”allegation or admission or criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
  Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s case.  If 
“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply.  If 
“there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of 
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” then AG ¶ 32(d) 
might apply. 
 
  The record demonstrates that Applicant’s criminal behavior between 2001 and 
2005 was serious and substantial. She had serious problems with controlling her anger. 
She has not been arrested or charged with criminal behavior since separating from her 
husband in September 2005. Applicant’s managers and supervisors have entrusted her 
with leading and managing the work of approximately eighteen junior-level staff 
members working in two geographical locations. None of Applicant’s direct supervisors 
and managers knows of her history of criminal conduct.  She has not reported this 
 
8 
 
 
conduct to her facility security officer. Her direct supervisor is unaware of the allegations 
in the SOR.  
 
  In November 2005, Applicant deliberately falsified her e-QIP by concealing and 
failing to report her criminal behavior which occurred in 2002 and 2005, her 
incarceration in a psychiatric ward for a mental health evaluation in 2005, and the 
mental health treatment she received from her aunt, who is a psychiatrist. Her 
unwillingness or inability to inform the government of her past criminal behavior and 
mental health treatment raises concerns about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Additionally, her deliberate falsifications and her unwillingness to be candid 
about her past behavior with her managers and supervisors suggest a failure in 
rehabilitation. I conclude that while AG ¶ 32(a) and AG ¶ 32(d) apply in part to mitigate 
Applicant’s criminal conduct occurring between 2001 and 2005, they do not apply to    
the deliberate falsification of her November 2005 e-QIP and her concealment of her 
criminal behavior and mental health treatment until confronted by an authorized 
investigator in May 2007. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 When Applicant completed and certified her e-QIP in 2005, she deliberately 
failed to report her past criminal behavior involving assault and battery of a family 
member, threatening to kill her husband in 2005, and domestic violence in 2003. 
Additionally, she failed report her incarceration in a psychiatric ward for threatening to 
kill her husband in September 2005 and her mental health treatment by a family 
member who was a psychiatrist.  That treatment included a diagnosis of depression and 
the prescription of an anti-depressant drug. In her answer to the SOR, she admitted that 
her failure to disclose this information was deliberate falsification of material facts. At 
her hearing, she denied a current problem with anger management. Applicant’s failure 
to inform her facility security officer and her managers of her criminal history suggests 
she wanted to hide her conduct from them and from the government. 
  
The allegations in the SOR raise security concerns under AG ¶ 16(a) and AG ¶ 
16(e)(1). AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” .” AG ¶ 16(e)(1) reads: “personal conduct, or concealment of 
 
9 
 
 
information about one’s conduct, that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, 
or duress, such as. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . .” 
 
  Several Guideline mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(a) if “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” If “the refusal or failure to cooperate, 
omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or 
inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security process” and “[u]pon being made aware of 
the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the individual cooperated fully and 
completely,” then AG ¶ 17(b) might apply.  If “the offense is so minor, or so much time 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not case doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply. 
 
  AG ¶ 17(d) might apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and 
obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if 
“the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”   
 
Applicant deliberately falsified material facts on the e-QIP she signed and 
certified in November 2005. Nothing in the record suggests that she took prompt good 
faith action to correct the omissions, concealments or falsifications before she was 
confronted with the facts and addressed them in her personal subject interview in May 
2007. (AG ¶ 17(a).)  Nothing in the record suggests that her failure to report her criminal 
behavior and relevant psychiatric treatment was caused or significantly contributed to by 
improper or inadequate advice specifically about the security clearance process from 
authorized individuals or legal counsel. (AG ¶ 17(b).) When she executed her security 
clearance application, Applicant knew she had a record of criminal behavior and failure 
to control and manage her anger. She also had reason to know that this behavior was 
not minor, so remote in time, so infrequent, or had occurred under such unique 
circumstances that it would not seriously raise concerns about her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment and perhaps impact her eligibility for a security 
clearance. (AG 17(c).) Applicant failed to provide documentation that she had taken 
positive steps that might alleviate the circumstances that caused her unreliable conduct 
and, as a result, such behavior was unlikely to recur. (AG ¶ 17(d).) Nothing in the record 
suggests that Applicant took positive steps to reduce or eliminate the vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress that her behavior caused. (AG ¶ 17(e).) I conclude, 
therefore, that none of the applicable personal conduct mitigating conditions applies to 
the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
 I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions.  I 
have especially considered AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  AG ¶ 
22(c) reads: “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent.”   
 
Applicant admitted alcohol consumption that led to a DWI in 2001.  Additionally, 
Applicant’s consumption of alcohol resulted in domestic violence between her and her 
husband in 2003 and 2005. These facts raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 
22(c). 
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23 (d) if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.”   
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related conduct occurred in her adult years, when she was in 
her late 20s and early 30s. Her alcohol use with her former husband triggered anger 
she was not able to control and resulted in domestic violence. Since separating from her 
husband in 2005, Applicant drinks alcohol in moderation, although she admitted drinking 
to intoxication once in December 2008. Since her separation and divorce from her 
husband, she has not been cited for alcohol offenses. The man with whom she is 
 
11 
 
 
currently involved in a domestic relationship does not drink alcohol, and alcohol does 
not appear to play a significant part in her current domestic relationship. She has not 
been diagnosed as alcohol dependent or as an abuser of alcohol. I conclude that AG ¶ 
23(a) applies in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case and that AG ¶¶ 23(b), 23(c), 
and 23(d) do not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
During her marriage, Applicant’s use of alcohol with her husband fueled anger   
that erupted into domestic violence. Since her separation and divorce, she has 
moderated her use of alcohol and now uses it responsibly. She has not been diagnosed 
as an alcohol abuser or as alcohol dependent, nor has she been arrested for alcohol-
related behavior since her separation from her husband in September 2005. After 
applying the Guideline G disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and after weighing 
Applicant’s past and current use of alcohol in light of the whole person concept, I 
conclude that she has mitigated security concerns deriving from the alcohol 
consumption adjudicative guideline.  
 
Applicant is a mature adult who has been entrusted with management and 
leadership responsibilities by her supervisors. For her part, however, she has not 
shared with them or with her security officer events in her life which could make her 
vulnerable to pressure and which could impact her capacity to lead others and to protect 
classified information.  
 
 
12 
 
 
In 2005, Applicant completed an e-QIP and deliberately failed to report past 
criminal behavior and incarceration for violent behavior, thereby creating a situation that 
could seriously mislead the government when it seeks to evaluate her honesty, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. Her falsifications were not minor: they went to the heart 
of her capacity for truthfulness, a critical qualification for one who would hold a security 
clearance. Applicant’s failure to be truthful was deliberate. She made no effort to correct 
her falsifications between November 2005 and May 2007, when the government 
confronted her with her lack of candor. Her deliberate falsifications are recent. I 
conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under the criminal conduct 
and personal conduct adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her 
criminal conduct and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:             AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
   
 
13 
 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:   For Applicant  
 
                                   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
___________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
   
 
  
 
