 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18672 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under the Sexual Behavior and 
Personal Conduct guidelines. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On January 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 19, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 11, 2009. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on May 12, 2009, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled on June 1, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which 
were received without objection. Department Counsel’s discovery letter was marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called two witnesses, and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were received without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 9, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor company since 1990. He has held a security 
clearance at the Secret or Top Secret level since 1985. He has a master’s degree. He 
has been married since 1980. He has two adult children.1  
 
 Applicant has a long history of incidents of indecent exposure and public 
masturbation. He was charged as a juvenile in 1968, when he was 14 years old, with 
indecent exposure. He was masturbating in his front yard and was observed by his adult 
neighbor. He was placed on probation for two years for the offense. He admitted that his 
incidents of indecent exposure and public masturbation occurred about once or twice 
every two weeks from about 1968 through 1978. He received psychological treatment 
from about 1968 to 1970 for his issues.2  
 
 Applicant was arrested in 1978, and charged with exposing himself in a public 
place. He was 24 years old at the time. He exposed his genitals and was masturbating 
in front of two girls who were about 14 years old. He was convicted of the reduced 
charge of disturbing the peace and was placed on probation for at least one year. He 
again received psychological treatment from about 1978 to 1980.3  
 
 Applicant continued his behavior of public masturbation approximately once a 
month from 1978 through September 2005. He often observed a female that he found 
attractive while he was driving or walking. If he was driving, he would find a parking lot 
or side street and masturbate. If he was not in the car, he would attempt to find a place 
such as public bathroom with a locked stall or a bathroom shower in the gym and 
masturbate. He stated that the last time someone observed him masturbating was in the 
mid-1990s. He was in a car and saw a woman. He was masturbating while he drove 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33-35, 44; GE 5. 
 
2 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4, 6, 9, 10. 
 
3 Id. 
 
 
3 
 
past her and she saw him. He stated that he stopped exposing himself out of fear of 
being arrested.4 
 
 Applicant submitted a Personnel Security Questionnaire on November 13, 1985. 
He listed his two arrests and his psychological counseling. He also wrote, “I have had 
no further problems and do not anticipate any more problems.”5 He provided a signed 
written statement for his background investigation on January 30, 1986. He discussed 
his arrests, psychological counseling and sexual behavior up through 1978, but he 
wrote: 
 
Partly because of my counseling and mostly because I became a 
Christian I gave up this behavior in 1978. It is no longer even something 
that I have to guard against and I don’t feel it is a security problem as my 
wife, my family and close friends are aware of my past behavior.6 
 
Applicant testified that he had given up exhibitionism by that time, but was still 
masturbating in public places. He later admitted that when he provided the statement, 
he was still having problems with exhibitionism, and that it was a false statement.7 
 
 Applicant submitted another Personnel Security Questionnaire on January 7, 
1991. He again listed his two arrests and his psychological counseling. He provided 
another signed written statement for his background investigation on March 27, 1991. 
He discussed the omission of some old drug use from the questionnaire. He did not 
admit that his incidents of public masturbation had continued. He wrote: 
 
When asked by the interviewer how I view myself in relation to honesty 
and ethical behavior, I described myself as an experienced man. I have 
lived through the mistakes of my youth and still have to explain them to 
others. This has resulted in a great deal of self evaluation which has 
helped me to make better decisions and live a more honest life.  I believe I 
am very honest and as I mentioned above I am not comfortable with 
dishonesty. . . . Again I ask you to forgive me for omitting the above drug 
use and believe me when I say that I am being completely honest with 
you. Thank you.8 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 30-32, 37-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6, 9. 
 
5 Tr. at 30; GE 1. It was not alleged in the SOR that Applicant submitted false information and any 
false statements will not be used for disqualification purposes. His statements will be considered in 
assessing his credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
6 GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 31-32. 
8 GE 4. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant had a polygraph and interview in October 2005, pursuant to a request 
that he be granted access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI). He admitted 
during the interview that he had continued to masturbate in public places, with the last 
incident in September 2005. He stated that he did it because he was unable to control 
his urges. He was denied access to SCI in February 2006.9 
 
 After he was denied access to SCI, Applicant sought counseling through his 
Employee Assistance Program (EAP). He received counseling from a Licensed 
Professional Counselor (LPC) from about March 2006 to August 2006 for his sexual 
compulsion issues. He enrolled in a program at his church in which he was provided a 
trained accountability partner. He met with or conversed weekly with his accountability 
partner for about six months. He began attending a 12-step program through his church 
in March 2006, and still regularly attends and leads the program. Applicant’s LPC wrote 
that “in [his] professional judgment, [Applicant] did not have a condition or treatment that 
would impair his judgment or reliability, particularly in the context of safeguarding 
classified national security information.”10 The director of the 12-step program wrote: 
 
In my experience [Applicant] is well into recovery and plans to continue 
with the program. Based on his actions and honesty, I do not judge him to 
be an imminent threat to the national interest, nor a security risk due to his 
open and honest behavior. Given the number of people that are aware of 
his issue and the steps he has taken to change his behavior I do not 
believe that [he] would be subject to influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. I find [Applicant] to be reliable, trustworthy and a leader within our 
program.11  
 
 Applicant admitted that he last masturbated in an inappropriate place a few 
weeks ago, when he masturbated in the locked bathroom on an airplane. He was at his 
son’s college graduation and “there were a number of very attractive young women in 
very slinky dresses, and one in particular caught [his] eye and stayed in [his] mind.”12 
He stated that he attempts to avoid things and places that could act as a sexual 
stimulus such as: 
 
Looking at pornography, watching things on TV that would be stimulating, 
going places where you would know that there would be females that 
might be undressed, like at a beach or swimming pool, where you could 
see more flesh. So I avoid those situations. I don’t go actively seek those 
out. So I don’t take in as much stimulus, and I mean, you get a certain 
amount just on a normal summer day, but I look away, I talk to people in 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 32-33; GE 6, 8, 9. The results of the polygraph are not considered for this decision except 
insofar as the impact the polygraph had on Applicant providing details about his sexual incidents. 
10 Tr. at 26-27, 35-37, 41-44, 47; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C. 
 
11 AE B. 
 
12 Tr. at 37-41. 
 
 
5 
 
my accountability group about struggles. And that helps to debilitate it and 
take it out of my mind.13 
 
 Applicant’s wife is completely aware of his sexual issues and the steps he has 
taken to address them. He has also told his children about his problem. A leader of 
Applicant’s 12-step program testified on his behalf. He stated that Applicant is 
committed to the program. Applicant told him about the incident on the airplane. He 
believes that Applicant is trustworthy and that he would not be subject to coercion or 
duress because of his condition.14  
 
 Applicant noted that he takes national security very seriously and has no 
personal security violations in his record. He stated that his issues could not be used as 
a basis for duress or exploitation and that he would contact security officials if anyone 
ever attempted to do so.15  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 41. 
 
14 Tr. at 27-28, 45-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
15 Tr. at 28. 
 
 
6 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
 
7 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
Applicant’s incidents of indecent exposure, exhibitionism, and masturbating in 
public and/or inappropriate places establish all the above disqualifying conditions. SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.h, and 1.i allege Applicant’s counseling and participation in the 12-step 
program. Those are matters in mitigation and do not raise a disqualifying condition. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.h, and 1.i are concluded for Applicant. 
Conditions that could mitigate Sexual Behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
(a) the behavior happened prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 Some of the incidents alleged occurred during Applicant’s adolescence. 
However, they continued well into his adult years. AG ¶ 14(a) is not applicable. It has 
been more than ten years since he exposed himself to a woman, but his incidents of 
masturbating in inappropriate places has continued. Applicant may not have been 
observed when he masturbated in a parked car, bathroom stall, gym shower, and the 
bathroom on an airplane, but they are not completely private places, and the behavior 
cannot be considered discreet. AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(d) are not applicable. Applicant has 
informed his wife, children and others about his sexual issues. That has lessened his 
vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, and duress. Because he continues to engage in 
inappropriate sexual actions, his vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, and duress also 
continues. AG ¶ 14(c) is partially applicable.  
 
 In sum, I conclude that Sexual Behavior security concerns are still present 
despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
8 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant’s personal conduct was also alleged under the Sexual Behavior 
guideline, as addressed above. That behavior also constitutes personal conduct and 
concealment of information about his conduct that could create a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(e) correspond to similar mitigating conditions under the 
Sexual Behavior guideline. AG ¶ 17(c) is not applicable and ¶ 17(e) is partially 
applicable under the same rationale discussed above. Applicant has obtained 
counseling and taken other positive steps to address his sexual problems. However, he 
repeated his inappropriate behavior several weeks ago. He is clearly sincere in his 
attempts to control his behavior, but at this time the behavior is likely to recur. AG ¶ 
17(d) is partially applicable. Like the Sexual Behavior concerns, the Personal Conduct 
concerns are still present despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
9 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has suffered from sexual compulsion problems since his early teens. He 
curtailed his incidents of exposing himself to women more than ten years ago because 
he was afraid of being arrested. He continued to masturbate in semi-private places such 
a parked car, bathroom stall, gym shower, and the bathroom on an airplane. When he 
applied for a security clearance in 1985, Applicant revealed his sexual issues as a 
youth, but indicated they were in the past and he kept his problems hidden from the 
Government for many years. He finally revealed his problems during a polygraph and 
interview pursuant to a request for access to SCI. He initiated counseling, obtained an 
accountability partner, and started attending a 12-step program after he was denied SCI 
access. Applicant should be commended for his actions to address his problems. He is 
clearly sincere in his desire to control his compulsions. It is equally clear that he is not 
yet in complete control of himself. He has lessened his vulnerability to pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, and duress by his openness to his family and others about his 
problems. I considered all of Applicant’s favorable information. However, the sexual 
conduct is likely to recur and his vulnerability remains a very real concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under the Sexual Behavior 
and Personal Conduct guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
10 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
