 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No.07-11060 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), E (Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on February 13, 2007 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 1). On December 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F, 
E, and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
  
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on December 16, 2008, and answered it on January 
14, 2009, and requested determination on the record without a hearing. Department 
Counsel submitted the government’s written case on April 8, 2009. On April 9, 2009, a 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on April 17, 2009, 
and did not respond. The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the all the allegations in the SOR. 
His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old supply chain specialist employed by a federal 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since August 2000. He has never 
held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant is married to an active duty sailor in the U.S. Navy. He has one child, 
for whom he pays child support, and one stepchild.  
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from April 1992 to July 1999. In January 1996, 
he received nonjudicial punishment under Article 15, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 815, for being disrespectful to a superior petty officer, in violation 
of Article 91, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 891 (GX 16). In July 1997, he was convicted by civilian 
authorities of driving under the influence (DUI) (GX 9 at 2). In March 1999, he received 
nonjudicial punishment for violating a lawful order, being drunk on duty, and drunk 
driving, in violation of Articles 92, 112, and 111, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §§ 892, 912, and 911 
GX 15). He was discharged from the Navy in July 1999 with an Other than Honorable 
Discharge (GX 4 at 22).  
 
 In May 2000, Applicant was involved in an argument with his wife. He pushed his 
wife as she was shouting at him, and she struck him in the head with a trophy. The 
police charged him with assault and battery. After the altercation, he left town until 
August 2000, thinking his wife would withdraw her complaint against him. When he 
returned, he learned that a warrant for his arrest had been issued for failure to appear in 
court. In September 2002, he was convicted of the assault and battery as well as the 
failure to appear. He was fined and placed on probation for 12 months (GX 13). 
 
 In November 2006, Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. 
They made payments of $887 per month from December 2006 to April 2007. They 
made no further payments and the bankruptcy was dismissed in May 2007 (GX 10). 
Applicant told a security investigator that his financial problems began when he and his 
spouse purchased a home they could not afford (GX 9 at 6). 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in February 2007, 
he answered “yes” to question 23a, asking if he had ever been charged with or 
 3
convicted of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. He disclosed his DUI conviction in 
a civilian court, but he did not disclose his Navy nonjudicial punishment for drunk driving 
and being drunk on duty. In response to question 23f, asking if in the last seven years 
he had been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offenses not covered by 
other questions, he answered “no” and did not disclose his convictions of assault and 
battery and failure to appear. He answered “no” to four questions about his financial 
record. He did not disclose his bankruptcy petition in November 2006, an automobile 
repossession in 2006, and numerous delinquent debts, including one debt that was 
reduced to judgment.  
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories on December 20, 2008 (GX 8), Applicant 
stated he did not disclose his bankruptcy because he misunderstood the question and 
thought the seven-year period ran “from the date I was filling out the paperwork.” In an 
affidavit dated July 14, 2008, he stated he did not disclose the bankruptcy and other 
delinquent debts because he was in the process of dismissing his bankruptcy petition 
and not sure of the status of his financial obligations (GX 9 at 7). He did not explain his 
other omissions from his application. 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is an automobile repossession. In his July 2008 
affidavit, Applicant stated his wife purchased the auto in 2005 and it was repossessed 
while she was deployed at sea (GX 9 at 5). Applicant’s credit bureau report (CBR) dated 
March 8, 2007, reflected past due payments but did not reflect a repossession (GX 7 at 
9). His CBR dated March 12, 2008 reflected an auto loan included in Chapter 13 
bankruptcy (GX 6 at 3). His CBR dated June 18 2008 reflected that the debt was 
included in his Chapter 13 bankruptcy (GX 5 at 4). In his July 2008 affidavit, Applicant 
stated his wife told him the debt was paid, but he submitted no documentation of 
payments. 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is for furniture. Applicant’s March 2007 CBR and 
March 2008 CBR reflected he was making regular payments on the debt under his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy (GX 6 at 3; GX 7 at 6). His June 2008 CBR reflected an unpaid 
judgment for the debt awarded to a collection agent for the furniture store, alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.i (GX 5 at 3). In his July 2008 affidavit, Applicant stated he was aware of the 
delinquent debt but not aware of the judgment, and he was making payments of $100 
on the debt (GX 9 at 5). He submitted no documentation of the payments.  
 
 The credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is reflected in the March 2007 CBR as 
included in the bankruptcy (GX 7 at 6), It is not reflected in the March 2008 CBR, but it 
is reflected as charged off in the June 2008 CBR (GX 5 at 5). 
 
 The telephone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is reflected as delinquent on all three 
CBRs (GX 5 at 5; GX 6 at 2; GX 7 at 4). In his July 2008 affidavit, Applicant stated the 
debt was paid, but he submitted no documentation of payment (GX 9 at 5). 
 
 The delinquent electric service bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is reflected on the June 
2008 CBR, and it is reflected as an unpaid collection item in the March 2008 CBR (GX 6 
 4
at 1; GX 5 at 9). In his July 2008 affidavit, Applicant stated the debt was delinquent at 
one time but had been paid in full (GX 9 at 5-6). He submitted no documentation of 
payment. 
 
 The delinquent cable service bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g appears on the June 2008 
CBR as assigned to collection, and it appears on the March 2008 CBR as a paid 
collection account with a zero balance (GX 5 at 9; GX 6 at 1). In his affidavit, Applicant 
stated he believed the account had been paid (GX 9 at 6). 
 
Applicant admitted the delinquent cable service bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h in his 
July 2008 affidavit. He stated he had forgotten about it and intended to pay it (GX 9 at 
6). He has submitted no evidence of payment.  
 
 The unpaid judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is based on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.c. As noted above, Applicant stated he was making payments on the debt, but he 
submitted no evidence of payment. 
 
 The collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is for the cable bill alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.g. It is reflected as “frozen” with a zero balance (GX 5 at 10). 
 
 The collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k does not appear on the June 2008 
or March 2008 CBRs, but it appears on the March 2007 as a past due collection 
account (GX 7 at 7). Applicant did not address this debt in his July 2008 affidavit, but he 
admitted it in his answer to the SOR.  
 
 Applicant’s June 2008 CBR and March 2007 CBR reflect that the account 
information was disputed for the two cable bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h (GX 5 at 
10; GX 7 at 10). The record does not reflect the basis for the disputes or their resolution. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
 5
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition that was dismissed (SOR ¶ 
1.a) and ten delinquent debts totaling about $20,396 (SOR ¶¶ 1,b-1.k). The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 6
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Three potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 
19(a) is raised where there is an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) 
is raised when there is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is 
raised when there is “consistent spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated 
by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, 
and/or other financial analysis.” All three conditions are raised by Applicant’s financial 
history, shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 The evidence reflects that SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.i are based on the same debt, as 
are SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.j. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the 
same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged 
twice). Accordingly, I will resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
did not arise under unusual circumstances, and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. This mitigating condition is not 
established because the debts arose because Applicant and his spouse were living 
beyond their means and not from circumstances beyond his control. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because there is no evidence Applicant has 
sought or received financial counseling and his financial situation is not under control. 
 
 7
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant’s CBRs show that the delinquent 
cable bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g was paid. He claimed to have paid the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.g, but he submitted no documentary evidence of payment. He 
claimed he was making payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but he produced no 
documentary evidence of payment. He produced no evidence of payments or a 
payment plan for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.h, and 1.k. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is 
established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, but not for the other debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
disputed the two cable bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h, but he presented no 
evidence of the basis for the dispute. In his July 2008 affidavit, he admitted the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h and promised to pay it. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is not established.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Activity 
 
 The SOR alleges two disciplinary proceedings against Applicant while he was in 
the Navy (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.c) and three civilian convictions (SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.d, and 2.e). 
It also cross-alleges as criminal conduct the falsifications alleged under Guideline E 
(SOR ¶ 2.f). Applicant admitted all the allegations. 
 
 The concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the government of the United 
States. A deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious 
crime within the meaning of Guideline J.  
 
Applicant offered no explanation or excuse for his failure to fully disclose his 
record of criminal conduct. His explanation for not disclosing his bankruptcy is 
implausible and not credible. He offered no explanation for not disclosing the 
 8
automobile repossession. It appears he may have been unaware of the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, and he may have forgotten about the $59 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.h, but he offered no plausible or credible explanation for not disclosing the other 
delinquent debts. Applicant’s record of criminal conduct and his failure to disclose the 
full extent of his criminal conduct and financial delinquencies in his security clearance 
application raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c), shifting the burden 
to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). The first clause of 
AG ¶ 32(a) (“so much time has elapsed”) focuses on whether the criminal conduct was 
recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@  The 
determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence.  
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id. 
 
 Applicant’s misconduct while in the Navy is arguably not “recent,” but his pattern 
of misconduct continued in May 2000, and it culminated in his falsification of his security 
clearance application in February 2007. I conclude AG ¶ 32(a) is not established 
because his criminal conduct was recent and did not arise under unusual 
circumstances. 
 
 Criminal conduct also may be mitigated if “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant’s recent falsifications negate a 
finding of “successful rehabilitation.” 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was discharged from the Navy under Other than 
Honorable Conditions (SOR ¶ 3.a), deliberately failed to fully disclose his criminal 
record (SOR ¶¶ 3.b and 3.c), and deliberately failed to disclose his record of financial 
delinquencies (SOR ¶¶ 3.d-3.g)1. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 
as follows: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
                                                          
1 SOR ¶ 3.g alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the debts alleged in subparagraphs 1.d and 
1.l. There is no subparagraph1.l in the SOR, but Applicant’s deliberate failure to disclose the debt in 
subparagraph 1.d is sufficient to raise a security concern. 
 9
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 The relevant disqualifying condition applicable to Applicant’s discharge from the 
Navy is AG ¶ 16(d): “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.” This disqualifying 
condition encompasses “a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.” AG ¶ 16(d)(3). 
Applicant’s multiple violations of the UCMJ and his civilian DUI conviction while in the 
Navy, all of which formed the basis for his discharge, are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 
16(d)(3).  
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition applicable to Applicant’s omissions of 
information from his security clearance application is “deliberate omission, concealment, 
or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal 
history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, the government has the burden of 
proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s state of mind 
when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence 
as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning 
an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 
at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant wrote “I admit” after each Guideline E allegation in the SOR, but his 
responses to interrogatories and his July 2008 affidavit strongly suggest he was 
admitting he entered the answers as alleged, but he was not admitting he intentionally 
gave false answers. Accordingly, I have treated the allegations of falsification as 
controverted.  
 
 Applicant was aware of the disciplinary infractions underlying his unfavorable 
discharge from the Navy, but he omitted them from his security clearance application. 
He has given no explanations for the omissions. As noted above in the discussion of 
Guideline J, he was aware of most of his financial delinquencies, but gave no plausible 
or credible explanation for not disclosing them. Based on this record, I conclude AG ¶ 
16(a) is raised. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant 
made no effort to correct the omissions from his application until he was confronted with 
the evidence. 
 10
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s 
omissions were not minor. They were recent, numerous, and did not occur under unique 
circumstances. They cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. 
 
 Finally, security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated if “the 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). Applicant eventually made full disclosure of his 
disciplinary and financial record in his July 2008 affidavit. Thus, he receives some credit 
under AG ¶ 17(e). 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F, J, and E in my whole person analysis. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F, J, and E, and evaluating all 
the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
the security concerns based on financial considerations, criminal conduct, and personal 
conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
 11
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
