1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-17410
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant answered and signed his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on
June 14, 2004. He submitted additional requested information concerning his previous
addresses and employment on May 3, 2005. On December 16, 2008, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
the security concerns under Guidelines F and E for Applicant. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR and elected to have his case decided
on the record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s
The Government submitted eleven (11) items in support of its contention.1
IRS Tax Guide (Publication 54) discusses Foreign Earned Income Exclusion for U.S. citizens living abroad-2
330 day rule.
2
written case on April 9, 2009.  Applicant received a complete file of relevant material1
(FORM) on April 22, 2009, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Applicant
submitted additional information. Department Counsel did not object and the information
was entered into the record. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2009. Based
upon a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated February 16, 2009, Applicant denied the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d of the SOR. He also denied the factual allegations in ¶¶
2.a and 2.b of the SOR with explanations and denied any intentional falsification. He
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school, and attended college in 1991. He served in the United States Army from
1971 until 1979. His first marriage ended in divorce in 1989. Applicant remarried in 1993
and has no children. His wife resides outside of the U.S. He has worked for his current
employer (overseas) since June 2004 (Item 4). 
Applicant has worked out of the country for the past ten years or more. He had
used his mother’s address in the United States for his address of record. He has worked
steadily during his career except for noted unemployment from December 16, 2002 until
January 29, 2003 (Item 4). 
Applicant was interviewed overseas by a DoD investigator on April 2, 2007 as
part of the security clearance investigation. He explained to the agent that he had not
filed his individual income tax returns for the years in question (1990, 11991, and 1992)
because he had been out of the U.S. for 330 days and believed that he did not have to
file the taxes based on that fact and the amount of his income was below $80,000.2
Applicant elaborated when he found out about the delinquent fees that he contacted the
IRS. Applicant was told that ultimately he did not owe anything. He explained that he
would produce documentation that the debt has been cleared. Concerning the two
delinquent accounts (SOR ¶ 1.b and ¶ 1.c), Applicant did not know about the debt for
$309 (medical services). He explained that the $273 debt (SOR ¶ 1.c) was due to a
cancellation fee on a phone contract. He cancelled his contract early and told the
company that he believed his pre-payment of $250 for mobile phone service would be
credited toward the cancellation fee. He never looked at his credit reports (Item 7).  
3
On April 20, 2008, Applicant explained that in 1997, an IRS agent told him that a
tax lien from 1996 in the amount of $45,444.28 had been filed against him. He learned
about this when he was on leave for a few days while visiting his mother in the U.S. He
was due to return overseas and could not file the tax forms immediately. He also
explained that his legal and professional papers were stored in a trunk in his mother’s
home and had been misplaced. According to Applicant, the IRS had not initiated any
other action against Applicant (Item 7).
The SOR alleges two delinquent debts, and a federal tax lien in taxes, penalties
and interest for the tax years 1990, 1991, and 1992 (years that taxes were not filed) in
the amount of $45,444. The total amount of other debt that Applicant owes is
approximately $582 (Item 8).
The current status of Applicant’s delinquent debts is as follows: the taxes
assessed for tax years 1990, 1991, and 1992 have been satisfied in the amount of
$45,444. A Certificate of Release of Federal Tax Lien was prepared and signed on April
22, 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant submitted a Form 2848 (Power of Attorney and
Declaration of Representative), signed April 9, 2009. This allowed the designated
person (an enrolled agent) to represent Applicant before the IRS to resolve any tax
issue regarding income for tax periods from 1989 until 2008.
Applicant settled the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c in January 2009 for $163.81.
His credit report confirms the account as settled. Applicant also provided documentation
of his cancelled check and payment coupon with his answer to the SOR. He explained
in his answer to the SOR that when he signed his 2004 security clearance form, he did
not know that there was an outstanding balance as discussed above. He explained that
he paid it to avoid any further issues with the account (Item 3).
Applicant’s submissions to the FORM document his payment of $309 for the
medical bill (SOR ¶ 1. b) on February 5, 2009. He did not realize that his hospital bill for
an emergency visit in August 2003 was not covered by his employer as part of a
Workmen’s Compensation claim. He was told by the company that it was covered.
Applicant explained that since it was showing on his credit report and to avoid any
further issues, he paid it.  
Applicant completed his June 2004 security application which had an addendum
signed on May 2005. In that application he answered “no” to questions 38 and 39
concerning financial delinquencies in the last seven years for over 90 or 180 days (Item
4).
In 2009, in his answer to the SOR, Applicant explained that when he completed
the SF 86 in 2004 he did not know of the two delinquent accounts or that he had a
current “judgment” filed against him. He elaborated in his answer to the SOR that his
“supposed indebtedness to the IRS in the amount of $45,444 for the years 1990, 1991,
and 1992 is still an unresolved and outstanding issue (Item 3). When Applicant
completed his June 2004 security clearance application, he answered “no” to questions
4
28 and 39: Your Financial Delinquencies. He incorrectly answered the questions but did
not falsify his application.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
5
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Also, AG ¶ 19(g), “ failure to file annual Federal, state, or local
income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same” is potentially
disqualifying. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on two accounts. He did not file
federal income tax returns for 1990, 1991, and 1992. A tax lien in the amount of
$45,444 was filed on January 22, 1996. His credit reports confirm the debts. The
evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant did
not file federal tax returns for 1990, 1991 and 1992 based on his belief that living and
working out of the country for 330 days out of a year and making less than $80,000 did
not require him to do so. He also had two delinquent accounts from August 2003 and
September 2003 that he did not realize were delinquent accounts. This mitigating
condition applies in this case. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ I do not find this a factor
fo consideration in this case. 
6
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has resolved the federal tax lien. The two accounts
are paid. His efforts are sufficient to carry his burden in this case. I conclude these
mitigating conditions apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant stated that he did not
believe he owed the tax lien based on working and living abroad and referred to a tax
provision for citizens living abroad. However, he has satisfied the lien. I conclude this
mitigating condition applies in part.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities” is potentially disqualifying.
In this case, when Applicant completed his 2004 security application, he did not
list any delinquent debts in response to questions 38 and 39. He stated in his answer to
the FORM in 2009, that he answered the questions to the best of his ability and did not
know about the indebtedness. He incorrectly answered the questions but he did not
intentionally falsify his application. He denied that he intentionally falsified his answers
or attempted to deceive the Government. 
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the government has the
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove
an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must
consider the record evidence as whole to determine whether there is direct or
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission
7
occurred. ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in
ISCR Case NO. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). Thus, 16(a) does not apply in
this case. I find for Applicant (SOR ¶ 2.a-b).
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are sufficient to
overcome the Government’s case. Applicant has worked for a defense contractor
overseas for approximately ten years. He is currently working overseas. He served in
the U.S. Army from 1971 until 1979. He did not file federal tax returns in 1990, 1991,
and 1992 because he did not believe he was required to do so. He believed that he did
not owe any tax. He has resolved the tax lien in the amount of $45,444. He did not know
that two accounts from 2003 and 2004 were delinquent. He has paid the two delinquent
accounts and provided documentation. He answered questions 38 and 39 concerning
financial delinquencies in the last 7 years to the best of his ability. He did not falsify his
SF 86. His answer and submissions to the FORM are sufficient for him to meet the
burden in this case. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations and personal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
8
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
