                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-10583 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
In the 1990s, Applicant downloaded approximately 500 pornographic images on 
his government-issued computers, while employed in a sensitive, important government 
position. In 2008 he made two statements, in which he denied that he used his 
government computer to view pornography. Applicant mitigated the security concern 
about his misuse of a government information technology system because this misuse 
was not recent and is unlikely to recur. However, he failed to mitigate personal conduct 
security concerns related to making false statements in 2008. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 7, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On March 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and 
M (Use of Information Technology Systems). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On March 23, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge (GE 7). Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on May 5, 2009. On May 7, 2009, the case was assigned to an administrative 
judge. On May 13, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice (GE 5). Due to a family 
emergency, the case was transferred to me on June 2, 2009 (Transcript (Tr.) 4-5). The 
hearing was held on June 3, 2009. Department Counsel offered four exhibits (GE 1-4) 
(Tr. 20-21), and Applicant offered two exhibits (Tr. 23-25, 40-41; Applicant Exhibits (AE) 
A-B). There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-4 (Tr. 21) and AE A-B (Tr. 25-26, 
41). Additionally, I admitted the Notice of Hearing, SOR, and response to the SOR (GE 
5-7). I received the transcript on June 11, 2009.    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR 
allegations, except he expressed some skepticism about the number of pornographic 
images found on his computer and the number of government computers found to 
contain pornographic images (GE 7). His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is between 70 and 80 years old (Tr. 6). He graduated from a service 
academy about 50 years ago (Tr. 26). He served on active duty for about 35 years and 
retired in the 1990s (Tr. 26). His retirement grade was at the two-star level. His 
retirement award was the Distinguished Service Medal (AE A at 8). The service chief in 
Applicant’s branch of service presided at his retirement ceremony (AE A at 8). During 
his career, he received eight Legion of Merit Medals (GE A at 9). He commanded a vast 
organization with enormous fire power, including nuclear weapons (GE A at 9-10). He 
supervised a budget of over $2 billion (AE A at 7). He has had an extraordinary career 
of service and made tremendous contributions to the national defense of the United 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy because this 
decision after minimal redaction will be posted on the internet. Specific information is available in the cited 
transcript and exhibits. 
  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
States (AE A). At various times during his career, Applicant has held a top secret 
clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information (Tr. 36; AE A). 
 
Applicant has been married for more than 40 years. He has several children and 
grandchildren (Tr. 26-27; AE B at 3). After retirement from active service, he worked for 
a defense contractor in relation to foreign military sales (Tr. 28). In the 1990s, he 
worked at a very high level in the government, in an extremely sensitive position for 
about a year, and then returned to the private sector (Tr. 28). He currently works as a 
consultant to the government, as a program manager for an entity that is closely 
associated with the government, and is on the board of directors for a government 
contractor (Tr. 29-31).    
  
Misuse of government computers2 
 
For about one year in the 1990s, Applicant was employed in an extremely 
sensitive government position. Use of his government computer while on duty to view 
images of adults engaged in pornographic activities, while occupying this position, 
would cast significant discredit upon the Department of Defense and it violates rules in 
his workplace about use of his government computer and on-duty Internet use.  
 
In the 1990s, while employed in this sensitive position, Applicant noticed his 
computer was operating slowly or had difficulties with its dial-up connection. Applicant 
asked computer maintenance to take corrective action. Maintenance replaced his 
computer with another government computer. Maintenance personnel discovered 
numerous Graphics Interface Format (.gif) files depicting individuals involved in sexual 
activity. Forensic computer analysts found 379 graphic images of adults engaged in 
pornographic activities on one hard drive (ROI ¶ 3-9). About a month later, investigators 
obtained the hard drive from his replacement computer and discovered 210 graphic 
images of adult pornography (ROI ¶ 3-6). A total of about 80 files found on the two hard 
drives were recovered from deleted files. The forensic examination of the two hard 
drives did not indicate how many files were automatically saved by the computer in 
temporary files and whether any files discovered on his computer were deliberately 
saved by Applicant and placed into folders for subsequent viewing.3   
 
Two images found on his hard drive depicted nude prepubescent adolescents 
(ROI ¶ 3-16a). One of the images was of very poor quality. Applicant denied that he had 
searched the internet for any child pornography (Tr. 39). He denied knowingly opening 
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this section are from a Report of Investigation (ROI) 
completed in the 1990s (Applicant was titled as the SUBJECT of the investigation) (GE 2). 
 
3 It is possible from the way the ROI was written that three computer hard drives were forensically 
examined and about 800 images of adult pornography were found (SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c). The more credible 
interpretation is that the government evaluated two computer hard drives and found 500-600 images of 
pornography. Applicant thought the number of images alleged in the SOR might be an exaggeration; 
however, he conceded whether it was 500 images or 800 images was not a significant issue (Tr. 60-61; 
GE 7).  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
any .gif files showing child pornography (Tr. 39). He denied that he had any sexual 
interest whatsoever in children or viewing nude or sexual images of children (Tr. 39). 
 
The military investigators turned the investigation was turned over to the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation after he ended his federal employment in the late 1990s. 
Applicant was never questioned or confronted about misuse of his government 
computer (ROI ¶ 3-32 and ROI cover letter; Tr. 45). Applicant was not advised of the 
existence of the investigation until 2009. Applicant told his spouse about the 
investigation shortly after he was advised of its results (Tr. 59).  
 
After leaving government service in the 1990s, Applicant occasionally viewed 
pornography (Tr. 60). He described his contact with internet pornography over the last 
ten years as “infrequent” (Tr. 60). Applicant downloaded and viewed some images of 
adults engaged in pornographic activities while on duty at his government place of 
employment.  
   
Falsification of security clearance related documentation 
 
On April 28, 2008, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
questioned Applicant about his misuse of a government computer to search for and look 
at pornographic material (Tr. 49). Applicant orally responded, “no, certainly not,” when 
he was confronted with the allegations (Tr. 49). Applicant provided an affidavit, which 
states, “I never misused a government computer and do not view child pornography” 
(GE 3). Applicant signed the statement and knew the part about denying that he viewed 
images of adults engaged in pornographic activities was not true at the time he made 
this statement (Tr. 53-54).  
 
On September 25, 2008, Applicant responded to a DOHA interrogatory, “To my 
knowledge I have not used any work computer to view pornographic material at [my 
government office]. In fact, I have thought all such computers blocked access to such 
sites. If I did so, it must have been very isolated as I don’t have time to surf the Internet 
in any of my jobs.” (Tr. 52-53; GE 4). Applicant signed this statement and knew it was 
not true at the time he made this statement (Tr. 56-58).  
 
At his hearing Applicant stated, “When I was presented with the first round of 
these allegations, I hotly and falsely denied same, both orally and subsequently, 
meaning later, on in the hour, in a statement that I submitted to the government 
representative” (Tr. 42).  He vigorously denied that he viewed images of adults engaged 
in pornographic activities to the OPM investigator. At his hearing, he described himself 
as being “blatantly” untruthful when he denied viewing images of adults engaged in 
pornographic activities (Tr. 50-51). Applicant had extraordinary regret about his actions 
(Tr. 56). He acknowledged in his SOR response and reiterated at his hearing that his 
responses to the OPM investigator and to the DOHA interrogatory were false in regard 
to his claim that he did not view images of adults engaged in pornographic activities on 
his government computer (Tr. 58). 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant conceded that the government should have a higher expectation of 
honesty and integrity for him because of his age and experience (Tr. 45). He 
emphasized that he did not knowingly view any child pornography and he did not recall 
ever seeing the two images of child pornography cited in the ROI (AE B at 2).4  He 
described his mental state in 2008 when he denied viewing images of adults engaged in 
pornographic activities on his government computer as “a combination of haughtiness, 
fear and embarrassment.” (AE B at 2). 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
4 The SOR did not allege that he viewed or possessed any images of child pornography (GE 6).  
The only information about the two images of child pornography was contained in the ROI (GE 2). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and M (Use of Information 
Technology Systems).  
   
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
On April 28, 2008, Applicant falsely denied using his government computer to 
view images of adults engaged in pornographic activities to an OPM investigator and on 
September 25, 2008, he reiterated this false denial in response to DOHA 
interrogatories. However, he admitted in his SOR response and at his hearing that his 
answers on these two previous occasions about viewing images of adults engaged in 
pornographic activities were false. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
   
None of the mitigating conditions apply. The falsification is established. He 
admitted that he deliberately and intentionally provided false information on two 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
occasions when he denied that he viewed images of adults engaged in pornographic 
activities in the context of a review to decide whether his security clearance should be 
continued.5 
    
Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
  AG ¶ 39 articulates the security concern relating to misuse of information 
technology systems: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 40(e) and 40(f) detail two conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case. AG 40(e) states, “unauthorized use of a 
government or other information technology system,” and AG ¶ 40(f) provides, 
“introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or 
from any information technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules, 
procedures, guidelines or regulations.” Applicant was well aware that he was not 
authorized to use a government computer to access and download files depicting 
pornographic images onto his government computer. By viewing .gif files on Internet 
sites showing images of adults engaged in pornographic activities, he automatically 
downloaded or introduced those media-images or .gif files onto his computer hard drive. 
As such, his introduction of those images onto his computer was probably unintentional 
because he was not aware that they would be automatically downloaded onto his 
computer. However, other pornographic .gif files were evidently intentionally saved or 
introduced onto his computer hard drive and then subsequently deleted from his 
computer hard drive. The forensic investigator then recovered the deleted .gif files, 
establishing by substantial evidence their previous intentional, unauthorized introduction 
 
5The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). In this case, Applicant did not contest the allegations of falsification.  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
onto his computer hard drive. AG ¶¶ 40(e) and 40(f) both apply and further inquiry and 
analysis about the applicability of mitigating conditions is necessary.   
 
AG ¶ 41 provides three mitigating conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
  
AG ¶ 41(a) fully applies and AG ¶¶ 41(b) and 41(c) do not apply.  Applicant 
downloaded about 500 images of adults engaged in pornographic activities. His conduct 
in going to the sexually-explicit Internet sites, and opening these .gif files was not 
accidental, unintentional or inadvertent. He knew when he double clicked these icons 
the type of image that would be revealed. This conduct was not done for organizational 
efficiency or effectiveness. He did not admit this conduct until after he was advised that 
he had been investigated for it. As such, his admissions were not spontaneous.  
 
However, Applicant’s abuse of government computers occurred more than 10 
years ago. He does not currently use a government computer, and has not been a 
government employee for at least 10 years. His viewing of adult pornography (which is 
not connected to his government service as a contractor) is private and infrequent. His 
viewing of images of adults engaged in pornographic activities using his government-
issued computer, while on duty as a government employee in the 1990s under all the 
facts and circumstances, “does not cast doubt on [his current] reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment.” Security concerns pertaining to use of information technology 
systems are mitigated. See AG ¶ 41(a). 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and M in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors that support approval 
of his clearance. During his active service from the 1950s to the 1990s, he received the 
Distinguished Service Medal and eight Legion of Merit awards. The service chief of 
Applicant’s branch of service presided at his retirement ceremony in the 1990s. 
Applicant deserves substantial credit for volunteering to support his service and the 
Department of Defense thereafter for about 50 years. He has served his nation and the 
national defense extraordinarily well, rising to very high level on active duty and 
subsequently in a civil capacity. His longevity and success speaks very well for his 
dedication, patriotism and loyalty to the United States, the U.S. government, and his 
employer. There were no allegations of security violations. He does not abuse alcohol 
or illegal drugs. He made mistakes, and he admitted them in his SOR response and at 
his hearing. I specifically find his denial of intentionally viewing or ever intending to view 
any child pornography to be credible. His remorse about viewing the adult pornography 
on his government computer and about making false statements about that misconduct 
in April and September 2008 is heartfelt and sincere. He has learned from his mistakes 
and I am confident that he will not repeat them. These factors show substantial 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Making false statements to an OPM investigator and in 
response to a DOHA interrogatory is not prudent or responsible. He had ample 
opportunity between being confronted by the OPM investigator on April 28, 2008, and 
receipt of the DOHA interrogatories on September 25, 2008, to correct the false 
information he provided to the government. Instead on September 25, 2008, he 
submitted more false information to the government. Notwithstanding his truly 
extraordinary background and contributions to the nation, his two falsifications are 
recent, material, and cannot be mitigated at this time.    
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the personal conduct security concerns. I take this position based on the law, 
as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful 
consideration of the whole person factors and supporting evidence, my application of 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my  
responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has failed to mitigate and/or overcome 
the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access 
to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
