                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-09291 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 15, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges security 
1 On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                          
concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On February 23, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 17, 2009, was provided to him, and he 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.2 Applicant did not submit any information within the 30-day 
time period after receiving a copy of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 
18, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old Training and Doctrine Specialist, who has worked for 
his government contractor employer since October 2004.3 He served in the U.S. Army 
as an enlisted person from November 1996 to September 2004. Applicant was married 
in March 1995 and that marriage ended by divorce in August 2006. He has two children 
from that marriage, a 15-year-old son and a 12-year-old daughter.  
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his e-QIP, and his October 2006, September 2007, October 
2008, and March 2009 credit bureau reports.4 The Government established by 
Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented that Applicant had or has nine 
delinquent debts totaling $12,315.00 and foreclosure proceedings initiated against him 
in February 2006 for an undisclosed amount. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.j.) The nine accounts are 
either collection or charged off accounts. Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.j., which refers to 
 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
2 DOHA transmittal letter is dated March 19, 2009; and Applicant received the FORM on March 
31, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to 
submit information. 
3 All background information pertaining to the Applicant, which is limited, was derived from his 
September 2006 e-QIP, unless otherwise stated. 
4 Items 5 – 9. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
the foreclosure proceedings, but added that the case against him was resolved.5 These 
delinquent debts were incurred in the 2004 to 2009 timeframe.  
 
Applicant offered no documentation that any of his debts with the exception of 
the foreclosure, discussed supra, have been paid, that he has set up payment plans, 
nor has he submitted any evidence that he contacted any creditors or sought credit 
counseling or that his debts are or will be resolved. In his Response to SOR, he 
indicated that he was coming out of a difficult divorce in which his former wife was 
“actively trying to ruin” his life. He added that he was trying to resolve his debts, but has 
“not been able to collect the money necessary” to complete this process.6 
 
In his September 2006 e-QIP, Applicant answered “No” to Sections 28(a) and 
28(b) (asking whether in the last seven years he had been 180 days delinquent on any 
debts, and whether he was currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts, 
respectively.) Although he admitted falsifying his e-QIP, he did not provide any 
explanation for doing so nor did he offer any mitigating evidence. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Id. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
 In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”7 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).8 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),9 the Government’s concern is: 
7 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
8 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
9  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline F. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.j.). As 
noted supra, he indicated in his Response to SOR that the 2006 foreclosure 
proceedings initiated against him had been resolved. His admissions and evidence 
submitted by the Government substantiate the allegations under this concern. In the 
absence of credible evidence, I am unable to glean any further information, favorable or 
unfavorable, with regard to identified financial concerns. 
 
¶ 19. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying 
include: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
 
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling 
problems, or other issues of security concern; 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by 
subject's known legal sources of income; and 
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling 
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family 
conflict or other problems caused by gambling. 
 
Of the Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions listed supra, two are 
applicable: ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 19(c): “a history of 
not meeting financial obligations.” These debts became delinquent in the 2004-2009 
timeframe. Furthermore, Applicant did not submit a payment plan, a budget, nor did he 
show that he has the ability to begin making payments on any of these debts. 
 
¶ 20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Guideline ¶ 20(a) does not provide a temporal or specific definition of what constitutes 
“recent” conduct. In the absence of any evidence, Applicant has nine delinquent debts, 
which remain unpaid and not in a payment plan. Moreover, he has not shown sufficient 
effort and/or unusual circumstances to establish his financial problems are “unlikely to 
recur.” His overall conduct with his creditors casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Based on my evaluation of the record evidence as 
a whole,10 I conclude Guideline ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
10See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis all debts are considered as a whole.   
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
The record disclosed sufficient information to support partial application of 
Guideline ¶ 20(b). Applicant did go through a contentious divorce in 2006, but offered 
little evidence as to how his divorce caused his debts or precluded him from resolving 
his debts. The record did not disclose any information indicating his actions were in bad 
faith. However, Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of Guideline ¶ 20(b) 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts or if he did so, failed to submit evidence documenting that he did.11  
 
Applicant does not receive credit under Guideline ¶ 20(c) because he did not 
receive financial or credit counseling, and he has no payment plans with his creditors. 
There is no record evidence of “clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control.”  
 
Guideline ¶ 20(d) does not fully apply because there is insufficient information to 
establish that Applicant showed good faith in the resolution of his debts.12 However, he 
is able to receive partial credit for resolving the foreclosure proceedings against him 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. Guideline ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. He did not provide 
“documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or [provide] evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue” with respect to any debts, except the foreclosure. In sum, 
he has not demonstrated sufficient effort to resolve financial concerns to merit full 
application of any mitigating conditions under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,13 I conclude none of the six 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) are fully applicable. Based on 
11“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). 
12The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).  
13  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
the available evidence, his financial problems are likely to be a concern in the future. 
Moreover, his financial problems are recent, not isolated, and ongoing. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
Under Guideline E (Personal Conduct),14 the government’s concern is as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
As noted, Applicant provided no explanation for failing to disclose truthful responses to 
questions 28(a), and 28(b). Considering the record as a whole, I am convinced 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the information. Numerous factors weighed in 
my analysis to reach that conclusion, including: Applicant=s age, his level of education, 
his employment history, the number and value of the debts, his long term disregard of 
the debts, and his admission. He knew the importance of accurate completion of his-
QIP, and nevertheless failed to provide information that was material to making an 
informed security decision.  
 
¶ 16. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
14 Guideline 18. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time 
or resources; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
Of the Personal Conduct Disqualification Conditions listed supra, two are 
applicable ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire . . .”, and ¶ 16(e): “personal conduct or 
concealment of information about one=s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress . . . .” 
 
¶ 17. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
I specifically considered all Guideline E Mitigating Conditions and conclude that 
none apply. Applicant=s falsification is recent, and his favorable information is not 
sufficient to apply any of the MCs.  
 
For the reasons outlined under the discussions of Guidelines F and E, I conclude 
Applicant=s behavior shows questionable judgment, lack of reliability, and 
untrustworthiness.  
 
 To conclude, Applicant presented little or no evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. Applicant 
did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. 
In reaching this conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and 
that analysis does not support a favorable decision. 
 
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”15 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
15 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.i.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j.:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
