DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXX, Xxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 08-08440
SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 26 January 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline F.  Applicant answered the SOR 24 March 2009, and requested a hearing.1
DOHA assigned the case to me 22 April 2009, and I convened a hearing 4 June 2009.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 10 June 2009.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations except for SOR 1.l. He is a 41-year-old
mail clerk employed by a defense contractor since September 2008. He previously held
an unidentified clearance with another government agency in October 2006, when he
was also employed as a mail clerk.
The SOR alleges, and government exhibits (G.E. 2, 4) confirm, 13 delinquent
debts totaling over $30,000. Applicant denies only one debt, for $400. Applicant
reported delinquent debts on his February 2008 clearance application (G.E. 1), and
confirmed many of them during an interview with a government investigator in May 2008
(G.E. 3).
Applicant’s financial difficulties are largely attributable to three lengthy periods of
unemployment and chronic underemployment. He was unemployed from February 2001
to March 2003 because of an automobile accident in which he lost one arm. He was
unemployed from January 2004 to June 2005. He was unemployed from November
2006 to September 2008. He was fired from his current employer because of a policy
dispute with his supervisors. His dismissal was overturned on appeal, but the company
offered him a new work location that was too far from his home, so he resigned. While
he was unemployed, he survived on social security disability payments and financial
support from his mother. He was later rehired by this company.
Some of the debts are for medical expenses that were not covered by insurance.
He has a deficiency amount due on an automobile repossession, and delinquent a
number of delinquent credit cards. Some of the debts are for delinquent rent that
resulted in evictions from his homes. One of the evictions was reduced to judgment.
Applicant’s friend let him live in an apartment, conditioned on payment when Applicant
received damages from a civil suit related to the automobile accident. When Applicant
lost the suit, his friend evicted him and reduced the back rent to judgment.
Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories (G.E. 3) documented that he
contacted all of his creditors in March 2008, offering minimal monthly payments on each
of his debts. Most of the creditors did not respond in writing. Several creditors have
offered substantial discounts with a lump-sum payment by Applicant, but he lacks the
funds to take advantage of those offers. Consequently, he has made no payments on
any of his debts. However, he remains in periodic contact with his creditors and intends
to repay his debts. He has a mandatory retirement account with his current employer,
which makes matching contributions. There is currently about $5000 in the account, and
Applicant intends to apply for a hardship liquidation of the account to pay some of his
debts when he is eligible to access the account in six months. He asks for a year to get
his financial house in order.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; . . .  3
3
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s credit reports establish his
indebtedness. He acknowledges most of the debts, and credibly states his intent to
satisfy all his creditors. However, he lacks the means to start repayment plans or take
advantage of the settlement offers made to him, and that circumstance is unlikely to
change in the near future.3
¶20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that4
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and5
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that6
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.7
4
The mitigating factors for financial considerations offer Applicant little solace. His
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  However, the debts were due to4
circumstances beyond his control and in some respects he has acted responsibly in
addressing his debts within his means.  The problem for Applicant is that he has very5
little means at present, and appears unlikely to have any greater means in the near
future. Further, there is no evidence that he has sought credit counseling or otherwise
brought the problem under control.  None of the alleged debts have been paid, although6
this has nothing to do with timeliness or good-faith.  Still, with no plan in place to7
address his debts and no likelihood of a plan in the near future, I cannot conclude that
Applicant will put his financial problems behind him. I conclude Guideline F against
Applicant. Consideration of the whole person factors yields no different result.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-m: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
