                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-06066 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 28, 2007, Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On November 26, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 10, 2008. He 
answered the SOR in writing on January 12, 2009, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on January 12, 2009. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 16, 2009, and I received the case 
assignment on April 27, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 27, 2009 and I 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
convened the hearing as scheduled on May 12, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits 
1 through 12, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Exhibit A, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 
18, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated January 12, 2009, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n of the SOR, with explanations. He denied all the other 
factual allegations in the SOR concerning any alleged delinquent debt. His defense was 
that his former wife owed all the alleged debts. He provided additional information to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 60 years old, married to his fourth wife, and is employed as a senior 
software engineer by a defense contractor.  He does not have a security clearance now.  
He earns $108,000 annually, and has a net remainder income each month of about 
$5,000.  He has one daughter who is 30 years old.  He married his third wife in 1984, to 
whom he was married while they accumulated about $51,000 in delinquent debt.  He 
became aware of his wife’s mismanagement of their funds in 1995.  He knew in 1994 
about two tax liens against him from 1988 and 1989, yet took no action to resolve them.  
Applicant has not filed his 2002 and 2004 Federal income tax returns.  Applicant does 
not know the status of his state income tax returns for those years.  He filed his 2006 
through 2008 Federal and state tax returns. He admitted these facts in his Answer. (Tr. 
21-25, 30, 33, 37, 64; Answer; Exhibits 1, 2, 10) 
 
 Applicant has 11 delinquent debts totaling $51,015 listed in the SOR.  He has not 
repaid or otherwise resolved any of these debts. Applicant gave his former wife a 
general power of attorney in the early 1990s to manage his finances, and never revoked 
it.  He never looked at his finances during their marriage, even after his 1995 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy.  He states all the debts are the responsibility of his former third wife.  She 
accepts responsibility for them in the Answer and her undated letter entered into the 
record as Exhibit A.  Applicant trusts her to pay these debts and clean up his credit 
record after she inherits her money from someone. (Tr. 30, 31, 33, 39-54, 63; Exhibits 
2-12) 
 
 Applicant owes a state $6,096, $10,007, $8,703, and $5,854 on four separate tax 
liens (SOR Para. 1. a, 1.b, 1.k, and 1.l) for the 1986, 1988 and 1989 tax years.  He 
owes another state $2,687 on a different tax lien (SOR Para. 1. a to c) for the 1992 and 
1993 tax years.  All five tax liens remain unpaid.  Applicant took no action to resolve 
these liens, even after he learned of them in 1994. (Tr. 39 to 43; Exhibits 2-12) 
 
 A natural gas utility is owed $402 on a bill (SOR Para. 1.d).  This bill remains 
unpaid.  Applicant took no action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 44; Exhibits 2-12) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant owes a car maker $8,880 on a judgment (SOR Para. 1.e).  This debt 
remains unpaid. Applicant took no action to resolve it. (Tr. 45-47; Exhibits 2-12) 
 
 Applicant owes a credit card provider $1,332 (SOR Para. 1.f).  This debt remains 
unpaid.  Applicant took no action to resolve this debt after learning of it in 2007 when 
questioned about it by the Government investigator. (Tr. 47; Exhibits 2-12) 
 
 A telephone company placed Applicant’s account for collection, seeking $2,240 
(SOR Para. 1.g).  This debt remains unpaid.  Applicant took no action to resolve this 
debt. (Tr. 51; Exhibits 2-12) 
 
 Applicant owes another credit card company $3,553 (SOR Para. 1.h).  This debt 
also remains unpaid.  Applicant has done nothing to resolve this debt. (Tr. 53; Exhibits 
2-12) 
 
 Applicant owes a bank $1,261 on an account (SOR Para. 1.i). This debt is 
unpaid.  Applicant denies any knowledge of this debt and has not taken any action to 
resolve it. (Tr. 53; Exhibits 2-12) 
 
 Applicant’s home was foreclosed in August 2006 (SOR Para. 1.j).  Applicant has 
not paid the balance due on this mortgage.  Applicant denies any knowledge of any 
home foreclosure. (Tr. 54; Exhibits 2-12) 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on November 13, 1995.  He was discharged 
of his debts in bankruptcy on February 14, 1996.  The delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR in the previous paragraphs occurred after the bankruptcy discharge. (Tr. 29; 
Exhibit 11) 
 
 Applicant was ordered to pay his former wife $3,000 monthly in alimony from 
2006 until 2008.  He did so, and after the legal obligation to pay expired, he continued to 
pay her $2,000 monthly to help her.  He estimates he has paid her about $100,000 in 
the past three years.  Applicant’s net monthly income after all deductions and expenses 
is about $1,000, which he saves in his checking account.  He now has $7,000 in that 
account.  His car is paid and his rent is $850 per month.  Applicant has not sought or 
received any financial counseling. (Tr. 55-73) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The Applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes four of nine disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns.  They apply in this case.  
 
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  AG ¶ 19(b) applies because of the irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any effort to repay the debts or enter into installment payment agreements. 
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated 11 delinquent debts, totaling about $51,000, 
and did not pay these obligations for several years, including the current year. His 
testimony shows he did not engage himself in any effort to resolve these debts, or stop 
accumulating them, even after his 1995 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant disengaged 
himself from his finances and now seeks to avoid responsibility for his debts. His 
repeated failure to pay his taxes to two states and the Federal government is a serious 
legal problem that he has not resolved for 23 years, in the case of the earliest tax lien.  
That fact triggers the application of AG ¶ 19(g). The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  There are six mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
 
6 
 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial worries arose between 1984 when he 
married his third wife and 2006 when he divorced her.  His irresponsible behavior 
continues to the present day as he refuses to repay the debts.  There is a regular 
pattern of going into debt and not taking any action to resolve those financial 
obligations.  Applicant has a constant history of this type of action. The evidence does 
not raise this potentially mitigating condition.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), the financial problems arose from his wife=s failure to pay the 
family debts and Applicant refusing to do anything to rectify her misconduct, even when 
his name appeared as an oblige of the debt. Applicant also failed continuously to 
monitor and manage properly the family finances and arrange the repayment of their 
debts incurred during the marriage. I find this potentially mitigating condition is not a 
factor for consideration in this case.  
 
For AG & 20(c) to apply Applicant would have to present evidence of counseling 
or that the problem is under control.  In fact, the debts remain unpaid, and Applicant has 
placed the entire repayment obligation on his wife.  He has the income and ability to 
repay the debts, but has not done so since they were incurred.  He admitted he had not 
undertaken any financial counseling. 
 
Applicant has not resolved any of the delinquent debts, either by payment or 
settlement. He places the burden on his former wife, aided by her written statement that 
the debts occurred when her company failed.  She admits in the statement in the 
Answer that she handled the debts irresponsibly (Answer and Exhibit A).  She did not 
testify at the hearing, and was not subject to cross-examination.  Applicant was aware 
of these debts for several years, and did nothing to rectify them.  Instead, he has paid 
his former wife alimony as ordered in the court for the specified time, and then 
voluntarily continued to support her.  He estimates he paid her $100,000 since their 
divorce.  He claims his former wife will pay these debts at some time in the future when 
she inherits an undisclosed amount of money from an unnamed benefactor. Applicant 
offered no written documents evidencing this commitment. If true, he would have been 
better off to pay his $51,000 in debts and seek reimbursement later from the person 
who caused his financial problem in the first place.  He did not, further demonstrating 
his poor judgment in financial matters. I conclude AG & 20(d) does not apply. 
 
The final mitigating condition of AG ¶ 20 (f) pertains to affluence resulting from a 
legal source of income.  Applicant testified he earned over $100,000 annually, and has 
a net monthly income remainder of about $2,000.  His income was spent on his former 
wife’s needs, and his current family.  He alleges affluence being inherited by his former 
wife, but it has not occurred yet.  This mitigating condition is not applicable.   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant did not pay attention to 
his financial debts between 1984 and 2006, and allowed them to accumulate. He 
completely abdicated his duty to pay his debts during that time period.  Even when on 
notice of a problem after his 1995 bankruptcy, he still purposefully remained oblivious to 
his debts and financial status.  After the November 26, 2008, SOR was sent to him, 
Applicant did nothing to repay his debts.  He has acted irresponsibly for 23 years about 
financial matters. 
 
 His former wife may claim the debts are her responsibility, but Applicant has had 
ample time to rectify the situation by repaying them or resolving them in installment 
payment plans over the past 14 years.  Both Applicant and his wife have done nothing 
to repay debt, except file bankruptcy in 1995.  Then they incur more debt.  These are 
actions of an irresponsible Applicant lacking in good judgment.    
 
The burden of proof being on him, Applicant failed to present his former wife in 
person to give testimony about the debts.  He also failed to take the initiative and 
resolve the debts, or to seek reimbursement from his former wife if she persists in 
accepting responsibility for those debts.  All these actions show a lack of good judgment 
by Applicant.  The conduct by this adult was continuous, voluntary, and frequent.  He 
has made no changes in his behavior to take responsibility to resolve any of the debts.  
He is subject to pressure and coercion because of the magnitude of his delinquent debt.  
The conduct is continuing.  His explanation of trusting his wife to pay the debts and 
clean up his credit report one day in the future when she inherits an undisclosed amount 
 
8 
 
 
of money is not credible or persuasive.  Applicant was evasive in the explanation of this 
supposed inheritance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  I conclude the “whole person” concept against him. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.n:  Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
