 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
                                                           )  ISCR Case No. 08-04595 
           SSN:         ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the 
guidelines for drug involvement and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application, Standard Form (SF)-86, on 
November 15, 2001. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, 
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to 
make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
1
 
 
On November 7, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision – security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) of the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
Applicant signed his notarized Answer on December 23, 2008, in which he 
admitted to all allegations under Guideline H except allegation 1.f. Under Guideline E, he 
admitted to SOR ¶ 2.a, which cross-references allegations 1.a. through 1.g. He denied 
allegations 2.b. through 2.d., which allege deliberate falsification of information he 
provided on his security clearance applications. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 16, 2009, and the case was assigned to 
me on February 25, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 27, 2009. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on March 26, 2009. During the hearing, the 
government offered six exhibits, marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
presented the testimony of four witnesses. He also offered one exhibit, marked as 
Applicant Exhibit A, which was admitted without objection. I held the record open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documentation. He timely submitted one document, which 
was forwarded by Department Counsel without objection. I admitted the document as AE 
B. DOHA received the transcript on March 3, 2009. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Subparagraph 1.c. of the SOR alleges that “You used cocaine from approximately 
1995 to 2002.” At the hearing, Applicant testified that he used cocaine starting in 1986, 
as he reported in his security clearance application of May 2006. In order that the SOR 
conform to the record, I amended SOR allegation 1.c. to read, “You used cocaine from 
approximately 1986 to 2002.”  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement of Reasons, 
and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
                                                 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the 
Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was 
issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
2
 
Applicant, 51 years old, earned a certificate in Data Communications Technology 
from a community college in 1993 (Tr. 87-88). He married for the first time in 1980. He 
and his wife separated in approximately 1992, and divorced in 2002 (Tr. 153-154). He 
has two children with his first wife, a 21-year-old son and a 13-year-old daughter. He 
married his second wife in 2004 and has no children from his second marriage (GE 1). 
Applicant has been employed as an engineer since 1978, and his current title is Senior 
Integration Engineer and Project Manager. He worked for a federal contractor from 1978 
to 2001, and another federal contractor from 2001 to the present. Both companies had 
policies in effect that prohibited illegal drug use during the years that Applicant was an 
employee (GE 1; Tr. 33; 50; 89; 149).  
 
Applicant began using marijuana sometime between the age of 10 years (Tr. 73) 
and his early teens (GE 5; Tr. 90), using it on weekends with friends. He experimented 
with amphetamines, and barbiturates (Tr. 91), as well as LSD and quaaludes (Tr. 73). He 
also purchased drugs during this time period (Tr. 91). When Applicant began working 
full-time, in his 20s, his use of marijuana decreased to about three or four times per year 
(Tr. 93). However, in his Interrogatory response, he noted that he “may have used 
marijuana in college on a weekly basis” and also noted that he purchased it about two to 
four times per year (GE 6). Applicant attended college between 1983 and 1993, when he 
was 25 to 35 years old (GE 1). Applicant also used hashish a “couple of times a year” 
from 1971 to 1995 (Tr. 94). Between 1995 and 2002, Applicant testified that he used 
marijuana infrequently, when he was with friends or playing sports, approximately one to 
two weekends per month. However, after he purchased his house in 2000, it became 
less frequent (Tr. 165).  
 
As a young boy, Applicant went on backpacking trips on the Presidents’ Day 
holiday weekend in February (Tr. 150). Applicant and several friends continued this 
annual tradition for decades. Applicant last attended the winter camping trip in February 
2002. During these three-day camping trips, he and his friends used marijuana (Tr. 92).  
 
Applicant used psychedelic mushrooms three times, between 2000 and 2001 or 
2002,3 during his winter camping trips. He testified that he first tried them when someone 
brought the mushrooms on the winter camping trip in 2000 (Tr. 97-98). During a security 
interview on August 17, 2007, Applicant stated he had psychedelic mushrooms in his 
home freezer, that they had been there for approximately six years, and that they were 
left over from his last camping trip in 2002 (GE 5). However, at the hearing, Applicant 
stated that the mushrooms belonged to his wife, who had obtained them from a friend 
(Tr. 105). He stated both in his August 2007 interview and at the hearing that he had 
asked his wife for several years to dispose of them, but she did not do so (AE A; Tr. 105-
106). Applicant disposed of the mushrooms after his August 2007 interview. His wife 
                                                 
3 Applicant first testified that his last use of psychedelic mushrooms was in 2002; but later said it was in 
2001 (Tr. 97-99). 
 
 
3
 
submitted a notarized statement that she has used illegal drugs recreationally on rare 
occasions, but stopped in 2005 (AE A). 
 
Between 19864 and 2002, Applicant used cocaine. The drug was available on the 
winter camping trips, and Applicant was not certain, but believes that he likely used it 
infrequently on those trips. However, in approximately 1995, he moved to an apartment 
where he met a man who used cocaine. Applicant used it “once every couple of months, 
maybe” and purchased it twice from the man (Tr. 96). He later testified that his cocaine 
use between 1995 and 2002 was, “I would say on average, per year, once every four 
months.” (Tr. 163). Although a security investigator reported in 2007 that Applicant used 
cocaine on “one occasion per weekend” from 1995 to 2002, Applicant called that 
statement “absolutely incorrect” at the hearing (Tr. 160), and noted that he had corrected 
this inaccuracy in his Clarifications document (GE 5). He also used cocaine during the 
winter camping trip of February 2002 (Tr. 97). 
 
For the past 15 years, Applicant and his family have joined several other families 
each year for camping trips in the Spring and Fall. Some of Applicant’s friends from the 
winter camping trips also attend the family camping trips (Tr. 151). Some drug use 
occurs at these events. Appellant estimates that, each year, he used marijuana on one 
of the annual family trips, after the children were in bed (Tr. 99-100; 152). He has not 
used illegal drugs in front of his children or told them about his own drug use. He has 
warned them not to use illegal drugs because he wants “to make sure that my children 
never did, or never would.” (Tr. 100-101). He testified that he is not exposed to illegal 
drugs on these trips anymore because “Everybody is well aware, I have made it very 
clear that I'm not interested, and I will not do drugs again, and I didn't want to be around 
it, I don't want to see it, I don't want to smell it.” (Tr. 103). As of the date of the hearing, 
he had last attended the family camping trip in Spring 2008, and intended to go to the 
Spring 2009 trip. 
 
Applicant has no intent to use illegal drugs in the future. On his last winter 
camping trip in February 2002, after he had used marijuana and cocaine (Tr. 149), he 
decided to walk on a log in the campfire. When he jumped off, he fractured his ankle, 
and later developed a severe infection in his foot. He wore a large cast, and had to self-
administer a strong antibiotic into a line that fed into his heart. He decided at that time 
that he would no longer use illegal drugs (Tr. 102-103). 
 
Applicant's witness, a friend who attends the annual winter trip, testified that he 
saw Applicant use marijuana on the 2002 trip. He knows that Applicant has not attended 
any camping trips with the group since 2002. Applicant has told the witness that he will 
not use illegal drugs again, and has not used drugs since that time in the presence of the 
witness (Tr. 59-61).  
 
                                                 
4 Applicant gave several dates for his first use of cocaine (GE 4; GE 5). It was determined at the hearing 
that the correct date is 1986 (Tr. 155). 
 
4
 
As to his friends who currently use drugs, Applicant testified, “And the ones who I 
do associate with, now, know very well – they all know it, but the ones who I associated 
with now are very well aware, as well as the rest of them, that I do not drugs [sic], I will 
not do drugs, and I cannot have it around me, or in front of me.” (Tr. 152). 
 
Applicant met with a chemical dependency counselor for an evaluation in relation 
to his security clearance (AE B). They met three times between January 29 and March 
16, 2009. During their second meeting, Applicant provided a urine sample for a 
toxicology screen; he was not forewarned of the test (AE B; Tr. 73). The urinalysis 
produced negative results for the presence of alcohol or any illegal substances (Tr. 69).  
 
Applicant told the counselor that he first used marijuana at 10 to 12 years old, and 
that he also experimented with amphetamines, LSD and quaaludes. His use decreased 
after high school, so that he only used illegal drugs on his annual camping trip, and only 
marijuana (Tr. 78). Applicant told her that he used psychedelic mushrooms three times 
during the winter camping trips, two of them in 2002 (Tr. 77; 80-81).5 He also reported 
that he used cocaine several times between January 2001 and February 2002 (Tr. 75; 
79-80). He did not inform her that he had used cocaine starting in 1995. Based on the 
information Applicant provided, the counselor found that Applicant did not meet the 
criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) for substance abuse or 
dependence (Tr. 71). 
 
Applicant applied for his first security clearance in November 2001 (GE 1). He is 
uncertain of the exact date that he received the clearance (Tr. 114). However, he 
testified that he had the clearance at the time he used marijuana and cocaine during his 
camping trip on February 28, 2002 (Tr. 148-149; 174).  
 
Q: But by the time you used drugs on this camping trip, in February 
of 2002, you knew you had a security clearance?  
 
A: Yes.  And there was -- that was the only time that I have done illicit 
or illegal drugs while possessing a security clearance.  
 
Q: Now, -- 
 
A: :And I know that that was wrong, I know it was stupid, I knew at 
the time, and that is the reason -- one of the reasons why that was it. 
(Tr. 148). 
 
Applicant testified that he was working at a DoD site that required a security clearance at 
the time he used marijuana and cocaine on February 28, 2002. Although he did not 
remember the exact date he began working at the site, he knows that he had a large 
                                                 
5 It is unclear from the counselor’s testimony whether Applicant reported to her that he used psychedelic 
mushrooms in 2000. 
 
5
 
cast on his foot that made entering and exiting the site very difficult (Tr. 102; 182). The 
cast was part of the treatment for the injury he received on February 28, 2002. I find that 
Applicant used illegal drugs one time, February 28, 2002, after he received a security 
clearance. 
 
Applicant completed security clearance applications in 2001, 2006, and 2007 (GE 
1, 2, 4 and 5). In his 2001 application, when he was applying for a secret security 
clearance, he answered “No” to the question that asked if he had used illegal drugs 
during the previous seven years (GE 1).6 When asked why he lied on the application, 
Applicant testified,  
 
A: …And when I filled out the form I absolutely did have a problem 
with that question. And I actually asked others around me, you know, 
what I should do. And, basically, the consensus was go ahead and 
say no, they don’t check it anyway, on a secret. So, you know, I 
answered no. And that was, obviously, as it turns out now that was a 
very stupid thing to do. 
 
Q: So you thought you could get away with it? 
 
A: Yes, I guess, yes. (Tr. 112-113). 
 
Applicant he did not want the government to know about his drug use because he was 
concerned about not succeeding at his new job with the federal contractor. He received a 
secret clearance after submitting the 2001 application (Tr. 115).  
 
In 2005, Applicant's company planned to submit him for a top secret security 
clearance and access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). Applicant decided 
to disclose his 2001 falsification to his facility security officer (GE 3). Applicant was 
aware that the higher level clearance would require a polygraph examination, which 
would reveal his illegal drug use (Tr. 174). However, he testified that his disclosure, 
 
… was on my own accord.  I'm the one who volunteered to be 
processed for an [government agency] TSSCI.  And I was well 
aware that it would require a polygraph.  
 
And at that point is when I decided I needed to come clean, with 
myself, with the Government, and own up to what I had done wrong. 
(Tr. 174). 
 
Applicant disclosed his falsification about illegal drug use in a letter in which he stated, “I 
was told not to include the information and that DSS does not check or polygraph for 
drugs at the secret level.” (GE 3). On his two subsequent applications, in 2006 and 2007, 
                                                 
6 This falsification was not alleged in the SOR. 
 
6
 
he listed his illegal drug use. However, he did not disclose on those two applications that 
he had used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance (GE 4; 5). He testified that 
he did not understand the question. He thought it concerned only those who used illegal 
drugs while holding positions as law enforcement officers, prosecutors or courtroom 
officials. He realizes now that he should have answered “Yes.” He did disclose in the 
2006 and 2007 applications that he used illegal drugs until February 28, 2002, when he 
held a security clearance (GE 4; Tr. 178-179). 
 
When Applicant worked at a defense contracting company between 1978 and 
2001, he sometimes kept surveillance equipment that was slated for disposal. He 
obtained permission to keep the equipment (GE 5). Over a period of five to seven years, 
he sold the materials at a flea market, earning about $1,000 per year. When the 
company closed its doors in 2001, he asked for and received permission to keep 
additional material. He sold some items and kept others. Applicant's witness, who 
worked with Applicant at this company, testified that it was acceptable for employees to 
take discarded company equipment (Tr. 43). 
 
In his current employment, Applicant also worked on projects where excess 
materials were discarded. At the end of a project in 2006, Applicant obtained such 
materials, including ladders, drills, and drywall. He gave some items to his son, who sold 
a portion of the materials for a profit of approximately $4,000 (GE 5). One of Applicant's 
witnesses, who worked for this same employer for 18 years, testified that the company’s 
policy is to dispose of materials remaining after an off-site project is completed, because 
it is more cost-efficient than returning the materials to the company. Consequently, 
project managers are directed to dispose of the material. The witness believed the 
company at that point has divested itself of any further interests in the property. He noted 
that this is the usual industry practice. His understanding is that it is acceptable if an 
employee decides keep the material. He was not aware of any instances in which the 
company had taken action against an employee who had taken such material (Tr. 31-32; 
37-38).  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and common-sense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).7 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
                                                 
7 Directive. 6.3. 
 
7
 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest8 for an Applicant to either 
receive or continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary 
decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the 
government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the 
government meets its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate 
the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an 
Applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.9 A person who has access to classified 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
Applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who 
will protect the national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the 
national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an 
Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.10 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Of the eight disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 25, the following three apply:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
                                                 
8 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
10 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
8
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia;  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
Applicant admits to illegally using numerous substances as a teenager including 
amphetamines, barbiturates, hashish, LSD, quaaludes and marijuana. As an adult, he 
used psychedelic mushrooms and cocaine, and most frequently, marijuana. He 
purchased marijuana and cocaine. Applicant also possessed psychedelic mushrooms, 
which were stored in his home with his knowledge for approximately five years. 
Applicant was granted his security clearance in 2001 or early 2002, and admits that he 
used illegal drugs in February 2002, while he held that clearance. 
 
AG ¶ 26 includes two relevant mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such 
as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
` Applicant’s last use of illegal drugs in February 2002, more than seven years 
ago, is not recent. However, Applicant's use extended over a period of approximately 30 
years, until he was 43 years old. In addition, he used illegal drugs in 2002, after he had 
been granted a security clearance. The lack of recency does not outweigh the fact that 
he used illegal drugs while he was a mature adult, and while he held a clearance. His 
conduct casts serious doubt on his reliability and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Some mitigation is available under AG ¶ 26(b) because Applicant avoids the 
winter camping trips where he used drugs in the past, and he has abstained from illegal 
drugs for a significant period. However, other facts weigh against mitigation under AG ¶ 
 
9
 
 
10
26(b). He maintains contact with some of the people with whom he used drugs. He 
knowingly allowed an illegal drug to remain in his home for approximately five years. 
Finally, he continues to attend the twice-yearly family camping trips where drugs are 
sometimes used and where he has used illegal drugs in the past. I find against 
Applicant on Guideline H. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure 
to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying conditions under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, 
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or 
other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to 
consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach 
of client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in 
the workplace;  
 
 
11
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
The government alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified answers on his 
security clearance applications in 2006 and 2007. Each allegation relates to the same 
question: whether he had ever used illegal drugs while possessing a security 
clearance. He answered “No” to this question on his 2006 and 2007 applications. 
 
Application of AG ¶ 16(a) requires deliberate falsification. Here, Applicant did not 
intentionally hide relevant information from the government. He misunderstood the 
question, thinking that it asked whether he used a controlled substance while employed 
in three professions—law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official. He 
answered “No” because he had never held any of those positions (Tr. 132-133). 
Applicant disclosed, in his answer to the immediately preceding question, that he used 
illegal drugs until February 28, 2002, which was after he had received a clearance. If 
he had intended to hide the fact that he used illegal drugs while holding a clearance, he 
would not have disclosed that date. Applicant did not intentionally conceal the fact that 
he used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance, and AG ¶ 16 (a) does not 
apply. 
 
AG ¶ 16(d)(4) is relevant to the allegation that Applicant wrongfully 
misappropriated materials belonging to his current and former employers. Applicant's 
witnesses credibly testified that it is common practice for companies to order local 
disposal of equipment and materials that remain after completion of off-site projects. 
The witnesses were unaware of any prohibition against employees or contractors 
taking such items. There is no evidence that Applicant violated a policy at either 
company by taking left-over materials that the companies had discarded. AG ¶ 16 
(d)(4) does not apply as to Applicant's personal use of the discarded materials. 
 
 However, this disqualifying condition is also relevant to Applicant's illegal drug 
use. Applicant used numerous illegal drugs over a period of approximately 30 years. 
Although he used some illegal drugs on a short-term experimental basis when he was a 
teenager, he used others, such as marijuana and cocaine, over a longer period. 
Applicant violated the law over a period of many years, even as an adult. He admits that 
used marijuana and cocaine in 2002, after he had a security clearance. AG ¶ 16(d)(3) 
applies as to Applicant's illegal drug use. 
 
 As to Applicant's illegal drug use, the following mitigating condition is relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
 
12
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant's drug use cannot be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c). Although a significant 
amount of time, approximately seven years, has passed since Applicant last used 
marijuana and cocaine, his conduct cannot be considered minor. Each decision to use 
a controlled substance was a decision to engage in an illegal act. He made that 
decision repeatedly over a period of three decades. The fact that he acted illegally 
beyond adolescence and well into his adult life, when he was a husband and father, 
demonstrate a persistent unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations that raises 
serious doubts about his trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) cannot be 
applied. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant has refrained from using illegal drugs for the past seven years, a 
significant period of time. However, his willingness to engage in persistent illegal 
conduct by using controlled substances for more than 30 years cannot be ignored. His 
last use occurred when he was a mature adult of 43 years. Applicant engaged in other 
actions that raise questions as to his trustworthiness. He used illegal drugs even 
though it was against the policy at both of his employers. He intentionally falsified his 
2001 security clearance application because he thought disclosure might jeopardize 
his job. Although this falsification is not alleged, and is not outcome-determinative, it 
does go to his credibility when assessing the whole person. Finally, his willingness to 
 
 
13
use marijuana and cocaine after he received his security clearance raises serious 
doubts about his suitability for access to classified information.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.    Against Applicant     
  Subparagraph 1.b.     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.     Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g.    Against Applicant  
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
