 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-08007 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: George H. Bowles, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), arising from past due mortgage payments totaling about $26,166. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on March 20, 2008. On 
January 16, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 29, 2009; answered it on February 11, 
2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on February 13, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 13, 
2009, and the case was assigned to me on March 16, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 30, 2009, scheduling the hearing for April 21, 2009. Applicant 
retained an attorney, who entered his appearance on April 13, 2009. On April 16, 2009, 
Applicant, acting through her attorney, requested a continuance until May 16, 2009. I 
granted the request, and DOHA issued a second notice of appearance on the same 
day, scheduling the hearing for May 16, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of three witnesses, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through O, which were admitted without objection. The 
record closed upon adjournment of the hearing on May 16, 2009. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on May 28, 2009. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 On June 11, 2009, after the record had closed, Applicant’s attorney requested 
that the record be reopened for the purpose of admitting evidence that Applicant had 
entered into a contract to sell the house on which the mortgage payments were past 
due. I granted the request, with no objection by Department Counsel. Applicant’s motion 
and the sales contract were admitted as AX P. Department Counsel’s comments are 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent debt alleged in the 
SOR. Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 70-year-old security assistant employed by a federal contractor. 
She has worked for her current employer since December 2000. She was a federal civil 
service employee from June 1963 to September 1993, when she retired. She received a 
security clearance in April 2003.  
 
 Applicant was married in July 1960 and divorced in December 1981. She 
remarried on March 1990. Her second husband died in February 1991. She has three 
adult sons. 
 
 In August 2007, her youngest son, age 44, asked Applicant to help him buy a 
home, because he was unable to obtain a loan by himself. He is divorced and has 
custody of his two children. Applicant agreed, assuming that she would be a cosigner 
on the loan. Her son promised to make the payments. He was employed at the time and 
assured Applicant he was earning enough to make the payments (Tr. 47). He testified 
his monthly take-home pay at the time he purchased the home was about $3,300. The 
monthly loan payment of $2,751 left him only $500 or $600 per month for all other living 
 
3 
 
 
expenses (Tr. 74). He testified he did not know how much the monthly payments would 
be until after the loan closed (Tr. 74). 
 
Applicant’s son had lived in another state for years, and Applicant was not aware 
that he had previous financial problems (Tr. 57). She did not read the documents 
carefully at closing and did not realize that, although she and her son are listed as co-
owners on the deed, she was solely responsible for the loan (Tr. 27). 
 
 Applicant’s son purchased the property for about $253,000, with no down 
payment (Tr. 45). The property was assessed at $257,900 for tax purposes (AX M; Tr. 
36), and was recently appraised at $230,000 (AX N; Tr. 41).  
 
 Applicant learned from a security investigator that the payments on the mortgage 
were delinquent. She questioned her son, who told her he was “a couple of payments 
behind,” and that he would take care of it. She was unaware that her son’s payment 
check in October 2007 was dishonored for insufficient funds, and that notices of default 
had been mailed to him in November 2007, December 2007, January 2008, February 
2008, and August 2008 (AX B through F). The notices were addressed to Applicant but 
mailed to her son’s address (Tr. 32).  
 
When Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in September 2008, she was 
still under the impression that her son was the primary borrower and she was a cosigner 
(GX 4 at 4; Tr. 51-52). As of the date of the hearing, her son had been laid off for about 
a month and was unemployed. He testified he was in the process of opening a teen 
club, but the club had not yet opened (Tr. 50, 61-62). He testified he did not tell 
Applicant the loan was in default because he was ashamed and embarrassed (Tr. 64).  
 
 When Applicant received the SOR in January 2009, she realized that the loan 
payments were about $26,000 in arrears (Tr. 29). Her credit report dated May 19, 2008, 
reflected that the account was more than 180 days past due (GX 3 at 3). Applicant 
contacted the lender, who agreed to not foreclose on the property. She listed the 
property with a realtor, and the lender agreed to permit a short sale. Applicant testified 
that, if the property did not sell, she would find a renter for the property, try to refinance 
the loan, or move into the house and live there while making the payments (Tr. 35-36).  
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income from her current employment, Social Security, 
and civil service retirement totals about $4,321. She lives in a rental property and pays 
monthly rent of $1,299. Her total monthly expenses, including rent, are about $2,672, 
leaving a remainder of about $1,649 (AX H through K). 
 
On June 6, 2009, after the record had closed, Applicant entered into a contract to 
sell the house for $210,000. The contract is contingent on the buyer obtaining financing 
and “bank approval.” The closing date is on or about July 30, 2009 (AX P). 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor considers her trustworthy, totally dedicated and an 
outstanding performer (Tr. 79). Applicant informed her supervisor of the problem arising 
 
4 
 
 
from the delinquent loan, and she kept her informed of her dealings with the mortgage 
company and the realtor (Tr. 81-83). 
 
 A friend of Applicant for 65 years and a former coworker during Applicant’s 
employment in civil service was aware of the problem with the delinquent loan. She 
considers Applicant one of the “most forthright, honest, trustworthy people” she had 
encountered in her personal life and professional career (Tr. 87). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges a single delinquent debt of about $26,166. The concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Two potentially disqualifying conditions are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where 
there is an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there 
is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” I conclude AG ¶ 19(a) is not raised, 
because Applicant has the financial ability and willingness to satisfy this debt. AG ¶ 
19(b) is raised, however, by the multiple delinquent payments for which Applicant is 
liable. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise AG ¶ 19(b), the 
burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). The delinquent debt 
 
6 
 
 
is recent, but it is an isolated incident and occurred under circumstances that are not 
likely to recur. In the context of Applicant’s long government service, her excellent 
reputation, and her responsible actions to resolve the debt, it does not cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. The debt arose largely because 
of her son’s loss of employment and his irresponsible and deceptive behavior, which 
were beyond her control. Applicant reacted responsibly by contacting the lender and 
taking steps to resolve the debt. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
has not sought or received financial counseling, but she has retained an attorney and 
the problem is being resolved. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith “requires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.” ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
Applicant promptly contacted the lender, obtained approval for a short sale, and listed 
the house with a realtor. She devised a realistic fall-back plan if the house was not sold 
quickly. On June 6, 2009, she entered into a contract to sell the house. Although the 
sale has not closed and the debt is not yet resolved, the contract shows Applicant’s 
good-faith efforts to resolve the debt. It also shows she has established a realistic plan 
to resolve her financial problem and has taken significant actions to implement the plan. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is 
established.   
 
Applicant did not submit documentary evidence of her negotiations with the 
lender, but her testimony was corroborated by the testimony of her son and her 
supervisor. There is no evidence that the lender has initiated foreclosure. Applicant 
submitted a copy of the appraisal she obtained in anticipation of selling the house and a 
copy of the recently-executed sales contract. She also provided documentary evidence 
of her financial situation, establishing her ability to pay the debt. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult, with a long record of federal service. She is highly 
regarded by her current employer. She has held a clearance for more than six years, 
apparently without incident. She was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. In 
hindsight, her failure to question her son about his ability to pay the mortgage, and her 
lack of attention to the mortgage documents were poor decisions. On the other hand, 
this debt was a family matter, and not incurred in an arms-length transaction. Under the 
circumstances, Applicant’s blind trust in her son does not cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on the debt alleged in the SOR. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal finding on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
