                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08251 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline K, 
Handling Protected Information, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On January 15, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines K and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 5, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2009. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 19, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled on June 11, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on June 18, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 74 years old. He is a graduate of a service academy and served on 
active duty for ten years before being honorably discharged. He has held a security 
clearance for more than fifty years. After leaving the service, he worked for the federal 
government from 1967 to 1993, when he retired. He did volunteer work for 
approximately a year before he returned to work part-time as a senior engineer for a 
federal contractor in 1994, and later that year began working full-time until 2007. He 
agreed to assume a six-week project that he had a particular expertise in before retiring. 
He had planned on retiring in January or February 2007, because a year prior his wife 
had become serious ill and needed care. Applicant and his wife were married in 1967. 
He had three children from a previous marriage and she had one child from a previous 
marriage; together they had a son.1  
 
 In the later part of February 2007, Applicant also had medical problems and 
needed specialized treatment. The day after his treatment, his wife was hospitalized. 
Applicant was anxious to finish the project he was working on so he could devote 
himself to the full-time care of his wife. He described himself as being in “emotional 
turmoil” from the stressors of his medical problems and his wife’s deteriorating 
condition. She had been experiencing health problems for over twenty years with 
varying degrees of incapacitation.2  
 
 Applicant was under pressure to complete the project and was waiting for a 
particular document he needed. He was never advised that the document, addressed to 
him, had arrived at his company two weeks earlier. The document was confidential and 
the internal policy of the company was that it required a classification receipt. This was 
a more stringent requirement than what the National Industrial Security Program 
Operating Manual (NISPOM) required. The company that sent the document, 
Applicant’s client, was unaware of Applicant’s company’s new requirement and did not 
send it following the more stringent requirement. Delivery of the document to Applicant 
was delayed while the two companies resolved the issue of the classification receipt. In 
the meantime, Applicant was frustrated when he learned the document that he 
1 Tr. 9, 23-26, 50-58. 
 
2 Tr. 19-22, 58-60. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
desperately needed to complete his project was held by his company, and he was not 
told it had arrived two weeks prior.3  
 
On March 12, 2007, when Applicant learned the document was at his company, 
he requested it so he could complete the project. When Applicant received the 
document, he took it home so he could complete the project while caring for his wife. He 
was authorized to work from home, but not to take the document home. He did not 
request permission from a supervisor to take the document home. He knew the 
document was confidential and it violated the rules and procedures for handling 
confidential material. An inventory was completed of Applicant’s office safe the next day 
and it was determined the document was missing. Applicant was contacted and 
admitted the document was in his possession at home. He secured it in an unauthorized 
safe at his home. He did not follow proper procedures for carrying and transporting the 
confidential document.4  
 
Applicant admitted he violated company policy and procedure. He admitted he 
was frustrated and acted inappropriately. When he was contacted at home by the 
Security Manager, Applicant admitted he had the document. He stated he would return 
the document, but he needed to care for his wife. Applicant admitted he was displeased 
with the Security Manager for not originally advising him that the document, he had 
been anxious waiting for to complete the project, was at their company for two weeks 
before he was told. He was frustrated that the delay was due to a rule that was not 
required by the NISPOM. The Security Manager was concerned about the document so 
she and another person went to his house to retrieve it. He handed the document to 
her. It was not wrapped properly, but she brought the appropriate material to wrap it.5  
 
Applicant does not dispute what he did was wrong. He understands he handled 
the situation wrong. He stated: 
 
I knew that my action was wrong. I knew, also, that since my wife was 
incapacitated and never came into my room, where I was working, that no 
one, other than me, was going to see the document. Although I 
understand fully that I broke the rules and that I was putting it at risk.6 
 
Applicant does not think he is above the rules and regrets his actions. He 
understands his need to follow the rules, even though he disagrees with the additional 
policy imposed by his company. He readily admitted he was overwhelmed with the 
deteriorating situation about his wife and was under a great deal of pressure to 
complete the project. The delay in receiving the document added to the pressure. He 
3 Tr. 27, 44-50. 
 
4 Tr. 36-38, 60-62; GE 4. 
 
5 Tr. 35-50, 66-76; GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. 30-31. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
sincerely regrets his actions. He credibly testified that he has never done something like 
this in the past and he will never do something like this again.7  
 
Applicant did complete the project. He was given a letter of warning for his 
actions. There is no evidence that the confidential document was compromised, but it 
was in his home with his wife. No evidence was presented that there were other 
classified documents at his residence. He has had no other security related issues since 
this incident.8   
 
Applicant explained he married his wife in 1967 and they had experienced the 
loss of two adult children. In his answer to the SOR he stated:  
 
I was under extreme and unique pressures when the incident under 
review occurred. I suspect it is difficult for anyone who has not lost a 
spouse after a long marriage (exacerbated by the prior death of two of our 
children) to appreciate the emotional turmoil involved in such a situation.9 
 
A senior executive service coworker of Applicant provided a letter stating that he 
has worked with him since 1983 and stated he “saw no relaxation of good classified 
document control and handling in a multitude of meetings, conferences and one-on-one 
situations” He also commented that he has no doubt as to the high character and moral 
standards of Applicant in both work and social environments and would and has trusted 
him with keeping our nation’s classified information safe from those not authorized.10 
 
 A former supervisor for whom Applicant worked for five years and maintained 
contact with for the past ten years also provided a character letter. He described 
Applicant as a meticulous, thorough, and dedicated public servant who served 
honorably and admirably in his specific area of expertise. He believed Applicant’s 
security violation was completely out of character. He still would trust him even knowing 
he made a mistake.11 
 
 Applicant’s son also provided a letter. He described his father as a person who 
possesses integrity, honor and selflessness. He stated his father sacrificed almost all of 
his time with his family to devote himself to his country, serving it for 56 years. He was 
routinely recognized for exceptional and faithful service. He further explained that when 
his mother fell ill, his father was consumed by concerns for her welfare and her 
immediate medical care. He also was concerned about completing a project on time. 
His son noted that it was his father’s dedication to completing an assigned task, while 
7 Tr. 30-33, 66-70. 
 
8 Tr. 34-37; GE 4. 
 
9 Tr. 24, 27-28; Answer to SOR. 
 
10 AE A. 
 
11 AE B. 
 
5 
 
 
attentiveness.”  
 
Policies 
h are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
ise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
nd has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
on as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
                                                          
being by his wife’s side that resulted in his decision to bring the needed document 
home. He described his father as tormented by his “single instance of 
12in
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, whic
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likew
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, ”The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel a
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolati
12 AE C. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
 
 (b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
 Appellant admitted he took a confidential document home with him because he 
needed to complete a project. It was not properly stored or wrapped. I find both 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions applicable to this guideline 
under AG ¶ 35. Specifically, I considered the following:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual currently reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment, and  
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant admitted that in March 2007 he took a confidential document home 
with him out of frustration and pressure to complete a project. His actions were 
influenced by his need to care for his wife due to her deteriorating health. Applicant has 
had a security clearance for more than fifty years without incident. He is truly remorseful 
 
7 
 
 
for his inappropriate conduct. He understands what he did was wrong. There is no 
evidence that the confidential document was compromised. I find these are unique facts 
and circumstances and are very unlikely to happen again. Applicant has served his 
country for more than a half of a century without a blemish. He accepts responsibility for 
his action. He was counseled and is committed to ensuring that a similar incident does 
not recur. I find both mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
 
(c) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to considerations of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 After careful consideration of all of the evidence, I conclude there is no additional 
adverse information outside of the evidence presented regarding the security infraction 
that has been alleged, which requires a separate finding or analysis under the Personal 
Conduct Guideline. I will consider all of the evidence presented when analyzing the 
whole person. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served his country as both 
a military officer and later while working for the Defense Department, and then as a 
defense contractor. He has served long and honorably. He was going through a very 
difficult time in his life as his wife’s health was deteriorating and she needed full time 
care. He also had his own medical problems. The pressure of being under a deadline to 
complete a project and frustration of finding out the document was sitting at his 
company for two weeks caused him to make a poor decision. He regrets his actions. I 
have considered his entire background and record. It is undeniable he violated the 
rules. However, this was a one time aberration in an otherwise stellar career. I find 
Applicant is not a security risk and that he is unlikely to make the same mistake in the 
future. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from Handling Protected 
Information and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
