                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02713 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
J, Criminal Conduct and E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
On December 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines J and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 22, 2009 and February 19, 
2009, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned 
to me on March 26, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 7, 2009. I 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
convened the hearing as scheduled on May 7, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 9. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified 
and offered Exhibits (AE) A through E. The Government did not object and they were 
admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 18, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, except ¶ 2.b. His admissions 
to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old and retired from the Navy in 2000, in the rank of E-7. He 
was married in 1986 and has three children, a daughter age 21, and two sons, ages 14 
and 11. He and his wife divorced in December 2007. He held a security clearance while 
he was in the Navy.1  
 
Applicant stated that while in the Navy he participated in four highly classified 
special missions while deployed on a submarine. He stated the missions were vital to 
national security. He stated personnel from the U.S. intelligence agencies and National 
Security Agency were on the missions. He explained the missions were very stressful.2 
 
 In 2004 Applicant was working for a federal contractor. In August 2004, a 
complaint was made with the police department by Applicant’s then 15 year old 
daughter that he had molested her. With his attorney, Applicant turned himself in to the 
police in September 2004 and was charged with four felony charges of indecent liberties 
with a minor. The allegations were that Applicant molested his daughter by asking her to 
undress and then masturbating while he looked at her. The allegations also stated that 
in July 2004 Applicant pulled open his daughter’s shirt and touched her breast beneath 
her bra.3 Applicant was charged with indecent liberties with a minor, specifically as the 
custodial parent by having his daughter expose her breasts and then on separate 
occasions touching her breasts both outside and inside her shirt. Applicant pled guilty to 
the two charges of touching his daughter.4 
 
 In April 2005, Applicant was found guilty and sentenced to incarceration for a 
term of five years for each offense, a total of ten years. The court suspended nine years 
and imposed supervised probation and required sexual offender treatment and 
counseling. Applicant served his sentence and was released from jail in March 2006. He 
stated he is on supervised probation until 2015. He reports to his probation officer once 
1 Tr. 34-35. 
 
2 Tr. 26. 
 
3 Tr. 27; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. 38-48; GE 3. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
a month; is subject to home visits and has to take a polygraph every six months. He has 
passed his polygraphs. He is required to register as a sex offender and update his 
registry every three months or it is a violation of his probation.5  
 
 At his hearing, Applicant denied he ever touched his daughter’s breasts. He 
stated his attorney told him to plead guilty and he would get the charges reduced at 
sentencing. Applicant stated he did not want to plead guilty. However, he stated once 
he pled guilty his attorney did not attempt to “plea bargain” or get the sentence reduced. 
He further stated: “I [pled] guilty because my attorney told me to do so and would get 
the charges reduced.” At his hearing Applicant admitted he asked his daughter to 
expose her breasts between five to eight times from June 2004 to August 2004. He 
denies he masturbated. He denies he ever touched his daughter, despite his guilty 
pleas. He stated he understands what he asked his daughter to do was wrong and 
takes responsibility for his actions.6 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with malicious wounding, a class 3 felony, in 
domestic court. Applicant and his wife were involved in an altercation on January 2, 
2007. They were separated at the time. Applicant admitted he and his wife had a 
conversation by phone shortly before he went over to her residence. He went to her 
home and they spoke to each other in the doorway. He admitted he had his foot in the 
door entryway. She attempted to remove him from the door jam area and push him 
back. He stated he walked away and she ran after him with an object, so he raised his 
steel toe work boot and kicked her from behind. He stated he was trying to leave the 
premises and his foot struck her knee. The police report notes “bruises and cuts.”7 He 
admitted he did not use good judgment going to her home. The charge is listed as 
“under advisement” which is equivalent to a deferred adjudication. The charge was 
dismissed on March 19, 2009.8 
 
 Applicant was aware that a condition of his probation was not to get in any 
trouble. His wife had filed for divorce while he was in jail. His daughter who was over 18, 
no longer lived with his wife, but his two sons did. Applicant stated that after he was 
incarcerated his daughter was placed in foster care because she had made allegations 
against her mother.9  
 
 A protective order was issued against Applicant after the altercation directing him 
to stay away from his wife and sons. Prior to then he had supervised probation with his 
5 Tr. 49-52; GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. 27, 44-48, 97. 
 
7 GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. 28-29, 58-74, 92-99; GE 8. 
 
9 Id. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
sons. The protective order prohibited him from having any type of contact or 
communication at all with his sons from January 2007 to January 2008.10  
 
 On March 17, 2007, Applicant was charged with violating the protective order. 
The court determined that Applicant was attempting to indirectly contact his sons. 
Applicant explained that while at the bowling alley he said to a woman, whom he knew 
had contact with his sons, “I just wish I could tell my boys I love them.” The woman then 
told the boys and they told their mother. Applicant did not think he did anything wrong 
by making this statement. He stated he did not ask her to do anything. He explained 
that this incident shows that he loves his kids and it was very difficult because he was 
not permitted to see his boys. He further stated “It is hard because I destroyed their 
lives with what I did.”11  
 
 Applicant was charged with violating the protective order. On August 27, 2007, 
the court found “facts sufficient to find guilt but defer adjudication.” Applicant appealed 
the case. The guilty finding was then taken “under advisement,” requiring Applicant to 
remain out of trouble and the charge would be dismissed. The charge was dismissed on 
September 29, 2008.12 
 
Applicant submitted his application for employment on July 7, 2006, Applicant 
indicated he was convicted of “two class 6 felonies on 18 April 2005, sentenced to 1 
year in [city] jail, and probation for 9 years.”13 Applicant stated that he told his Foreman 
and General Foreman in January 2007 and March 2007, about his convictions. He did 
not tell his facility security officer. He stated he assumed that because he told his 
Foreman and listed the felonies on his job application that he would be asked about the 
offenses. He was not advised nor was he aware that he needed to tell his facility 
security officer about his record. When he turned in his job application he was asked 
what the nature of the felonies were and he stated he divulged they were sex crimes, 
but did not divulge the crimes involved a minor.14  
 
Applicant stated that due to the stressful deployments he was on while serving in 
the Navy he used pornography to help him relax following his retirement. He then 
became addicted to viewing pornography. He saw a counselor for approximately six 
months, but said the counselor kept falling asleep during his sessions. He did not get 
another counselor. He stated he chose to act out on his daughter rather than other 
outlets. He stated he hated himself for it. While in jail he participated in group sessions 
for sex offenders once a week for a year. After his release he participated in weekly 
group counseling for sexual addiction and at the same time attended individual 
10 Id. 
 
11 Tr. 29-30, 76-85. 
 
12 AE B.  
 
13 AE A. 
 
14 Tr. 30-33, 52-58, 84-91, 100-104. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
counseling on a weekly basis. He did this for a year. Approximately six months ago his 
counseling was reduced to twice a month and recently it was reduced further to once a 
month. He does not have the internet in his house.15  
 
Applicant’s sons are aware of the offenses. Applicant visits them once every six 
weeks because they live in another state. He must get permission and a travel pass to 
travel outside of the state and must contact his probation officer upon his return. All 
visits are supervised as part of the terms of his probation. He speaks with the boys and 
his ex-wife three to four times a week. Some people at work know of the offenses and 
some do not. Applicant is engaged and his fiancée is aware of his offenses. She is a 
foster parent to a 17-year-old girl. The foster child is also aware of his past. Applicant 
can not spend the night at his fiancée’s house and can not have any unsupervised 
contact with a girl under the age of 18. Applicant has no contact with his daughter and 
does not know where she lives. He learned from his ex-wife that she is now married and 
has a child. He can not have any contact with her while he is on probation.16 
 
Applicant stated that his problems were due to post-traumatic stress due to 
stressful deployments he had while serving in the Navy. His counselor provided a letter 
and stated:  
 
[Applicant] was trying to balance a bad marriage, a stressful military 
career, and was submerged in an under water vessel in enemy territory for 
extended periods of time.  
 
                                                        * * * 
 
[Applicant] continues to be focused on his treatment, and committed to a 
healthy life. 
 
* * * 
 
He has learned from his past mistakes, loves his family, his country, and 
refused to tarnish or disappoint either of those which he holds in the 
highest esteem.17  
 
 Applicant stated he made a horrible mistake, but it has nothing to do with his job. 
He stated he has never violated his probation, but admitted he had two incidents that 
were “under advisement.” He stated he is not unreliable, but made some bad choices. 
He is complying with the terms of his probation. He stated he is not a horrible human 
being, but made gross mistakes. When asked what his explanation was for his actions 
15 Tr. 99, 106-111, 119. 
 
16 Tr.74-76,112-118. 
 
17 AE D. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
against his daughter he stated: “My counselor has told me that some of it is post-
traumatic stress.” He does not know why he chose to act out against his daughter 
instead of other ways.18   
 
 Applicant provided copies of awards he received while in the Navy that I 
considered.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
18 Tr. 118-121. 
 
7 
 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of two charges of indecent liberties with his minor 
daughter, both felonies. He also was charged with violating a protective order and 
malicious wounding. The court found there was sufficient evidence for a finding of guilt 
and deferred adjudication. The charges were eventually dismissed. Applicant served 
eleven months in jail and is on supervised probation until at least 2015. He is required to 
register as a sex offender. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
8 
 
 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant pled guilty to indecent liberties, including touching his daughter. I did 
not find his statements credible that he did not commit the aggravated offense of 
touching his daughter. Applicant is on supervised probation for another six years. He 
has been in counseling and appears to be getting his life in order. However, subsequent 
to his release from jail he had two incidents resulting in charges of malicious wounding 
and violating a protective order. Both charges were held “under advisement” and were 
not dismissed until September 2008 and March 2009. These charges occurred while 
Applicant was on probation and a determination was made that there was sufficient 
evidence for a finding of guilt. I have considered the seriousness of the offenses; 
Applicant’s actions subsequent to his release from jail; and the fact he continues on 
supervised probation. I find all of these matters cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. Although there is some evidence that he is 
remorseful for his actions, there is still a level of inconsistency in his attitude regarding 
his offenses. He pled guilty to indecently touching his daughter, but denies he did it and 
that he was only doing what his lawyer told him to do. He does admit he asked her to lift 
her shirt up on numerous occasions. He retired from the Navy in 2000 and admitted he 
was addicted to pornography as a stress reliever and he suffers from post-traumatic 
stress disorder. I find under the circumstances although there is evidence of some 
rehabilitation, it is not enough to overcome the seriousness of Applicant’s conduct and 
lack of good judgment regarding the sexual offenses and his subsequent criminal 
charges. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 
9 
 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
I have considered all of the facts and find Applicant provided sufficient notification 
to his employer that he was a convicted felony. He expressly stated on his employment 
application the felony convictions, that he served time in jail, and was on probation for 
nine years. No evidence was provided that showed Applicant was required to provide 
this information specifically to the facility security officer. Therefore, I find he did not 
deliberately fail to divulge this information. His employer was sufficiently on notice 
regarding his felonies. 
I have considered all of the evidence presented regarding the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c and conclude Applicant’s personal conduct, that is his sexual 
offenses and his conduct after his release from jail create a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. There are some people that are aware of Applicant’s criminal 
conduct, others are not. I have considered the nature of the conduct and if known, 
conclude it is likely to affect his personal, professional and community standing. 
Therefore, I find disqualifying condition (e) applies.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy , unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
Applicant’s offenses are not minor and he remains on probation for felony 
offenses for another six years. Applicant must continue to register as a sex offender. 
The concerns under this guideline and the analysis are the same as was addressed 
under the criminal conduct guideline.  
 
10 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served twenty years in the 
Navy and deployed on important missions. He pled guilty to indecent liberties with his 
daughter and was convicted of two felonies. He served eleven months in jail and was 
placed on supervised probation for nine years. There are six years remaining in his 
probation. Applicant admitted he made a horrible mistake. He also stated he did not 
commit the offense he pled guilty to, but only did so because his lawyer told him to. He 
has supervised probation with his sons. He was charged with two offenses related to his 
family after he was released from jail. His counselor believes he has learned from his 
mistakes and is committed to a healthy lifestyle. I have concerns about Applicant’s 
judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from criminal conduct 
and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
 
11 
 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.b:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
