 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02022 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard B. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on June 4, 2007. On December 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On January 3, 2009, and on March 20, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on May 1, 2009. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2009. On June 1, 
2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for June 15, 2009. The 
case was heard on that date. The Government offered five exhibits which were admitted 
as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5. The Applicant testified and offered four exhibits 
which were admitted without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - D. The record was 
 
2 
 
 
held open until June 30, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents.  She 
timely submitted a three-page document that was admitted as AE E. The transcript was 
received on June 23, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  She has been employed as an electronic technician with 
her company since April 2005. From 1998 to 2003, she served on active duty in the 
United States Marine Corps. She separated as an E-4 with an Honorable Discharge. 
She attends college part-time. She is married and has three children, ages 9, 8, and 5. 
(Tr at 5-7, 21, 35; Gov 1; AE E at 2)  
 
On June 4, 2007, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions 
(SF 86) in order to apply for a security clearance. Applicant answered “No” in response 
to question 28(a) “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any 
debt(s)?” She also answered “No” in response to question 28(b) “Are you currently over 
90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” (Gov 1)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant has the following 
delinquent accounts: a $1,149 debt owed to an apartment that was placed for collection 
in July 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 4 at 13; Gov 5 at 1); a $445 medical bill placed for 
collection in October 2006, date of last activity on the account was January 2002 (SOR 
¶ 1.b: Gov 4 at 11; Gov 5 at 1); a $3,095 credit card that was charged off in May 2007, 
date of last activity on the account was November 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 4 at 16; Gov 5 
at 2); a $3,747 credit card account that was charged off in May 2007, date of last activity 
on the account was September 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 4 at 4); a $5,900 credit card 
account that was charged off in April 2007, date of last activity on the account was 
February 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 4 at 6); a $960 credit card account that was charged off 
in December 2006, date of last activity on the account was January 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.f: 
Gov 4 at 7); and a $367 account placed for collection in January 2008, date of last 
activity on the account was October 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 5 at 3). 
 
Additional delinquent debts include: a $580 department store account placed for 
collection in May 2007, date of last activity on the account was January 2005 (SOR ¶ 
1.h: Gov 4 at 4; Gov 5 at 3); a $5,935 credit card account placed for collection in May 
2007, date of last activity on the account was February 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 4 at 10, 
16; Gov 5 at 3); a $5,543 credit card account placed for collection in May 2007, date of 
last activity on the account is October 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 4 at 10, 16; Gov 5 at 3); a 
$4,709 department store credit card account placed for collection in May 2007, date of 
last activity on the account was January 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.k: Gov 4 at 9-10, 16; Gov 5 at 
3); a $1,916 credit card account placed for collection in May 2007, date of last activity 
on the account was July 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.l: Gov 4 at 9-10; Gov 5 at 3) a $10,946 
 
3 
 
 
electronics account placed for collection in June 2007, date of last activity on the 
account is February 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.m: Gov 4 at 14; Gov 5 at 3); a $1,510 credit card 
account placed for collection in May 2007, date of last activity on the account is 
November 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.n: Gov 4 at 7); and a $9,299 account placed for collection in 
May 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.o: Gov 4 at 14: this a duplicate of SOR ¶1.m). 
 
Applicant denied all of the debts alleged in the SOR. She denies the debt owed 
to the apartment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a because she disputes the amount of the debt 
owed. She signed a lease in 2003. After a year, Applicant claims, she paid extra to go 
on a month to month lease. The apartment company claims that she vacated the lease 
early. They kept her security deposit which is the equivalent of one month’s rent. She 
did not leave a forwarding address when she moved. (Tr at 28-30)  
 
Applicant claims all of the remaining debts are debts her mother obtained using 
her identity. Her mother used Applicant’s identity because she had poor credit. 
Applicant discovered that her mother used her identity to obtain credit in the fall 2002. 
Applicant was on active duty in the Marine Corps and a creditor called her inquiring 
about a debt. She obtained a copy of her credit report in 2002 or 2003. Applicant’s 
credit report lists her mother’s maiden name. Applicant claims she never used her 
mother’s maiden name to obtain credit. She also never used her hometown address to 
obtain credit. Her mother’s maiden name and her hometown address appear on 
Applicant’s credit report.  Her mother initially denied that she used Applicant’s identity to 
obtain credit, but later admitted it and said that she would pay the accounts. She has 
not paid off any of the accounts. Mother and daughter rarely communicate. (Tr at 22-26, 
31) 
 
Applicant did not notify the credit bureaus that she was a victim of identity theft. 
She never reported her mother to the police. Her mother asked her not to file a report 
because she was afraid of getting sued. She last spoke with her mother briefly in 
December 2008, but does not speak with her on a regular basis. (Tr at 27-28)  
 
Applicant provided a copy of her husband’s credit report, dated June 10, 2009. 
(AE D) She claims that she and her husband use his credit. They have no recent 
delinquent debts. They own their home, two cars, and do not have very many debts. All 
of their accounts are current. Her husband works two full-time jobs. After expenses, 
they have approximately $3,000 left over each month. They are current on federal 
income taxes.  They have always lived within their means. (Tr at 34-37; Gov 3 at 4) 
Applicant has approximately $40,000 in investments. She has approximately $6,700 in 
her savings account. (AE A; AE C)  
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant denies that she intentionally failed to list 
her financial delinquencies in response to questions 28(a) and 28(b)of the security 
questionnaire that she completed on June 23, 2007. (Tr at 35-37.) 
 
Applicant’s manager wrote a letter on her behalf. He indicates Applicant performs 
technical test operations on classified hardware and handles classified data. She has 
 
4 
 
 
demonstrated that she is intelligent, trustworthy and reliable. She quickly learned test 
procedures, equipment, and criteria. He notes Applicant is “people oriented and 
easygoing.” Applicant always acts in a professional and ethical manner. (AE E at 3) 
Applicant also does well in school. (AE A; AE B.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant’s credit reports lists 15 
delinquent accounts, an approximate total balance of $56,101. 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005)).  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions are 
relevant to Applicant’s case: 
 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Applicant has significant amount of debt 
that is several years old. With the exception of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, the debts 
were incurred by her mother using Applicant’s personal information. Applicant and her 
husband use his credit rating. His credit report indicates no delinquent accounts. 
Applicant’s credit was ruined by her mother. She currently has $40,000 in investments. 
 
6 
 
 
Her manager vouches for her integrity and reliability. Applicant’s poor credit history does 
not cast doubt on her current trustworthiness, reliability, or good judgment.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part. Applicant’s mother used 
her identity to open numerous financial accounts. Applicant discovered that her mother 
was using her identity in 2002. However, she has taken no steps to protect herself 
against her mother using her identity to obtain more credit. She has taken no action to 
correct her credit reports. She has not reported her mother’s use of her identity to the 
credit reporting agencies. Applicant admits that she rented an apartment from the 
creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a. She disputes the debt but has not formally disputed the account 
on her credit report. While I acknowledge the delicate position Applicant is placed and 
her reluctance to report her mother to the police, her lack of action towards protecting 
her credit from further abuse is irresponsible. For this reason, this mitigating condition is 
given less weight.   
 
FC MC ¶20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) partially applies. Applicant’s mother used her identity to obtain all of the financial 
accounts that are listed in the SOR. She did not provide documented proof that her 
mother actually used her credit to steal her identity. Her mother’s maiden name and her 
childhood address are listed on the credit report. However, this is not conclusive that 
her mother opened accounts using Applicant’s identity without her knowledge. Credit 
reports occasionally list the individual’s past addresses. Applicant has been aware of 
her mother’s identity theft since 2002, but has not taken steps to resolve the issue or 
protect her identity from further abuse.   
 
Weighing all of the factors under the specific facts of Applicant’s case, to include 
her mother’s identity theft, the work ethic of Applicant and her husband and their 
financial stability, I conclude Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list her  
financial delinquencies in response to sections 28(a) and 28(b) on her security 
clearance questionnaire, dated June 4, 2007.    
 
  Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) potentially applies in 
Applicant’s case. For PC DC ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission of her delinquent 
accounts must be done with a deliberate intent to deceive. In her answer to the SOR, 
Applicant denies that she intentionally falsified her security clearance questionnaire. I 
find her explanation credible.  
 
 The personal conduct concern is found for Applicant.  
    
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the favorable 
comments of Applicant’s manager. I considered her honorable service in the United 
States Marine Corps. I considered that most of Applicant’s delinquent debts were the 
result of her mother using her identity without Applicant’s knowledge. Applicant provided 
substantial evidence that she and her husband are financially stable. She works full-
time, raises three children and attends college part-time. Her husband works two full-
time jobs.  While Applicant could have been more proactive in protecting her identity 
from future abuse, considering the particular facts of this case and based solely on the 
whole person factors, Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised. However,  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is warned that she must take steps to protect her identity from further abuse 
and to formally dispute the items on her credit report with the credit agencies in order to 
prevent her poor credit history from being raised as a security concern in future security 
clearance investigations. Personal conduct concerns are mitigated because Applicant 
did not intend to falsify her security clearance application. Under the particular facts of 
this case and in consideration of the whole person factors, I conclude that Applicant’s 
financial issues do not create a security risk.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
