 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06497 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-
QIP) on December 26, 2007. On February 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On March 17, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on April 16, 2009. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on April 17, 2009.  
Applicant received the FORM on April 28, 2009. He had 30 days to submit a response 
to the FORM. He did not submit a response. On June 16, 2009, the FORM was 
forwarded to the hearing office. The FORM was assigned to me on June 17, 2009. 
 
2 
 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations in the SOR. 
(Item 4) 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed as a security officer with the 
defense contractor since December 2007. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married 
and has no children. (Item 5; Item 6)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts:  
a $5,110 delinquent credit card account that was charged off in April 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a: 
Item 6 at 15, 22; Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 5); an $8,331 credit card account that was 
charged off in May 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 6 at 14, 23, 29-30; Item 7 at 3; Item 8 at 6); a 
$1,898 account that was charged off in April 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 6 at 15, 23; Item 7 
at 3; Item 8 at 10); a $6,382 department store credit card account that was placed for 
collection in May 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 6 at 14, 24, 31; Item 7 at 3; Item 8 at 11, 19); 
and a $3,035 account that was placed for collection in May 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 6 at 
15, 25; Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 13). 
 
On August 21, 2008, Applicant provided a Personal Financial Statement in 
response to interrogatories. He listed he and his spouse’s net monthly income as 
$2,692.60. Monthly expenses were $820 and monthly debt payments consisted of 
$2,582.48. After expenses and debt payments, Applicant has a negative balance of 
$754.88 each month. (Item 6 at 5) 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began about four years ago. Applicant was laid off 
and a few months later his wife was laid off as well. He was unable to find a job for a 
year. During the year he was unemployed, he took online courses towards completing 
his bachelor’s degree in criminal justice. His wife eventually found a job with a mortgage 
company and Applicant was hired by the same company about four months later. They 
were not making as much money as in their prior jobs. About a year later, both 
Applicant and his wife were laid off.  His wife soon found a job. Applicant searched for a 
job and continued to take courses. After graduating from college, Applicant had difficulty 
finding employment. He and his wife were unable to pay the bills. They discussed filing 
bankruptcy but felt an obligation to pay their bills.  In September 2007, his wife was laid 
off again. She was unemployed for five months and found a job that paid significantly 
less than what she was making. She got a second job at night in order to meet 
expenses. 
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer in December 2007. His wife was let 
go from her day job. She currently works part-time as a cashier and continues to look 
 
3 
 
 
for employment. They hope to resolve their credit issues. The current status of the 
delinquent accounts are:    
 
SOR ¶1.a: $5,110 charged off credit card account. The debt is not paid. 
Applicant was offered a settlement of $4,235 or $321 a month. He and his wife were not 
able to afford the monthly payment. (Item 4 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $8,331 charged off credit card account. Applicant states that he set 
up a payment plan in July 2008. He claims that they have timely paid $50 a month since 
that time but offered no proof of payment such as bank records, cancelled checks or a 
receipt from the company. (Item 4 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $1,898 charged off deficiency resulting from an automobile 
repossession. Applicant states he and his wife have paid $105.45 per month on this 
debt. The company offered to settle the account for $900. Applicant hopes to resolve 
this debt with his income tax return. He provided no proof that payments were made 
each month in a timely manner and/or proof the debt was resolved. (Item 4 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: $6,382 credit card account placed for collection. Applicant claims he 
arranged a payment plan of $30 a month. He claims he has made payments each 
month over the phone or by sending in a check. He provided no proof of payments. 
(Item 4 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $3,035 account placed for collection. Applicant was offered a 
settlement of $3,200 or payments of $119 per month over a period of 36 months. 
Applicant and his wife were unable to afford the monthly payment. (Item 4 at 3) 
 
Applicant states that he and his wife have every intention of paying off their 
debts. He indicates they will have an extra $105 each month once the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c is settled.  In May 2009, their first mortgage lien payment will decrease by 
$170 because they will no longer have an escrow shortfall.  They plan to use the 
additional money to pay down debts. (Item 4)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
4 
 
 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); apply to Applicant’s case. Between 2006 and 2007, Applicant 
incurred 5 delinquent debts, totaling $24,756.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant’s financial problems are relatively recent. None of the delinquent accounts 
have been resolved. Applicant claims he is incapable of resolving all of these delinquent 
accounts. His household debts are greater than his income each month.     
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant and his wife 
have been laid off on numerous occasions within the past several years which affected 
their ability to pay their debts. It is not clear whether Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. Applicant claims he was unable to find work for a period of two 
years. While he took on-line college courses during this time, one could argue that he 
could have found some sort of part-time employment to help out with the household 
bills.       
 
     FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial 
counseling. While Applicant claims that he has entered repayment plans for three of the 
five accounts, he admits that he is unable to afford the payments on the two remaining 
debts. He provided no proof to corroborate his assertions that he is timely making 
payments towards three of the accounts. He admits that he and his wife have a 
negative monthly balance each month. His financial situation is unlikely to be resolved 
soon. 
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant claims he has been 
paying towards three of the accounts. However, he did not provide documentation 
which would corroborate his statement. He has been unable to pay on two of the 
accounts because he cannot afford to make payments.  
 
Although Applicant has been employed since December 2007, he took no action 
towards resolving his delinquent accounts. He claims he does not have the means to 
repay all of his accounts but hopes to repay all of them in the future. His inability to 
 
6 
 
 
resolve his delinquent accounts remains a security concern. He has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a significant amount 
of unresolved delinquent debt. Although his financial problems were aggravated by  
several periods of unemployment over the past three years, Applicant remains unable to 
meet his financial obligations as well as pay his delinquent debts. He provided 
insufficient documentation to corroborate that he and his wife have been timely making 
payments on three of the accounts. Applicant has failed to meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
   
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
