  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 08-07549 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 21 debts totaling in excess of $44,000, which were placed for 
collection. Applicant provided documentation that: five debts have been paid, two 
disputed debts were removed from her credit report, the creditor cannot locate one debt, 
and her son is current on his monthly car payments. There is no evidence the remaining 
12 debts, totaling in excess of $29,000, have been paid or are being paid. Applicant has 
failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns under financial 
considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
 
 
1
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on January 9, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On January 9, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated April 13, 2009. The FORM contained 
seven attachments. On April 17, 2009, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along 
with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. Applicant’s response was due2 on 
May 17, 2009. No response to the FORM has been received. On June 11, 2009, I was 
assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated the debts list in SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.s, 
and 1.t have been paid in full, that she was waiting for receipts for the debts listed in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i., and denies the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.q. She admitted the 
remaining factual allegations, with explanations. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR 
allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old security officer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since December 2007, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. 
Applicant is a single mother caring for three children. Applicant’s take home pay for the 
pay period ending August 9, 2008 was $1,918 and for the period ending August 23, 
2008, was $1,861, (Item 4) Applicant states her monthly expenses and debt payment 
was approximately $3,000 per month. Her monthly net disposable income (gross 
income less expenses) was approximately $750.  
 
 Applicant submitted a May 2008 letter indicating she had contacted a financial 
counseling organization. There is no evidence she entered into a formal agreement or 
individualized program with that financial counseling organization to address her 
financial difficulties.  
 
 Applicant co-signed on a truck with her children’s father. The high credit was 
$18,170 and monthly payments were $479. The truck was repossessed, resold, and a 
balance of $9,827.55 (SOR ¶ 1.l) remains on this debt. Applicant asserts, but failed to 
provide any supporting documentation, the truck debt was in a bankruptcy3 proceeding. 
In April 2008, the creditor offered to settle this matter for $3,439 if payment was 
received before March 28, 2008. Payment was not made. (Item 3)  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. 
 
3 As of February 2008, when Applicant completed her SF-86, she had not filed for bankruptcy protection 
during the previous seven years.  
 
 
 
2
 Applicant purchased a vehicle for $18,868, which was repossessed resulting in a 
debt of $13,257 (SOR ¶ 1.j). The debt continues to accumulate interest. Applicant states 
she tried to arrange payments on this debt. Applicant co-signed on a car for her son. 
The original debt was $17,839 with monthly payments of $396. At one time her son was 
behind on his payments and the debt was placed for collection, however, her son has 
brought his payments current. The most recent credit reports (Items 6 and 7) indicated 
the debt is being paid as agreed.  
 
 Applicant asserts, but failed to provide documentation, she is making $50 
monthly payments on a $180 debt listed in SOR ¶1.a. Her credit report (Item 5) lists the 
debt as having been placed for collection. Applicant asserts, but failed to provide 
documentation, the $85 debt listed in SOR ¶1.b. has been paid in full. Her credit report 
lists the debt as having been charged off.  
 
 Applicant asserts, but failed to provide documentation, she would arrange to 
make payments on the $330 medical debt listed in SOR ¶1.c. Her credit report lists the 
debt as having been placed for collection. She asserts, but failed to provide 
documentation, her son would arrange payments on the $435 debt listed in SOR ¶1.d. 
The SOR lists five accounts (SOR ¶1.e through ¶1.i) with a collection agency. Applicant 
provided letters stating four debts with the agency have been settle in full. (Answer to 
SOR) 
 
 Applicant stated she had contacted the telephone service listed in SOR ¶1.k 
($182) and asserts the creditor could not locate the debt. She stated she would continue 
to pursue this debt. No further documentation was received. Applicant disputed the 
$193 debt listed in SOR ¶1.n. Applicant’s credit report indicated the account was closed 
and refinanced. Applicant stated the creditor of the $1,847 debt listed in SOR ¶1.o 
would not accept her offer of $50 monthly payments.  
 
 Applicant owed $1,970 on the debt listed in SOR ¶1.p. In August 2008, the 
creditor offered to settle this matter for $1,182.12 if paid by August 29, 2008. Payment 
was not made. (Item 3) Applicant asserts, but failed to provide any documentation 
supporting her assertion, she pay $50 bi-weekly on this debt. Applicant denied the $575 
debt listed in SOR ¶1.q, which has been deleted from her credit report.  
 
Applicant asserts, but failed to provide documentation, she would arrange to 
make payments on the $495 gas utility debt listed in SOR ¶1.r. Her credit report lists the 
debt as not satisfied. Applicant asserts, but failed to provide documentation, the $303 
insurance debt listed in SOR ¶1.s and the $164 insurance debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.t have 
been paid in full. Her credit report lists these debts as having been placed for collection. 
Applicant asserts, but failed to provide documentation, she would arrange to make 
payments on the $110 debt listed in SOR ¶1.u. Her credit report lists the debt as having 
been placed for collection.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
 
 
 
3
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
 
 
 
4
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. The SOR asserted 21 debts totaling in excess of $44,000, which were placed 
for collection. Disqualifying Conditions Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
 
 
5
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant provided letters stating four of the five debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 
and 1.i), with one creditor had been settled in full. Applicant’s credit reports indicate the 
monthly payments on the $14,017 car loan (SOR ¶ 1.m) are being paid in a timely 
manner. Applicant disputed two debts (SOR ¶ 1.n and SOR ¶ 1.q) which have been 
removed from her credit report. Applicant contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.k ($182) 
and was informed the debt could not be located.  
 
There is no evidence of payment on the remaining 12 debts, which total 
approximately $29,000. Applicant asserted, but failed to provide documentation, that 
three debts were paid in full (SOR ¶ 1.b, $85, SOR ¶ 1.s, $303, and SOR ¶ 1.t, $164). 
Applicant asserted, but failed to provide documentation, that an additional six debts 
(SOR ¶ 1.a, $180, SOR ¶ 1.c, $330, SOR ¶ 1.d, $435, SOR ¶ 1.p, $2,040, SOR ¶ 1.r, 
$495, and SOR ¶ 1.u, $110), totaling approximately $3,500, are being paid or she will 
arrange payments. There has been no payment on three of the largest debts (SOR ¶ 
1.j, $13,257, SOR ¶ 1.l, $9,827, and SOR ¶ 1.o, $1,847), which total approximately 
$25,000.  
 
Applicant asserts two of the debts resulting from repossession are or may be 
included in bankruptcy proceedings. Applicant has provided no documentation that she 
has ever sought bankruptcy protection. The fact the co-signer may have included the 
debts in bankruptcy would not relieve her obligation on these debts.  
 
None of the mitigating factors apply to the remaining unpaid debts. The behavior 
did not happen long ago. The behavior is not infrequent. There are numerous unpaid 
debts. There is no evidence the obligations were incurred under unusual circumstances. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. The evidence of Applicant’s stated intentions to pay off her 
delinquent debts fall short of demonstrating a track record of financial reform and 
rehabilitation sufficient to permit the conclusion that Applicant’s history of financial 
difficulties will be resolved soon and will not recur.  
 
 There is not sufficient record evidence to support application of Adjudicative 
Guideline ¶ 20(b) that her financial problems were beyond her control, and she has 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant did co-sign on two cars, one was 
repossessed and payments are current on the other. Co-signing is not an event beyond 
one’s control.  
 
There is no evidence Applicant has attended financial classes, maintains a 
budget, is living within her means, or paying her debts in a timely manner. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. Applicant submitted a May 2008 letter indicating she had contacted a 
financial counseling organization. There is no evidence of a formal agreement or 
individualized program with that financial counseling organization to address her 
financial difficulties. There is no showing payments have been made on any debt.  
 
 
 
 
6
Applicant has paid five debts and her son is current on his car payments. AG & 
20(d), that she has initiated a good-faith effort to repay her creditors, does apply to 
these six debts. Applicant asserts she paid three additional debts and is paying or will 
start paying six additional debts. However, she provided no documentation supporting 
her assertion. Without documentation showing her efforts are being implemented in an 
organized or structured way, it is premature to conclude Applicant’s financial difficulties 
have been resolved or are under control. 
 
The lack of documentation also prevents the applying AG ¶ 20(d) to the 
remaining debts. A mere intention to repay debts without documentation establishing 
repayment or a good-faith effort to repay her debts is insufficient to warrant applying this 
mitigating condition.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a single mother raising 
three children. Her monthly disposable income (gross income less expenses) is 
approximately $750. In August 2008, when she answered the interrogatories, Applicant 
was made aware of the government’s concerns about her unpaid obligations. Ten 
months later, there is evidence Applicant has addressed five debts totaling less than 
$500 and her son is current on this car payments.  
 
Applicant still has unresolved delinquent debts, which remain unpaid. She has no 
specific, concrete plan for addressing or resolving her delinquent debts in the 
foreseeable future. As previously stated, her assertion she is trying to address her 
delinquent debts lacks adequate corroborating documentation.  
 
 
 
 
7
 
 
 
8
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a life time 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances a clearance is not 
recommended, but should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, she may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e -1.i:  For Applicant     
  Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m and 1.n  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o and 1.p:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r -1.u:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
