                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 08-02110 
 SSN: ---------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Several of Applicant’s debts initially became delinquent due to circumstances 
beyond his control. Recently, he demonstrated a meaningful track record of debt 
repayment. He mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 20, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On December 
16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR detailing 
the basis for its preliminary decision to deny Applicant eligibility for access to classified 
information, citing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed 
 
 
2 
 
                                           
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his 
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On January 12, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 
24, 2009. Between March 30, 2009, and April 3, 2009, Applicant received oral notice of 
the hearing (Tr. 8). On April 7, 2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice. At the hearing, 
Applicant elected to proceed without delaying the hearing (Tr. 8-9). The hearing was 
held on April 20, 2009. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered seven exhibits (GE 
1-7) (Transcript (Tr.) 11-12), and Applicant did not offer any exhibits (Tr. 20). There 
were no objections, and I admitted GEs 1-7 (Tr. 12). Additionally, I admitted the Notice 
of Hearing, SOR, and response to the SOR (GEs 8-10). I received the transcript on April 
28, 2009. I held the record open until May 22, 2009, to provide Applicant an opportunity 
to provide additional evidence (Tr. 57-58). After the hearing I received five exhibits from 
Applicant. Department Counsel did not object to my consideration of these five exhibits 
and I admitted them into evidence (AE A-E).     
   
Findings of Fact1 
 
In his SOR response, Applicant admitted responsibility for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c to 1.e and 1.h; and he denied responsibility for SOR debts in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f and 1.g 
(GE 10). His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor (Tr. 40, 47). He has 
been employed in security by a defense contractor since May 2001, and he has been a 
supervisor for a government contractor that provides security services since 2005 (Tr. 
35, 39). He supervises personnel who provide physical security at three sites (Tr. 36). 
He was selected employee of the year in 2004 (Tr. 44). He married in 1997 and 
divorced in 1999 (GE 1, Tr. 47). He has two children, ages 10 and nine (Tr. 37).  He is 
engaged and plans to marry in November 2009 (Tr. 40).  He served in the U.S. Marine 
Corps from 1996 to 2000 and earned an Honorable Discharge from the Marine Corps 
(Tr. 42-43). 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant was unemployed from February to May 2001 (Tr. 43). When he was 
hired at his current employment, he was paid $10.50 an hour, and now, four years later, 
he is making $1650 per hour (Tr. 44). The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g are paid. The 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d as well as 1.c and 1.h are duplications of each other. The 
source, status, and amount of his individual SOR debts are more specifically described 
as follows (paragraph letters correspond with the SOR subparagraphs): 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
 
3 
 
(a) Debt for $608 (SOR ¶ 1.a). He admitted he had an account; however, he did 
not believe he owed the creditor because the telephones he received were turned off 
and then turned on again (Tr. 16-17, 21). He disputed the applicability of the original 
two-year contract with the creditor because he used the telephone services for five 
years (Tr. 21-22). He telephoned the creditor about the dispute; however, he did not 
provide documentation disputing the debt (Tr. 21-22). On May 18, 2009, he received a 
settlement offer for $250 (AE E). On May 19, 2009, he paid this debt (AE E); 
 
(b) Credit card debt for $4,100 (SOR ¶ 1.b) became delinquent when Applicant 
was unemployed (Tr. 22). He used this credit card for living expenses when he was 
unemployed (Tr. 44). He thought this debt was a duplication of his debt in SOR ¶ 1.d 
(Tr. 17). When he contacted the bank, he learned the debt was transferred from the 
bank to a collection company (Tr. 24). His credit reports dated March 15, 2006, 
September 9, 2008, and November 21, 2008, indicate the account was transferred or 
sold (GE 4 at 2; GE 6 at 1; GE 7 at 3). I conclude this debt is duplicated in SOR ¶ 1.d; 
 
(c) Department store credit account for $4,926 (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant said this 
debt involved repossession of one of Applicant’s vehicles (Tr. 17). However, his credit 
report showed it was a department store account and indicated it was assigned to an 
attorney for collection (GE 7 at 5, 6). He had not contacted the creditor at the time of his 
hearing about resolving this debt (Tr. 31). I conclude he is confused about the origin of 
this account, and this debt is a department store account that is duplicated in SOR ¶ 
1.h; 
 
(d) Debt for $16,053 is owed to a collection company (SOR ¶ 1.d, Tr. 24; GE 6 at 
2). His September 9, 2008, credit report shows a high credit of $8,433 and a balance of 
$16,053 (GE 6 at 2). He made contact with the creditor in the fall of 2008 (Tr. 27). He 
attempted to establish a payment plan, but the bank wanted monthly $1,000 payments 
(Tr. 22-23, 27-28);  
 
(e) Automobile financing installment account debt for $3,987 (SOR ¶ 1.e; GE 7 at 
4). The creditor orally advised Applicant that this debt duplicates the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c 
(Tr. 29-31; GE 2 at I-2). However, there was no documentation corroborating the 
assertion that the two debts were duplications (Tr. 30-31), and I find that this debt is not 
duplicated in the SOR. Applicant’s former fiancé was using the vehicle and she was 
supposed to make the payments (Tr. 25). She stopped making the payments, and 
Applicant called the creditor and asked them to pick-up the vehicle (Tr. 25). The creditor 
sold the vehicle at auction (Tr. 25). Applicant has not made arrangements to pay this 
debt, but plans to work on setting up a payment plan (Tr. 23);  
 
(f) Debt for $896 (SOR ¶ 1.f) is listed at GE 7 at 4. Applicant denied the debt 
because he did not recognize it (Tr. 31; GE 10). At the time of his hearing, he had not 
contacted the creditor (Tr. 31). This debt became delinquent in June 2003 (GE 7 at 4);   
 
(g) Collection account for $293 related to a delinquent medical bill for care 
Applicant’s son received (SOR ¶ 1.g; GE 7 at 5; AE A). On May 4, 2009, Applicant 
 
 
4 
 
received an account statement showing the balance due was zero (AE C). Applicant 
said his most recent credit report, dated May 15, 2009, did not show this account (Tr. 
33, 34); 
  
(h) Department store debt for $3,776 (SOR ¶ 1.h; GE 7 at 4). This is the same 
department store as listed in SOR ¶ 1.c above. Applicant admitted this debt (Tr. 34). 
Applicant’s 2006 credit report indicates the account was transferred or sold (GE 7 at 4). 
Applicant had not contacted this creditor by the time of his hearing (Tr. 33-35). Applicant 
said his most recent credit report, dated May 15, 2009, did not show this account (Tr. 
33). I conclude that this debt is a duplication of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
Applicant paid the following non-SOR debts for $959 in the fall of 2008 and $66 
(Tr. 13, 20, 28; GE 2 at I-23, I-27). He also maintained his child support in a current 
status for the last ten years (Tr. 15-16).  
 
Applicant’s net pay is about $2,200 monthly (Tr. 36). His expenses are: rent-
$500; child support--$375; groceries and dining out--$250; utilities, phone and cable--
$365; automobile insurance and gasoline--$300; and Miscellaneous--$165 (Tr. 37-38; 
AE D).  His former spouse may seek an increase to $450 in his child support payment 
as it is 25% of his income (Tr. 45-46). He owns one car, a 1995 model which cost 
$2,000 (Tr. 37). He does not have any credit cards, and has not had any credit cards 
since 2004 (Tr. 38). He has $1,500 in a savings account and no 401K account (Tr. 41). 
 
On May 5, 2009, Applicant received credit counseling and assembled a spending 
plan (AE A, D). He did not provide a debt repayment plan because he is attempting to 
“clean up all discrepancies” (AE A). The credit counseling service told Applicant to 
investigate his debts and determine their validity (Tr. 41). After he determines their 
validity, the credit counseling services is supposed to help him set up a payment plan 
(Tr. 41; AE A).   
 
A member of the management team employing Applicant, described him as 
intelligent, motivated, dependable and trustworthy (AE B). Applicant saved the life of an 
employee by providing emergency medical assistance (AE B; Tr. 47-48). He shows 
strong performance and extreme competence with a high degree of integrity, honesty, 
responsibility, and loyalty (AE B). Applicant is a dependable leader who contributes to 
mission accomplishment (AE B). 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
 
5 
 
Applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the 
security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
  AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and, “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) provides, “Applicant’s credit 
report was sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case that Applicant had  
[ ] delinquent [SOR] debts that are of security concern.” Applicant’s history of delinquent 
debt is documented in his SF 86, his responses to DOHA interrogatories, his SOR 
response and at his hearing. He failed to ensure his creditors were paid as agreed. The 
government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). Further 
inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
   
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
7 
 
                                           
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) or 20(e) 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. His delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Applicant receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because his financial problems 
initially resulted because of his unemployment and underemployment after leaving 
active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps. He receives substantial mitigating credit because 
his delinquent debts “occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on [his] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” He 
established that he paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g and he paid two non-SOR 
debts. He has a plan to pay the remaining debts through a debt counseling service. He 
credibly promised to pay his debts once he establishes their validity.2    
 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant received financial counseling, and there are “clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” for the reasons stated 
in the preceding paragraph. He understands the security implications of delinquent debt 
and will scrupulously avoid future delinquent debt. He has also established some, but 
not full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) because he showed some, recent good faith3 in the 
resolution of his SOR debts.    
 
 
2 Of course, the government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation and/or additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the 
government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. Violation of a promise made in a security context 
to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and may support future 
revocation of a security clearance.  This does not imply that this clearance is conditional. 
 
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
 
                                           
Applicant did not provide documentation contesting the validity of any debts and 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. His overall recent conduct with his creditors shows he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.4  
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent debts. Nevertheless, he established the full applicability 
of AG ¶ 20(c). Moreover, security concerns are fully mitigated under the “Whole Person 
Concept,” infra at pages 8-10.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
  There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s financial conduct. Several of 
Applicant’s debts became delinquent years ago. In 2005, he began his present 
employment as a supervisor and his pay was increased. And, he should have made 
greater progress on his debts. He essentially admitted responsibility for his repossessed 
car-related debt and two credit card/department store-originated collection debts. His 
total admitted, unpaid delinquent debt is about $25,000. He showed some effort in 2008 
and 2009 to resolve his delinquent debts, but could have acted more aggressively to pay 
his delinquent debts, to seek debt repayment or resolution, and to better document his 
 
4“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether the Applicant maintained contact with his or her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
9 
 
remedial efforts. These factors show some financial irresponsibility and lack of 
judgment. His history of delinquent debt raises sufficient security concerns to merit 
further inquiry.   
The mitigating evidence under the whole person concept is more substantial. 
There is no evidence of any security violation. He is a law-abiding citizen. His current 
financial problems were caused by a factor somewhat beyond his control: (1) 
unemployment, and (2) underemployment. He paid two SOR debts. He paid two non-
SOR debts. He has a plan to pay his other SOR debts. He does not have any credit 
cards. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted).  
 
Although Applicant is only 33 years old, he has achieved some important 
educational and employment goals, demonstrating his self-discipline, responsibility and 
dedication. He served on active duty for four years, including service overseas in 
Southwest Asia. He obtained employment with his current employer in 2001; however, 
his pay as a security guard was low. In 2005, he was promoted to his current position 
and began to achieve financial stability. He understands how to budget and what he 
needs to do to establish his financial responsibility. Clearly, he could have acted more 
aggressively to resolve his debts, after receiving employment with a government 
contractor. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust him. Moreover, he has 
established a “meaningful track record” of debt payments by paying two SOR debts and 
two non-SOR debts. He is attempting to validate his remaining SOR debts. He has 
promised to pay them if he can establish they are valid debts. See n. 2, supra. I found 
his statement to be candid, forthright and credible. Applicant has demonstrated his 
 
 
10 
 
loyalty, patriotism and trustworthiness through his service to the Department of Defense 
as a contractor and to the U.S. Marine Corps. He was employee of the year in 2004, 
and saved another employee’s life while on duty. These factors, especially his past 
government service, show sufficient responsibility and rehabilitation to mitigate security 
concerns.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge 
