 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04836 
                                                            )                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on June 27, 2007. On August 19, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a hearing before an  
administrative judge. His answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on November 13, 
2008. The case was assigned to me on January 5, 2009. 
 
Applicant and Department Counsel agreed to a hearing date of March 2, 2009. It 
was necessary to continue the hearing because of inclement weather. The hearing was 
rescheduled for April 6, 2009, and I conducted the hearing as scheduled. 
      
The Government called no witnesses and introduced 6 exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 6 and admitted to the record without objection. The Government 
provided for administrative notice general information from the web site of the U.S. 
Courts on the background and general provisions of the Servicemembers’ Civil Relief 
Act and its applicability to bankruptcy, stays of proceedings where the servicemember 
has notice, and stays or vacation of execution of judgments, attachments and 
garnishments. I marked this document as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. The Government  also 
provided for administrative notice excerpts from the statutory law of the State where 
Applicant resided on the applicability of the Servicemembers’ Civil Relief Act to default 
judgments, the enforcement of liens, and the rights, benefits, and protections accruing 
to a servicemember upon call to active duty. I marked the document containing the 
excerpts from the State statutes as HE 2.  
 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and called four witnesses, his wife and three 
attorneys who were representing him in various matters. He offered a list of 71 exhibits 
identified as Ex. A through Ex. SSS. All of Applicant’s exhibits were marked and 
admitted to the record, with the following exceptions: Exs. BB and QQ were withdrawn 
prior to the hearing and were not further identified; Ex. III, JJJ, and KKK were admitted, 
although they contained handwritten notations which Department Counsel did not 
concede had evidentiary value; sections of Exs. FFF, GGG, and HHH were offered as 
legal argument and were admitted for whatever limited factual value they might have in 
this case; and facts in Ex. OO and Ex. NN were admitted for administrative notice. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on April 15, 2009. 
 
Preliminary Matter: Motion In Limine 
 
On February 27, 2009, Applicant filed a Motion In Limine1 and requested that 
one of his witnesses, an attorney with expertise in the Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Relief Act of 
 
1The Parties filed the following documents related to Applicant’s Motion In Limine: Applicant’s Motion In 
Limine for Expert Witness to Be Present During Testimony (February 27, 2009); Department Counsel’s 
Response to Applicant’s Motion in Limine (March 20, 2009); Applicant’s Reply to Department Counsel’s 
Response to Applicant’s Motion In Limine (April 2, 2009); Department Counsel’s Supplemental Response 
to Applicant’s Motion in Limine (April 2, 2009); Supplement to Applicant’s Reply to Department Counsel’s 
response to Applicant’s Motion In Limine (April 3, 2009). These documents are cumulatively identified as 
HE 3 and included in the hearing record.   
 
3 
 
 
1940 and the Servicemembers’ Relief Act of 2003, be qualified as an expert witness 
and be permitted to be present during the testimony of Applicant and three additional 
witnesses in order to clarify any facts presented in evidence that would be related to his 
expert testimony. In making this request, Applicant relied on Rule 703 of The Federal 
Rules of Evidence.   
 
Department Counsel opposed Applicant’s Motion in Limine and requested that it 
be denied. In requesting denial of the Motion, he noted that under The Federal Rules of 
Evidence, legal conclusions and expressions of legal opinions are generally not 
admissible as expert opinions. Additionally, Department Counsel observed that expert 
witnesses must offer opinions based on facts that are in record evidence. He stated a 
concern that the proffered expert witness might offer opinions based on incomplete sets 
of facts and might not address factual matters not included in Applicant’s exhibits, “and 
which cannot be reasonably expected to be presented or adduced at a DOHA hearing.”  
(Department Counsel’s Response to Applicant’s Motion in Limine at 2.) 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, the Parties presented additional oral 
argument regarding Applicant’s Motion in Limine. After hearing their arguments, I 
concluded that Applicant’s witness could appear in the proceeding as a fact witness and 
not as an expert witness. Accordingly, I denied Applicant’s Motion in Limine.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains ten allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.j.) and two allegations of disqualifying conduct  
under AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.). In his Answer, Applicant denied 
all twelve allegations in the SOR. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and employed as a flight test engineer by a government 
contractor. He has worked for his present employer for seven years. He holds a 
Bachelor of Science degree in Professional Aeronautics and is pursuing a Master of 
Science degree in Aerospace. In 1998, he retired from the U.S. military after 23 ½ years 
of service. (Ex. 1; Ex. G; Tr. 289-290.) 
 
 Applicant has been married twice. He married his first wife in 1971; he and his 
first wife divorced in 1996. Applicant married his second wife in 1997. Applicant’s 
second wife has had a career in Nursing for approximately 35 years. In 1989, she 
received a Master of Science degree in Nursing and is currently a family nurse 
practitioner. After receiving her Master’s degree, she joined a reserve unit of the U.S. 
military. She expects to be promoted to Captain (O-6) in the summer of 2009. (Ex. 1; Tr. 
71, 90-91, 128-129.) 
 
 On their personal financial statement, Applicant and his wife report assets 
totaling $1,986,000, liabilities of $815,000, and a net worth of $1,171,200. Among their 
assets are two farms, a mobile home, and two houses. Their total gross monthly income 
is $27,234, and their total monthly expenses are $13,476. They list monthly contingent 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
liabilities of $8,475. Their total monthly expenses, including contingent liabilities, are 
$21,951. (Ex. A; Ex. B; Tr. 121, 301-304.) 
 
 Soon after he retired from the military in 1998, Applicant and his wife formed two 
corporations, one to establish and operate a hardware store and the other to own the 
commercial real estate where the hardware store was located. Applicant and his wife 
were the sole shareholders, managers, and owners of the businesses. The businesses 
were financed by two bank loans with Bank X. One loan, for $360,000, was for the real 
property. The second loan, for $700,000, was secured by the hardware store business 
and other real property that Applicant and his wife owned. Both loans were guaranteed 
by the Small Business Administration (SBA) and were personally guaranteed by 
Applicant and his wife. In 1998/1999, during its first year of business, the hardware 
store had twelve to fifteen employees and made approximately $1.3 million. Applicant 
worked full-time at the business; his wife continued her full-time work as a nurse 
practitioner and worked at the hardware store some evenings and on weekends. (Ex. 
EE; Ex. FF; Tr. 35-36, 74-75, 131, 242-243, 314-315.) 
 
 In 1999, Applicant acquired two credit card accounts which he used to pay for 
business expenses of the hardware store corporation. After the terrorist attacks of 
September 11, 2001, hardware sales fell off, and Applicant experienced financial 
difficulties with the business. Applicant and his wife asked Bank X to extend additional 
credit to them, but the bank refused to do so, stating that the real property that Applicant 
had provided as collateral had diminished in value. Applicant and his wife were unable 
obtain loans from other banks because all of their collateral had been pledged to Bank 
X. The business continued to lose money, and Applicant and his wife found it necessary 
to reduce the number of employees in the business to five or six. In February 2003, 
Applicant took a full-time job with his present employer and he and his wife, who 
remained employed as a nurse practitioner, continued to manage the hardware store. 
(Tr. 35-37;75-80; 329-330.) 
 
 On June 13, 2005, Applicant’s wife was called to active military duty, and she has 
served on continuous active duty in the continental U.S. since that time. By letter dated 
June 15, 2005, Applicant’s wife wrote to Bank X, cited her call to active military service, 
and requested that interest on the hardware store loan, which was guaranteed by the 
SBA, be reduced to 6% for the duration of her active military service as provided by 
section 207(a)(1) of the Servicepersons’ Civil Relief Act (SCRA), P.L. 108-189 – Dec. 
19, 20032. Applicant and his wife also requested that the interest on the commercial 
property loan be reduced to 6%, as permitted by SCRA. The bank complied with this 
request. By letter dated February 21, 2006, an officer of Bank X notified Applicant and 
his wife that the SBA had advised the bank that the hardware store loan was not eligible 
for the 6% interest reduction under SCRA.  The hardware store business closed in April 
2006. On July 13, 2006, the commercial real estate business owned by Applicant and 
his wife filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition. (Ex. GG; Ex. AAA; Ex. OOO; Tr. 75-80.) 
 
 
2 See 50 U.S.C. app. 527. 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant and his wife hired a law firm to represent the real estate business in the 
bankruptcy. In July 2006, the law firm filed the Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition and all 
related papers on behalf of the business. It also represented Applicant in negotiating a 
consent order. Applicant did not believe that the law firm adequately represented his 
interests regarding SCRA when it negotiated the consent order on his behalf with Bank 
X.3 The bankruptcy court awarded attorneys fees to the law firm. Applicant refused to 
pay the law firm’s fees of approximately $24,000. The law firm brought a claim against 
Applicant for its fees, and a warrant in debt action was filed against Applicant on June 
18, 2008. This delinquent debt was alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i., and it has not been satisfied. 
Applicant denies the debt and believes the law firm owes him a refund. (Ex. 3 at 15; Ex. 
CCC; Ex. DDD; Tr. 380, 411-412.) 
 
 The bankruptcy court found that, before filing his petition in bankruptcy,  
Applicant had defaulted on two deeds of trust held by Bank X. As of September 27, 
2006, the payoff for the two deeds of trust was in excess of $700,000.  Applicant made 
no payments on the two obligations after filing his petition. On July 24, 2006, Bank X 
filed a motion for relief from the automatic stay under Chapter 11, which the bankruptcy 
court heard and granted in part and denied in part. Applicant was awarded time to try to 
sell the properties and the inventory of the hardware store, which he was unable to do. 
Bank X subsequently sold the properties at a sheriff’s sale.4 Applicant was responsible 
for a deficiency of $358,000, identified at SOR ¶ 1.h. The bankruptcy was dismissed by 
order of the bankruptcy court dated January 4, 2008. The debt had not been satisfied as 
of June 6, 2008. Applicant does not believe he is legally obligated to pay the debt, even 
though he personally guaranteed the two deeds of trust. (Ex. VV; Ex. AAA; Tr. 271-272, 
311, 328-329.)   
 
 During the 4½ year period between September 11, 2001 and the closing of his 
hardware store in April 2006, Applicant encountered numerous business difficulties, 
which resulted in additional financial delinquencies alleged in the SOR.  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed two debts to a credit card company, and, 
as of June 6, 2008, these debts had not been satisfied. One debt was for approximately 
$4,247 and the other debt was for approximately $5,379.5 Both debts had been charged 
off by the creditor in July 2004. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied both debts. The record reflects that, 
on April 25, 2005, a check for $378.93 was remitted to the creditor authorizing payment 
from the hardware store corporate account for one of the two accounts. The record also 
 
3 Applicant stated that “the bankruptcy was a vehicle only to get a ruling. . . on the Servicemembers Civil 
Relief Act application” to the hardware store debt and the commercial property business debt.  (Tr. 324.) 
  
4 Applicant relied on Section 706 (a) and 706 (b) of SCRA to assert his belief that the bank was not 
authorized to sell his assets and collateral at the sheriff’s sale. See 50 U.S.C. app.596. 
  
5 Applicant distinguished the two accounts: “One was the typical [credit card] that you pay off [in] full 
every 30 days.  The other one . . . was revolving.  You had a minimum monthly payment.” (Tr. 330.)  
 
6 
 
 
reflects at that in March and April 2005, the creditor gave Applicant formal notice 
amending the terms of his small business corporate account to hold him personally 
liable for charges to the account, as follows: 
 
The Company and the Authorizing Officer are liable to us for all Charges 
on the Card Account made in connection with all Corporate Cards. If you 
are a Corporate Cardmember you are liable to us for all Charges made in 
connection with the Card issued to you, even though we may send bills to 
the Company and not to you.     
    
(Ex. III; Ex. JJJ; Ex. KKK.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he learned in 2005 that the creditor was holding him 
and his wife personally responsible for the unpaid debts. He denied personal 
responsibility for the debts and stated: “I do not believe they are the debts [of me and 
my wife]. They are the debts of [the hardware store]. I attempted to pay [the credit card 
creditor] morally, as a moral obligation, until I realized that [the credit card creditor] had 
arbitrarily taken the debt and moved it to me personally.” (Tr. 219, 329-332, 335.) 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant wrote to the creditor and stated again his opinion 
that he was not the debtor on the accounts. He stated that the hardware store 
corporation was responsible for payment of the debts. One of Applicant’s witnesses was 
an attorney he had hired in December 2008 to assist him in dealing with the two credit 
card debts. The attorney stated that he had advised Applicant that he did not think the 
credit card company can validly request payment of the debt from Applicant and his 
wife. In February 2009, the attorney wrote again to the credit card company and 
disputed Applicant’s responsibility to pay the debt. As of the date of Applicant’s hearing, 
the credit card company had not responded to the attorney’s letter, and Applicant had 
taken no action to pay or settle the debts. (Ex. K; Ex. QQQ; Tr.199-203, 225-227, 393-
396.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed his state of residence approximately 
$91,000 in delinquent taxes for 2002 and 2003, and, as of June 6, 2008, the debt had 
not been satisfied. (SOR ¶ 1.c.)  In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt.  
 
 An attorney representing Applicant in his state and federal tax matters appeared 
as a witness and identified the state tax delinquencies as sales and withholding taxes 
related to the hardware store business. The attorney identified the delinquency 
attributed to Applicant and his wife as a converted assessment. Applicant’s state of 
residence assesses delinquent business taxes against responsible officers following the 
closing of a business. Under the principle of converted assessment, the state takes the 
corporate tax debt, dollar for dollar, and charges it to the responsible officers.  (Tr. 139.) 
 
The record reflects that in December 2003, Applicant, on behalf of the hardware 
corporation, signed an agreement with the state to pay the delinquent taxes, beginning 
in January 2004. The terms of the agreement were six monthly payments of $2,500 and 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
a balloon payment of $75,000. Applicant made payments of $2,500 on each of the 
following months: January 2004; February 2004; March 2004; April 2004; May 2004; 
and June 2004. Thereafter, he made no more payments. Applicant stated he made 
payments until his wife prepared to enter active duty in June 2005, but the record does 
not support this statement. He also stated that he stopped making payments because 
the corporation lacked the money to make the balloon payment of $75,000. (Ex. RRR; 
Tr. 347-350.) 
 
On June 26, 2005, Applicant, on behalf of himself and his wife, wrote to the state 
taxing authority and reported his wife’s call to active military duty on June 13, 2005. 
Relying on Section 207 of SCRA, Applicant requested that the interest charged on the 
pre-existing tax delinquency be capped at the statutory six percent during the time of his 
wife’s active duty service.6  (Ex. O.) 
 
The record does not contain a reply from the State taxing authority to Applicant’s 
request, nor does it reflect any payments made by Applicant after he sent the letter. On 
April 4, 2007, the State taxing authority served a notice of tax lien and demand for 
payment of state taxes on a bank account in the name of Applicant’s hardware store. 
The state taxing authority demand letter required that the bank levy “all available funds, 
up to the amount due, to the Department of Taxation to pay your debt.”  The demand 
letter identified the tax delinquency debt as $85,212.78. On May 23, 2008, the state 
taxing authority served the hardware store with a consolidated bill and notice to levy, 
with the notation that immediate action was required. This letter identified that balance 
due as $91,235.  Applicant estimates that the delinquent tax, exclusive of interest and 
penalties is approximately $36,000. (Ex. P; Ex.Q; Tr. 166) 
 
By letter to the state taxing authority dated July 11, 2008, Applicant requested a 
stay of the notice of intent to levy. In support of his request, Applicant cited his wife’s 
continuing active duty military service, his preparation of legal action against the bank 
which had lent him money to establish his two businesses and which had foreclosed on 
the business mortgages and sold the business assets pledged as collateral, and what 
he believed to be his rights and his wife’s rights under section 207 and section 706 of 
SCRA.7 (Ex. R.) 
 
On August 13, 2008, the state taxing authority replied to Applicant’s request for a 
stay of the notice of intent to levy. The state taxing authority stayed collection activity on 
Applicant’s wife’s portion of the account and stated that it would pursue collection on 
Applicant’s portion of the account. On January 6, 2009, Applicant authorized a law firm 
representing him to file an offer of compromise on his behalf with the state taxing 
authority and to request thereby a release of the lien. In the offer of compromise, 
Applicant proposed to pay the state taxing authority $30,000 over a period of 36 months 
to satisfy a converted tax assessment for delinquencies dating to tax years 2000 to 
 
6 See 50 USC app. 527. 
 
7 See 50 USC app. 527 and 50 USC app. 596. 
 
8 
 
 
2003. As of the date of Applicant’s hearing, no reply had been received from the state 
taxing authority to the offer of compromise.  (Ex. S; Ex. T; Tr.145-146.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed the Federal government approximately 
$88,000 in delinquent federal withholding taxes since about December 2004, and, as of  
June 6, 2008, the debt had not been satisfied. (SOR ¶ 1.d.)  In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant denied the debt.  
 
The federal tax delinquencies arose when the hardware store business failed to 
withhold required payroll taxes for its employees. The record reflects that in November 
2005 Applicant contacted the federal Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and offered to pay 
the hardware store’s outstanding federal tax debt, including penalties and interest, by 
March 17, 2006. By letter dated November 29, 2005, the IRS accepted Applicant’s offer 
and identified the total amount due as $147,514.61. The record also reflects that a 
federal tax lien was filed June 13, 2005 and released May 14, 2008, showing an unpaid 
balance of assessment of $22,354.15.  In 2008, the IRS assessed the unpaid business 
tax debt against Applicant and his wife personally. Applicant admits to an outstanding 
federal tax debt of $40,000 to $50,000, minus interest and penalties. (Ex.U; Ex. W; Tr. 
146-147, 359-362.) 
 
On February 24, 2009, Applicant filed claims with the IRS for refund and requests 
for abatement of interest and penalties accruing to delinquent employment taxes for tax 
quarters commencing in January 2002 and ending September 2005. Applicant 
supported his claims for refund and requests for abatement with the following rationale:  
 
[Applicant and his wife] were assessed penalties and interest 
during the time that [Applicant’s wife] was called up for active duty. 
Pursuant to the SCRA, Public Law 108-189, Section 207, there is a limit of 
6% interest which can be assessed, while someone is in military service. 
Also, pursuant to SCRA, Public Law 108-189, Section 510, penalties and 
interest are supposed to be deferred upon request while the taxpayer is in 
military service.   
 
(Ex. LLL.) 
  
 On February 24, 2009, Applicant also filed claims for refund and requests for 
abatement of interest and penalties accruing to his income taxes for tax years 2003 and 
2004. His arguments in support of his request relied on the rationale expressed above 
in Ex. LLL.  At his hearing, Applicant stated his intention to set up a payment plan for 
the delinquent employment and income taxes after the IRS adjusts the interest and 
penalties as he requested in his claims for refund and requests for abatement. He 
stated that he had sufficient resources to pay the principal amounts owed. The attorney-
witness advising him on his state and federal tax delinquencies stated that, based on 
his knowledge of federal tax law, Applicant would not waive or forfeit his request for 
abatement if he paid the principal tax debt before receiving a decision on the abatement 
request.  (Ex. MMM; Tr. 162-166, 362-363.) 
 
9 
 
 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed delinquent county property taxes that had 
not been satisfied as of June 6, 2008. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges that Applicant owed 
approximately $1,459 in delinquent county property taxes for 2004, and SOR ¶ 1.g. 
alleges that he owed approximately $1,649 in delinquent county property taxes for 
2005. Applicant denied the allegations. He stated that when the bank seized his 
property and sold it at a sheriff’s sale, it overpaid all outstanding county property taxes 
by about $5,000. He did not provide documentation to corroborate his statement. 
Schedule E of Applicant’s Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition lists the 2004 and 2005 
county property tax delinquencies. Applicant’s Ex. AA contains photocopies of five 
checks made by Applicant and his wife and payable to the county taxing authority. The 
checks bear the following dates and amounts: October 6, 2008: $1,012.22; September 
15, 2008: $6,397.10; September 11, 2008: $414.32 (specified as payment of 2008 
taxes); March 23, 2008: $655 (specified as payment of 2007 taxes); and January 26, 
2008: $2,110. It is unclear from the record whether any of these checks was in payment 
of the 2004 and 2005 delinquencies alleged in the SOR. Applicant stated that the check 
for $6,397 was for delinquent property taxes owed by the hardware store. He further 
stated that he and his wife personally paid the delinquent corporate taxes with the 
September 15, 2008 check for $6,397. The record contains a letter to Applicant from the 
county taxing authority, dated February 17, 2009, which states that real estate taxes for 
the commercial property company have been paid and no amounts are outstanding and 
due. (Ex. AA; Ex. KK; Ex. V V; Tr. 365-371.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant owes a creditor $1,697 on an account delinquent 
since November 2005. (SOR ¶ 1.f.)  Applicant acknowledged the debt in response to 
DOHA interrogatories. He was unable to provide further information on the status of the 
debt or to provide a receipt indicating that the debt had been satisfied. (Ex. 3 at 15; Tr. 
372-377.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed a delinquent debt of $1,075 to the U.S. 
Trustee that presided over his Chapter 11 bankruptcy. (SOR ¶ 1.j.) Applicant denied the 
debt, stating that it was not a personal debt but a corporate debt owed by the 
commercial property company which he and his wife established. He acknowledged that 
the commercial property company no longer had any assets with which to pay its debts. 
(Ex. 3 at 16; Tr. 390-391.) 
 
 Applicant completed and certified an e-QIP on June 27, 2007. Section 28a on the 
e-QIP asks: “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any 
debt(s)?” Applicant answered “No” to the question at Section 28a.  Section 28b on the 
e-QIP asks: “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant 
answered “No” to the question at Section 28b.  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified material facts by responding 
“No” to the questions at Section 28a and 28b. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.)  Applicant denied 
deliberate falsification and stated that he answered Sections 28a and 28b correctly as 
an individual. He stated that he did not, as an individual, have any debts that were 
 
10 
 
 
delinquent over 180 in the past seven years and he did not, as an individual, have any 
current debts that were over 90 days delinquent. (Tr. 391-392.) 
 
 Applicant did not seek advice from his security officer before answering the 
questions. He was familiar with the questions posed on security clearance applications 
because he had answered such questionnaires many times during his military career, 
and he was confident in deciding for himself how he would answer the questions. When 
he completed and submitted his security clearance application, he was aware that he 
had personally guaranteed, and therefore was personally liable for, the business loans.  
After he completed his SF-86, he discussed denial of his SCRA claims with his security 
officer and provided her with a letter written by a military legal assistance attorney 
requesting assistance from the Justice Department in the matter. (Ex. CC; Tr. 433-434, 
437-439.) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
11 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns.  
 
 
12 
 
 
The record reflects that Applicant experienced difficulties in meeting the 
obligations of his businesses in at least 2003, and those difficulties continue to the 
present time. While Applicant denied all ten allegations of financial delinquency in the 
SOR, the record evidence establishes that the financial delinquencies exist and that 
Applicant initiated and carried out the actions that resulted in the debts alleged. 
Applicant and his wife were the sole responsible financial agents of the two businesses 
they established.  
 
Applicant and his wife took out loans, which they personally guaranteed, to 
establish the two business corporations. A business downturn after September 11, 2001 
had a negative affect on the businesses. Applicant was unable to pay the interest on the 
loans he took out to establish the businesses. Moreover, the businesses incurred debts, 
for which they were responsible and which they did not pay. Additionally, the 
businesses were responsible for paying federal, state, and county property taxes, which 
they also failed to pay. 
   
The businesses failed in 2006. After the businesses shut down, creditors, 
including state and federal taxing authorities, looked to Applicant and his wife to satisfy 
the delinquent debts incurred by the businesses. This evidence is sufficient to raise 
security concerns under disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Several mitigating conditions could apply to Applicant’s case. If the financially 
delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might apply.  If 
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply.  If “the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply.  If “the 
individual initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts,” the AG ¶ 20(d) might apply.  Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
Applicant established his businesses in 1998. His hardware store business fell off 
after the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. Applicant and his wife acted 
responsibly by turning to other employment to acquire cash and by reducing the number 
of individuals they employed in the hardware store. They sought to have their interest 
payments lowered under SCRA. However, they allowed their business loans and debts 
of the hardware store business to become delinquent. They did not timely file payroll 
 
13 
 
 
taxes for their employees. They appeared to have adversarial relationships with most of 
their creditors and did not seek, in good faith, to pay or settle their debts.  Some of their 
actions were not responsible under the circumstances.  
 
  While Applicant admitted the debts existed and that they had been incurred by 
companies that he and his wife established and were solely responsible for, he denied 
personal responsibility for the debts and did not pay them, even though he provided 
personal financial information that established his present ability to pay or resolve the 
debts. As an affirmative defense, he asserted he should not be held personally 
responsible for the corporations’ debts. He also asserted he should not be responsible 
to pay court-ordered debts or debts that he believed did not reflect creditors’ compliance 
with SCRA. He stated he did not believe he should be personally responsible for paying 
the delinquent debts and taxes of the corporations, which were no longer in existence. 
From his perspective and in his opinion, the debts were unenforceable.  
 
In light of his financial situation, Applicant had the burden of presenting evidence 
to demonstrate extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a favorable security 
clearance determination. His assertions that his debts were personally unenforceable 
do not mitigate security concerns about his judgment and reliability demonstrated by his 
failure to timely satisfy his substantial unresolved debt. 
 
DOHA’s Appeal Board has concluded that reliance on the unenforceability of a 
debt does not constitute a good faith effort to resolve the debt within the meaning of the 
Directive. The Appeal Board has noted that “a security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts.  Rather it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
Accordingly, even if a delinquent debt is legally unenforceable under state law, the 
federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an 
applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.” ISCR 
Case No. 07-09966 at 3 (App. Bd. June 25, 2008).    
 
Applicant denied responsibility for the financial delinquencies alleged in the SOR. 
In support of his denials, he asserted affirmative defenses based on his layman’s 
understanding of the applicable law. He also presented three attorney-witnesses who 
testified about the advice they had given him. None of Applicant’s objections to paying 
the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR has been tested or resolved in a definitive legal 
proceeding. He has the resources to settle or pay his debts should he choose to do so. 
 
Applicant provided documentation to corroborate that he had paid all delinquent 
personal property taxes owed to his county. County personal property tax delinquencies 
for 2004 and 2005 were alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.g.  
 
 I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply in mitigation to 
the facts in Applicant’s case. I also conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part in 
mitigation. 
 
 
14 
 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
When he answered “No” to questions 28a and 28b on the e-QIP he signed and 
certified on June 27, 2007, Applicant was aware of the several financial delinquencies 
derived from the two businesses he incorporated in 1998. These delinquencies were 
alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h. Applicant was also aware that he had personally 
guaranteed the loans he had acquired to establish the businesses. Applicant’s “No” 
answers indicate falsification of material facts and raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 
16(a).  AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.”  
 
Several Guideline E mitigating conditions might apply in this case.  If Applicant 
“made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct his omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts,” AG ¶ 17(a) might apply. If “the refusal or failure 
to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by 
improper or inadequate advice of an authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or 
instructing the individual specifically concerning the security clearance process” and 
“[u]pon being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, 
the individual cooperated fully and truthfully,” AG ¶ 17(b) might apply.  If “the offense 
was so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 17(c) might 
apply. If “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur,” AG ¶ 17(d) might apply. If “the 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress,” then AG 17(e) might apply. 
 
 Applicant denied that he deliberately falsified his answers to questions 28(a) and 
28(b) on the e-QIP he signed and certified on June 25, 2007. He stated that he read the 
questions carefully, concluded that they applied to him personally, and thus did not 
report the corporate debts because he did not consider them to be his personal debts. 
 
 
15 
 
 
                                           
 When he completed the e-QIP in June 2007, Applicant knew that the hardware 
store business was no longer in existence and at least one creditor had put him on 
notice that it considered him responsible personally for paying the delinquent debts of 
the hardware store. He also knew that he had personally guaranteed the loans he 
received when he established his hardware store business, and he knew he had 
defaulted on those loans. He did not seek counsel from his security officer when he 
completed his e-QIP. He explained that he had completed security clearance 
applications many times in the past during his military career, and he was confident he 
knew how to answer the questions accurately. He stated that he later provided the 
security officer with documents about his claims under SCRA. He knew that he owed 
large sums to various creditors and that the SCRA does not negate his responsibility to 
pay the debts. The SCRA permits delay in payment and caps interest payments. The 
debts still exist, and SCRA does not end Applicant’s responsibility to pay his creditors. 
 
 Applicant’s answers to Questions 28(a) and (b) were incorrect. Incorrect answers 
are not the same as deliberately false answers.8 However, when his answers are 
examined in light of what he acknowledged he knew at the time, the reasons he had for 
not accepting personal responsibility for his debts, and the motives he might likely have 
to conceal his substantial financial delinquencies from the government, I conclude that 
direct and circumstantial evidence supports a finding of deliberate falsification. I also 
conclude that none of the Guideline E mitigating conditions applies to the facts of 
Appellant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
 
16 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems 
associated with his business ventures began when he was a mature adult. He was 
aware of his financial problems and contested them by denying personal responsibility 
for them. He is aware that the corporations he established are no longer in business 
and no longer possess assets that can be used to pay or settle debts. He failed to 
accept responsibility for debts he incurred in establishing and operating a business, and 
he failed to candidly acknowledge and report those debts to the government on his 
security clearance application. 
 
Applicant has taken action, albeit recent, to address his county personal property 
tax delinquencies. At his hearing, he provided documentation corroborating his 
statement that he is no longer in arrears on his county property taxes. However, these 
actions are recent and do not demonstrate a track record of satisfaction of debt 
consistently over time. It is not clear that Applicant has accepted his obligations to 
creditors.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies and personal conduct.  
 
Applicant can reapply for a security clearance one year after the date of this 
decision.  If he wishes, he can produce new evidence that addresses the Government’s 
current security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d.: Against  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
 
17 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h. through 1.j.: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   Against Applicant 
   
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
___________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
