   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:                                            ) 
                                                                     )   
                                                                     ) 
 -------------------------                             )             ISCR Case No. 08-09336 
 SSN:  ---------------- 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
                 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se     
 
 
______________ 
 
 Decision 
______________ 
      
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge: 
 
History of Case 
 
On January 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 5, 2009, and requested a hearing.  
The case was assigned to another judge on March 3, 2009, and reassigned to me on 
March 31, 2009.  The case was scheduled for hearing on April 14, 2009.  A hearing was 
held on the scheduled date, for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s 
security clearance. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of four exhibits; 
Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and three exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was 
 2
received on April 22, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
   
Besides its five exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of eight 
documents:  Background Note: China, U.S. Department of State (January 2009); 
Country Specific Information: China, U.S. Department of State (March 2009); Country 
Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2008, China, U.S. Department of State  (February 
2009); Annual Report to Congress from the National Counterintelligence Executive on 
Economic Collection, 2005-2006 (August 2006); Intelligence Threat Handbook 
[Unclassified/For Official Use Only), Interagency OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS) (June 
2004); 2007 Report to Congress, U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission (November 2007); Background Note: Hong Kong, U.S. Department of State 
(February 2008); Country Specific Information: Hong Kong SAR, U.S. Department of 
State (February 2009). 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292, at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. April 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875, at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006).  Administrative notice is 
appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well known.  See Stein, 
Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). For good cause shown, 
administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named background reports 
addressing the geopolitical situation in Hong Kong. Administrative notice was extended 
to the documents themselves, consistent with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  
This notice did not foreclose Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the 
information contained in the reports addressing Hong Kong’s current state.   
 
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues 
 
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the 
record to provide a copy of an ISCR decision pertinent to Applicant’s statute of limitation 
claims.  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the 
record. The Government was afforded three days to respond.  Within the time permitted, 
Applicant provided a copy of another judge’s decision (ISCR Case No. 08-01122, Oct. 
21, 2008).  Department Counsel, in turn, provided a copy of an Appeal Board decision 
that reversed the trial judge’s decision relative to the applicant’s statute of limitations 
arguments.  Applicant’s post-hearing decision and Department Counsel’s Appeal Board 
reversal are received for guidance purposes.  
 
Summary of Pleadings 
 
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged to have (a) parents who are citizens and 
residents of Hong Kong, (b) a brother who is a citizen and resident of Hong Kong, and 
(c) a sister who is a citizen of Hong Kong and resides in the U.S.     
 
 3
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have three debts totaling more than 
$50,000.00.   Allegedly, Applicant has not paid any of these debts. 
 
 For her answer, Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR.  She 
claimed that she has casual and infrequent contact with her parents.  She claimed that 
she and her brother have become strangers for the past 15 years.  She explained that her 
sister immigrated to the U.S when she was 20 years of age to pursue her education.  She 
claimed her sister is a permanent U.S. resident who has applied for U.S. citizenship.  With 
respect to her admitted debts, she claimed she accumulated them during her marriage 
and assumed responsibility for them as a part of her divorce settlement.   
 
Findings of Fact 
        
Applicant is a 47-year-old senior quality assurance engineer of a defense 
contractor who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and 
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings 
follow. 
 
 Applicant’s background 
 
Applicant was born and raised in the PRC to parents of Chinese descent (see ex. 
1).  She earned a bachelors degree from a PRC university in 1983 (R.T., at 51).  She 
immigrated to Hong Kong with her father in 1985 (R.T., at 52-53).  
  
Applicant immigrated to the U.S. on a student’s visa in 1988 at the age of 27 to 
apply her engineering training and advance her education (R.T., at 44-46).  Once in the 
U.S. she enrolled in a recognized U.S. university and was awarded a master of science 
degree in chemical engineering in 1992, and a second masters degree in statistics in July 
2004 (see ex. 1; R.T., at 47-51).  Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 
2001 (ex. 1).  Upon becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant surrendered her Chinese passport 
and renounced her Chinese citizenship (see ex. 2). 
 
In October 1985, Applicant married H in the PRC (R.T., at 79).  H was born in the 
PRC and immigrated to Hong Kong in 1985, where he met Applicant. He accompanied 
her on a spouse visa to the U.S. in 1988 (R.T., at 79-80).  Applicant has no children from 
her marriage.  H abandoned Applicant around 1994, and left with virtually all of the debts 
to administer (R.T., at 80-81).  She filed for divorce against H in 1997 and received her 
final divorce decree in 1998 (R.T., at 80).  She divorced H in July 1998 and maintains no 
contact with him (see ex. 1; R.T., at 62).  She does not know whether or not H ever 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen (R.T., at 82).   
 
Applicant’s mother was born in the PRC to parents of Chinese descent, and 
remains a citizen of the PRC and a resident of Hong Kong (ex. 1).  She and Applicant’s 
sister left the PRC for Hong Kong in 1989.  Her mother earned a living as a school 
 
4
teacher, while living in the PRC (R.T., at 55).  She continued her teaching career after 
she returned to Hong Kong for a number of years, before her retirement in 1997 (R.T., at 
54, 77-78).  Upon arriving in Hong Kong, she never applied for Hong Kong citizenship. 
 
Applicant’s father was born in Hong Kong to parents of Chinese descent and 
became a citizen of Taiwan by birth.  He returned to Hong Kong in 1985 (R.T., at 54), 
and was followed by her brother in 1987 (R.T., at 54).  Applicant’s father was an 
administrator when residing in the PRC.  Upon returning to Hong Kong, he became a 
door man, and was later promoted to a manager (R.T., at 56-57).  He never applied for 
Chinese citizenship.  He is over 80 years of age 
 
Together, Applicant’s parents have a small but comfortable retirement income and 
enjoy a quiet and frugal life together in a small village located in Hong Kong.  They own 
their own apartment and do not require or receive any financial assistance from 
Applicant (R.T., at 66-67). 
  
Besides her parents, Applicant has a brother who was born in the PRC, but 
applied for and became a citizen of Hong Kong following his arrival in 1987.  Her brother 
resides in Hong Kong, is unmarried, and is currently underemployed (R.T., at 57-59).  
Even though he still lives with her parents, she has had no contact with her brother for 
over 15 years (R.T., at 58). 
 
Applicant’s only sister was born in the PRC and applied for and became a citizen 
of Hong Kong following her arrival in 1989 (see ex. 2).  Her sister immigrated to the U.S. 
in 1991 on a student’s visa (at the age of 20) to pursue her studies (R.T., at 68-69, 76).  
She applied for U.S. citizenship and is a permanent resident of the U.S. (see ex. 1).  Her 
sister is unmarried and has a son under 18 years of age (R.T., at 62).  She eaned 
several graduates degrees in the U.S. and currently teaches at an American university 
(R.T., at 61, 76-77).  Applicant last spoke to her sister in January 2009 and does not 
know if or when her sister obtained her U.S. citizenship, or whether she has since 
renounced her Hong Kong/PRC citizenship (R.T., at 61-62, 75).  
 
Applicant has maintains some telephone contact with her parents (R.T., at 59).  
She last spoke to her mother in February 2009 (R.T., at 59), but maintains no e-mail or 
letter contact with either of her parents (R.T., at 60-61).  She visited her parents in Hong 
Kong in 1995, and again in 2002, but not subsequently (R.T., at   ).  Her mother last 
visited Applicant in the U.S. in 2003 (R.T., at 68).  
 
Applicant’s grandparents passed way.  Before her grandfather’s death in 1997, he 
was a prisoner of war in the PRC (ex. 2; R.T., at 65). Applicant does not know anything 
about her grandfather or other grandparents, to include her extended family members.   
 
In addition to her sister, Applicant has several cousins who reside in the U.S. 
(R.T., at 74-75).  She has little contact with any of them.  
 
 
5
Applicant has not been involved in any embarrassing or compromising incidents 
overseas, and has not engaged in any illegal activities (see exs. 1 and 2).  She provides 
no financial assistance to any of her family members (who are self-sufficient), or to 
anyone or any entity outside the U.S.  She has never served in a foreign military; nor is 
she willing to do so (exs. 1 and 2).  She has had no contact with any foreign government 
representatives or organizations since residing in the U.S.  She has no financial interests 
or obligations in Hong Kong. 
 
Applicant has no property ownership, no foreign bank accounts, no retirement, 
medical, or education benefits in Hong Kong, and no social security or any other 
received government benefit from Hong Kong or any other foreign country (see exs. 1 
and 2).  She has never had any foreign property confiscated, and s he has never 
sponsored any foreign nationals to the U.S. (see ex. 4).  
 
Applicant has never voted or sought political office in Hong Kong or any foreign 
country, and has not performed or attempted to perform duties that could serve the 
interests of Hong Kong or any foreign government. To the best of her knowledge, her 
family members residing in Hong Kong are free to travel outside of the country and are at 
no risk of coercion, compromise, or pressure by any members of the Hong Kong or PRC 
governing bodies (see ex. 2; R.T., at 83-84).   
 
By contrast, Applicant has held jobs in the U.S. and maintains brokerage accounts 
with U.S. banks.  She owns the home she resides in. She considers herself a fully 
assimilated U.S. citizen (see ex. 4; R.T., at 26), and professes no allegiance, preference, 
sympathies or alliances with any person or entity or government in the PRC, or 
anywhere else (see ex. 4).  She fully understands the importance of reporting any all 
foreign travel to his employer’s security officials. 
 
Hong Kong’s historical background 
 
 Hong Kong’s history dates back over five millennia.  It developed strong trading 
relationships with Britain in 1842 (following the First Opium War) under the Treaty of 
Nanking (see Background Note: Hong Kong, supra, at 2).  Britain was granted a 
perpetual lease on the Kowloon Peninsula under the 1860 Convention of Beijing, and 
expanded its control over the surrounding area under a 99-year lease of the New 
Territories in 1898 (id.). 
 
 
 In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Hong Kong developed as a warehousing 
and distribution center for British trade with southern China (see Background Note: Hong 
Kong, supra).  Heavy migration to Hong Kong occurred after the Communist takeover of 
mainland China in 1949.  Hong Kong achieved considerable economic success as a 
British colony in the post-1949 period as a manufacturing, commercial, finance, and 
tourism center.  High life expectancies, literacy, per capita income, and a confluence of 
 
6
other socioeconomic indicators serve to illustrate Hong Kong’s measurable 
socioeconomic achievements. 
 
 Hong Kong’s reversion 
 
 Since July 1, 1997, Hong Kong has been a Special Administrative Region (SAR) 
of the PRC.  This is important to note because of the generally recognized heightened 
risks that are associated with the PRC, and the unilaterally imposed citizenship and 
residency status on Applicant and her family members who are birth residents and 
citizens of Hong Kong before the reversion (see Country Specific Information: Hong 
Kong SAR, supra, at 5).  
 
 Hong Kong today has a population of 7.00 million (95 per cent of which are 
Chinese), and is one of the most densely populated regions of the world (see 
Background Note: Hong Kong, supra, at 1-2).  China has given Hong Kong considerable 
autonomy over its domestic affairs. The PRC has retained responsibility and control over 
foreign and defense affairs.  State Department records confirm that the PRC has taken 
an increasingly active oversight role over Hong Kong=s political developments. 
 
 Still, both the Sino-British joint declaration (1984) and the basic Law provide 
political safeguards to ensure that Hong Kong retains its own political, economic, and 
judicial systems and unique status for at least 50 years after reversion and continue to 
participate in international conventions and organizations under the name of Hong Kong, 
China (see Background Note: Hong Kong, supra, at 2-3). Hong Kong, with its quasi- 
autonomy, remains a free and open society where human rights are respected, courts 
are independent, and there are established traditions of respect for the rule of law (see 
id., at 3-5).   
 
 Citizens of Hong Kong are limited, however, in their ability to change their 
government, and the legislature is limited in its power to change government policies 
(see Background Note: Hong Kong, supra, at 3). And the PRC still retains oversight and 
ultimate veto authority over all of Hong Kong’s economic and political decision making.  
Any changes in Hong Kong’s Basic Law (such as to achieve full universal suffrage) will 
require approval by Hong Kong=s chief executive (currently Donald Tsang), at least a 
two thirds approval by the Legislative Counsel (Legco), and then the PRC’s National 
People’s Congress’ Standing Committee (NPCSC), which is by no means assured (see 
id, at 3). 
 
 Because Applicant’s parents and brother are still citizens and residents of Hong 
Kong with unilaterally imposed Chinese citizenship by the PRC’s immigration law, the 
PRC’s system, its respect for human rights and the rule of law, and its collection 
activities that extend throughout its maintained intelligence operations in Hong Kong and 
Macau, become quite relevant to evaluating any potential security risks associated with 
Applicant’s parents and brother, and to some extent her sister who remains a Hong Kong 
citizen and resident of the U.S.   Despite her more limited contacts with her parents and 
 
7
siblings in recent years, she still retains her strong affections for her immediate family 
members, which is unlikely to change in the foreseeable future. 
  
 The PRC’s country status 
 
 Established in 1949, the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) with over 1.3 billion 
people is the world’s most populous country, as well as one of the world’s fastest 
growing economies (see Background Note: China, supra, at 1-2).  Today it continues to 
undergo rapid economic and social change (growing its economy at a rate of about 11.4 
per cent per year).  Political power, however, remains centralized in the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) with little indication of any change in the foreseeable future.  
China’s 70.8 million square mile country is authoritarian in structure and ideology. The 
PRC possesses increasingly sophisticated military forces and continues to modernize 
itself from a land-based military power to a smaller, more mobile, high tech military that 
eventually will be more capable of mounting limited operations beyond its coastal waters 
(see id, at 15-17).  
 
 While not a country acclaimed to be hostile to U.S. persons and interests, the 
PRC maintains a relationship that is more competitive than cooperative.  The PRC 
operates a large and sophisticated intelligence bureau, entitled the Ministry of State 
Security (MSS) (see Intelligence Threat Handbook, supra, at 17-22).  These operations 
use clandestine agents to collect intelligence on Western consortia investing in the PRC 
who are suspected of involvement in attempts to democratize the PRC, as well as other 
pro-democracy groups thought to be engaging in anti-communist activities (see id., at 
71-74). 
 
 Based on past reports to Congress, the PRC is considered one of the most active 
collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information (see Annual Report to Congress 
from the National Counterintelligence Executive on Economic Collection, 2005-2006, 
supra).  The PRC is known especially to use its intelligence services to gather 
information about the US and to obtain advanced technologies and uses Hong Kong to 
further its collection purposes (see Intelligence Threat Handbook, supra, at 24, 27. 71-
72).  The PRC actively monitors international communications satellites from maintained 
intercept facilities, in addition to collecting information on US military operations and 
exercises.  Examples of PRC economic espionage are cited in the Annual Report to 
Congress from the National Counterintelligence Executive on Economic Collection, 
2005-2006, supra, at 10-12.  Most of the examples of illegally exported technology to the 
PRC involved high tech equipment and devices used in missile and aircraft guidance 
systems, highly sensitive weapons parts, infrared cameras and missile microchips.  
 
  As a corollary of its authoritarian roots, the PRC has never been known for a 
positive human rights record among Western nations and international human rights 
groups.  Part of this can be explained in terms of the PRC’s lack of any cognizable 
tradition for respect for developing democracies and the rule of law. State Department 
country reports on the PRC cite the country’s poor human rights record.  Its noted 
 
8
historical abuses include the suppression of political dissent, arbitrary arrest and 
detention, forced confessions, torture, forced relocations, and mistreatment of prisoners 
(see Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2008, China, supra, at 2-12). 
  
 Of growing concern to U.S. security interests are the State Department=s latest 
reports of increased high profile cases in the PRC involving the monitoring, harassment, 
detention, arrest, and imprisonment of journalists, writers, activists, and defense lawyers 
seeking to exercise their law-protected rights (see Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices - 2008, China, supra). The State Department cites a comprehensive, credible 
accounting of all those killed, missing, or detained, reported incidents of deaths in 
custody, disappearance, torture, forced locations, and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading 
treatment or punishment (see id., at 4-12).  While the PRC officially denies holding any 
political prisoners, Western non-government organizations estimate that several hundred 
persons remained in prison in 2006 for the repealed crime of counterrevolution, and 
thousands of others were either serving sentences or were being detained for counter-
revolutionary offenses (id., at 9).  
 
 In its November 2007 Report to Congress, the Security Review Commission 
describes the PRC as a country intent on acquiring and exploiting the knowledge 
developed by its many collection agents: legally, if possible, and otherwise illegally by 
espionage (see  2007 Report to Congress, U.S.-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission, supra, at 104-06).  The PRC’s concerted efforts to acquire sensitive 
technology poses a considerable challenge to U.S. counterintelligence measures.  
Recent indictments of Chinese citizens for espionage have served to highlight the 
PRC=s spying activities in the U.S. (see id.).  Violating its own 2004 U.S.-China 
agreement, the PRC oft-fails to schedule timely end-use inspection visits of dual-use 
items licensed for export to the PRC.  Better export controls can be effective only if they 
are multilateral in scope (id.).  Without effective dual use export controls in place, the 
PRC can be expected to acquire dual use technologies with military potential through the 
U.S. and other source countries.  
 
Applicant’s finances 
 
Applicant and her ex-husband owned a home in the U.S. during their marriage 
and accumulated considerable credit card debt (R.T., at 37-41).  After their divorce in 
1998, Applicant continued to live in the home, suffered from depression, and struggled to 
pay her bills without any financial support from H (see ex. 2; R.T., at 40-41).  
 
 In December 2007, Applicant moved to her current state of residence and put her 
old home up for sale.  Before the house was sold in December 2008, Applicant did not 
have much left over for paying her bills (R.T., at 70-71).  
 
 Records show that she accumulated three delinquent debts totaling more than 
$50,000 during her marriage., and assumed responsibility for these debts as a part of 
her divorce settlement in 1998 (see exs. 2, 3 and 4).  She explored both bankruptcy and 
 
9
credit counseling following divorce, but elected not to pursue either option due to 
uncertainties in her employment and concerns about the credit consequences from a 
bankruptcy filing (see ex. 2; R.T., at 38-39, 71-72). 
 
To date, Applicant has made no payments on the three delinquent debts listed in 
the SOR.  Records show that her debt to creditor 1.a was closed in 2001 with a 
delinquent balance of $28,685.00 (see exs. 3 and 4; R.T., at 42).  She has made no 
effort to contact or otherwise address this debt.  In December 2008, she received a 
cancellation of debt notice from creditor 1.a that presumably was filed by the issuing 
creditor with the IRS.  Whether this debt is treated as income to Applicant by the IRS is 
unclear at this time. 
 
Applicant has a delinquent debt with creditor 1.b in the amount of $10,677.00 (see 
exs. 3 and 4).  Reportedly, this account was opened before 2001, became delinquent in 
2001, and was charged off by the creditor in June 2005 with a delinquent balance of 
$10,677.00 (exs. 3 and 4).  Applicant has made no concerted attempts to pay or 
otherwise discharge this account since at least 2001. 
 
Applicant’s third and final listed debt is a delinquent debt owed to creditor 1.c in 
the reported amount $11,718.00 (see exs. 2, 3 and 4).  This account was placed in 
collection and charged off in February 2008 with a reported balance of $11,718.00 (see 
exs. 3 and 4).  Applicant failed to make any manifest attempts to resolve this debt since 
at least  2001.  
 
Applicant considers all of her listed credit card debts to be barred by relevant 
statutes of limitation and are no longer collectible (R.T., at 43-44, 71-72).   She cites to 
her most recent credit report for proof that she no longer has any negative accounts and 
has regained financial control of her life (R.T., at 44). 
 
Applicant has a net monthly income of $5,015.00 from her work (see ex. 2).  She 
claims net monthly expenses of $1,490.00 and a mortgage debt of $1,779.00 a month 
(ex. 2).  Her personal financial statement reflects a net monthly remainder of $1,746.00 
(ex. 2).  This monthly remainder is a little more than she reported after the sale of her 
home in 2007, but not by much.  
 
Applicant provides no evidence of her performance evaluations, endorsement 
from her supervisors and colleagues, or contributions to her community.  She provides 
no evidence of assessments from her friends and acquaintances in her community or 
civic and charitable contributions.   
   
Policies 
 
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by 
administrative judges in the decision-making process covering DOHA cases.  These 
 
10
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and 
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security 
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the 
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In 
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into 
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in 
E2(a) of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended to 
assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision. 
 
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy 
factors are pertinent herein: 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if 
the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication under the this 
Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism   See revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG), ¶ 6. 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
            The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Compulsive 
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including 
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income 
is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts.  Adjudication Guidelines (AG), ¶ 18. 
   
                  Burden of Proof 
 
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continued   
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive 
requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence 
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a 
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that 
evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences 
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the 
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture. 
 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: It must prove any controverted facts 
alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and it must demonstrate that the facts proven have 
a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security clearance.  
The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the Government to 
affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified 
information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather, consideration must 
take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. 
 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or 
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of 
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or 
mitigation of the Government's case. 
 
Analysis 
     
Applicant was born in the PRC to parents of Chinese descent and traces some of 
her British family roots from her father through Hong Kong’s historical colonial links with 
Britain. She immigrated to the U.S. in 1991 for educational reasons.  She completed her 
graduate curricula in the U.S. and became a U.S. citizen in 2001.  Applicant is an 
experienced engineer with a U.S. defense contractor.  Security issues of concern to the 
Government focus on the citizenship and residence of her parents and brother in Hong 
Kong following its reversion to the PRC in 1997, a country known for its poor human 
rights record and its engagement in economic data collection in Hong Kong and the U.S.  
Additional security concerns are raised over the Hong Kong citizenship of Applicant’s 
sister, who resides in the U.S.  And security concerns are raised over Applicant’s three 
delinquent debts that have since been written off without any tangible effort expended by 
Applicant in paying or otherwise resolving the debts.   
 
 Foreign influence concerns 
 
The Government urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s immediate 
family members (her parents and brother) who are citizens and residents of Hong Kong 
(which has since reverted to the PRC) might be subject to undue foreign influence by 
PRC authorities to access classified information in Applicant’s possession or control.  
Lesser concerns are also raised over Applicant’s sister who is a citizen of Hong Kong and 
a resident of the U.S.  
 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
 Because Applicant and her immediate family members have PRC citizenship by 
virtue of Hong Kong’s reversion to the PRC in 1997, they present potential heightened 
security risks covered by Disqualifying Condition (DC) ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign 
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a 
citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the Adjudication 
Guidelines for foreign influence.  
 
The citizenship/residence status of Applicant’s family members in what is now the 
PRC poses some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign 
influence that could compromise classified information under Applicant's possession 
and/or control.  DC ¶ 7(b), “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information,” has possible application due to 
the  presence of Applicant’s father in the PRC. Although Applicant has not seen her 
mother since 2003; nor has she seen her father since 2007, she talks to her parents on a 
regular basis.  Such contacts could create potential conflicts of interest; even though she 
has no voting or financial interests in China (inclusive of Hong Kong). 
 
Applicant and her family have roots in Hong Kong (for years a British colony) and 
are steeped in British culture, free markets, democratic government, human rights 
protections, and respect for the rule of law.  Applicant has no contacts with or interests in 
the PRC. 
 
From what is known from the presented evidence, none of Applicant’s immediate 
family residing in Hong Kong have any political affiliations with the Hong Kong or PRC 
governing bodies.  Her parents or siblings do not have any history to date of being 
subjected to any coercion or influence.  Nor do any of her immediate family members 
appear to be vulnerable to the same.  
      
The citizenship status and presence in Hong Kong of Applicant’s father poses 
some risk because of Hong Kong’s reversion to the PRC’ and the latter’s sovereign 
oversight powers over all of Hong Kong’s domestic affairs, and plenary responsibility over 
its external affairs.  The risks are manageable, though, and reconcilable with U.S. 
security interests. Applicant’s contacts with her parents are more than neutralized by the 
former’s demonstrated strong loyalties to the U.S. and manifest commitments to protect 
this country’s security interests and resist any family pressures that could weaken her 
fiducial duties to protecting classified information. 
 
The Adjudicative Guidelines governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se 
results or mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are 
citizens/residents of foreign countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable 
risk in one foreign country may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by 
practical necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for 
referencing in the supplied materials and country information about Hong Kong.  To be 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
sure, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over matters they 
view to be of strategic importance to their own vital interests.  We know that even friendly 
nations have engaged in espionage against the U.S.  (see ISCR Case No. 00-0317 (App. 
Bd. March 29, 2002). 
 
The new AGs do take into account the country’s demonstrated relations with the 
U.S. as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular relatives with 
citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The geopolitical 
aims and policies of the particular foreign regime involved do matter.  
 
As for security concerns associated with the presence of Applicant's parents and 
brother in Hong Kong (a Chinese sector that continues in a semi-autonomous way 
despite its reversion to the PRC), any potential heightened risk of a hostage situation or 
undue foreign influence brought in the hopes of eliciting either classified information or 
economic or proprietary data out of Applicant through her family members residing in 
Hong Kong is a manageable one.  None of these family members have any relationships 
or demonstrated connections with any officials or agents of the Hong Kong  and PRC 
governments that could create the basis for potential conflicts. 
 
 Applicant, accordingly, may take advantage of one important mitigating condition: 
MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the persons or activities of these persons in that country 
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the U.S.”  
 
For Hong Kong, with its quasi-autonomy, remains a free and open society where 
human rights are respected, courts are independent, and there are established traditions 
of respect for the rule of law (see id., at 3).  True, citizens of Hong Kong are limited in 
their ability to change their government, and the legislature is limited in its power to 
change government policies (id.).  Further, the PRC still retains oversight and ultimate 
veto authority over all of Hong Kong’s economic and political decision making. Since 
reversion, though, the PRC has essentially left Hong Kong to manage its own internal 
affairs without any significant interference from PRC authorities.  This deference is not 
expected to change in the foreseeable future.  
 
Applicant, accordingly, may take partial advantage of mitigating condition: MC ¶ 
8(a), “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such 
that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between 
the interests of a foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.” Further, in the hypothetical situation where Applicant’s parents or 
any of her family members residing in Hong Kong or the U.S. were to be pressured, 
Applicant’s strong loyalties and security commitments to the U.S. make it very unlikely 
that she would permit himself to be pressured into compromising classified information.  
 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
Of full benefit to Applicant is MC 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either 
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty, 
patriotism, and professional commitments to the U.S., are well demonstrated and enough 
under these circumstances to neutralize all potential conflicts that are implicit in her 
relationships with her immediate family members. 
     
Whole person assessment also serves to minimize Applicant’s exposure to conflict 
of interests with her parents and brother who continue to reside in Hong Kong.  Not only 
has Applicant become a naturalized U.S. citizen and received her advanced engineering 
degree in the U.S., but she has made every effort to work, save, and pursue her financial 
interests exclusively in the U.S.  
 
In Applicant’s case, any likelihood of coercion, pressure, or influence being 
brought to bear on her parents and siblings, or any other family members, would appear 
to be minimal.  By all reasonable accounts of the presented record, Applicant has no 
visible conflicts of interest with Hong Kong and the PRC or property interests in China 
that could be at risk to exploitation or compromise by Hong Kong government authorities 
or PRC military or intelligence officials.   
 
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's parents and 
brother residing in Hong Kong are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive 
judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to 
her familial relationships in Hong Kong (now part of the PRC).  Her demonstrated 
loyalties and commitments to protecting U.S. security interests, make it highly unlikely 
she would succumb to any foreign influence brought to bear on herself or her parents by 
PRC government or military officials.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the 
allegations covered by Guideline B. 
  
 Financial issues 
 
         Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially 
overextended as to indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide 
by rules and regulations, which can raise questions about the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information, and place the person at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent 
debts and her past inability to pay these debts warrant the application of two of the 
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines DC ¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts, and ¶19(c)) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to he limited resources following her 
divorce in 1998 and ensuing extra burdens imposed on her meeting her mortgage and 
other debt responsibilities without assistance from her ex-husband.  Faced with mortgage 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
demands, symptoms of depression and limited income, she let some of the old consumer 
debts she inherited from her marriage become delinquent.  She still has not addressed 
three major debts and provides no indications of her willingness to do so.  Applicant’s 
progress to date in regaining control of her finances is insufficient to mitigate security 
concerns over the state of her financial situation.  
 
 To demonstrate her good-faith intentions in addressing her listed debts, Applicant 
essentially relies on the availability of governing statutes of limitation in her current and 
former state to render her listed debts non-enforceable.  She cites to a DOHA decision 
(ISCR Case No. 08-01122 (Oct. 21, 2008)) to sustain her claims that statute of limitations 
bars render debts unenforceable and to that extent should mitigate any security concerns 
over outstanding debts.  However, this decision was reversed by the Appeal Board (see 
ISCR Case No. 08-1122 (App. Bd. Feb 9, 2009, and for all of the reasons advanced by 
the Board, Applicant’s reliance on statutes of limitations bars in her current and former 
states is not sufficient to overcome judgment and trust concerns that relate to her past 
failures to address her valid debts.   
  
 Based on her evidentiary showing, Applicant’s proofs are sufficient to establish 
some extenuating circumstances associated with her debt accumulations.  As a result, 
MC  ¶ 20(b) of the financial considerations guideline, “the conditions that resulted in the 
behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the 
individual acted responsibility,” has some application to Applicant’ s circumstances.  
 
         Full mitigation credit is not available to Applicant, however, based on the facts of 
this case. Neither Applicant’s oral nor written evidence reflect any initiated voluntary 
repayment efforts on her behalf on her three listed debts.  Her past unwillingness to 
address these debts with her positive income sources preclude her taking advantage at 
this time application of any of the mitigating conditions covered in the financial guideline. 
                                             
    Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities, 
among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial stability in a 
person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire trust and 
confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of a clearance 
holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, 
judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases (as here). 
 
         Whole person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the judgment 
questions raised by her accumulation of delinquent debt.  She is not able to demonstrate 
enough tangible effort in addressing her covered debts to mitigate her debt 
delinquencies, or establish control over her finances.  Without more evidence of her 
overall contributions in her work and community and her progress in stabilizing her 
finances, it is still too soon to credit her with restoring her finances to levels compatible 
with minimum levels of judgment and trustworthiness. In balance, whole person 
assessment does not enable Applicant to establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to 
 
 
16 
                                      
 
enable her to overcome appraised security concerns arising out her accumulation of 
delinquent debts. 
 
 Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding 
Applicant’s debt accumulations, the limited resources she had to address them with 
following her 1998 divorce, and the absence of corrective steps to address her old debts, 
it is still too soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to repay her 
debts and restore her finances to stable levels commensurate with her holding a security 
clearance.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by 
subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c.   
 
        In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including each 
of the factors and conditions enumerated in AG E2(a) of the Adjudicative Process of 
Enclosure 2 of the Directive. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact, 
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate 
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
       Sub-paras 1.a through 1.d:                       For Applicant  
 
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDREATIONS):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Sub-paras 2.a through 2.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusions 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security 
clearance.   Clearance is denied. 
 
 
    
Roger C. Wesley 
Administrative Judge 
