                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-07461
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Thomas A. Kruza III, Attorney At Law
June 8, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on February 7, 2008.  On October 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines H and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 16, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on March 3, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on March 11,
2009, scheduling the hearing for April 2, 2009.  The Government offered two exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received without objection.
Applicant offered twenty-nine exhibits, referred to Applicant’s Exhibits A through CC.
She also testified on her own behalf.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on
April 16, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
2
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of United States
Code, Title 21, Sections 802 and 812 which define the Controlled Substance Act.
Applicant had no objection.  (Tr. p. 40).  The request and the attached documents were
not admitted into evidence, but were included in the record. The facts administratively
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 34 years old and engaged to be married.  She is employed by a
defense contractor as a Program Manager, and is applying for a security clearance in
connection with her employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she abuses illegal drugs.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because the Applicant engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations that raise questions about her reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.
The Applicant obtained her Bachelors Degree in December 1997, and her
Masters Degree in Mechanical Engineering in May 2000.  While in graduate school, she
used marijuana about ten times, between 1998 to 1999.  She also used LSD on two
occasions between August 1999 and October 1999, and used cocaine on two
occasions between October 1998 and November 1998.  She used these illegal drugs at
outdoor festivals, concerts, camping trips and in Europe.  She has worked in a DoD
related program as either an apprentice, or on a part or full time basis, since high
school.  She obtained a DoD security clearance in 1998.    
In 2003, while traveling in Amsterdam with her fiance, she used marijuana three
times.  She also used it on one occasion in 2006, while attending a gathering with
graduate student friends.    
She began working for her current employer in September 2005.  Although the
Applicant realized that the use of illegal drugs was prohibited by law and was against
DoD policy, she used illegal drugs anyway.  She testified that her illegal drug use was a
stupid mistake that will never be repeated.  She now fully understands her
responsibilities while holding a security clearance, and how serious it is to the DoD.
She has not used any illegal drug for the past three years, since her last marijuana use
in 2006, and she has no intention of ever using any illegal drug in the future.  (Tr. pp.
59, 66-67, 70 -71, 74 -75 ).   
Since her last use of marijuana in 2006, the Applicant has redirected her life.
She no longer associates with any of her friends from graduate school or anyone else
who uses illegal drugs.  She realizes that her earlier drug use was stupid and that it has
3
no place in her life.  She also realizes the enormous responsibilities that come with
holding a security clearance.  She understands that illegal drug use is not only against
the law but against defense industry policy.  She states that she will never use any
illegal drug in the future and is confident that she will not.  She has signed a statement
of intent on March 19, 2009, indicating that if she is ever to use any illegal drug in the
future, her security clearance will be immediately revoked.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A and
Tr. pp. 65-66).     
The Applicant now lives with her fiancé, who does not use illegal drugs, other
than a one time marijuana use in Amsterdam.  They are planning to get married this
spring.  They have purchased a house together and they plan to have children after
they are married.  When she is not working, as a stress release the Applicant enjoys
exercising and playing with her pets.    
Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s supervisor, professional colleagues
and friends indicate that they have never observed the Applicant using any illegal drugs
or exhibiting the effects of illegal drug use.  In fact most of them never heard about or
even pondered the possibility of the Applicant or her fiancé ever using illegal drugs until
they were informed of her hearing before DOHA.  (Applicant’s Exhibits G through P). 
Performance evaluations of the Applicant for 2007 and 2009 reflect excellent
ratings, her work quality is outstanding, her communication skills are effective, and her
work is flawless.  (See Applicant’s Exhibits B and C).  Applicant received a promotion
dated December 31, 2008.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D).  Applicant has received several
awards in recognition of her excellence in service. (Applicant’s Exhibit T).
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24. The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25. (a) any drug abuse;
25. (b) testing positive for illegal drug use;
25. (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
4
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26.  (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
26. (b).(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
26. (b).(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
26. (b).(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16. (c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
17(d). The individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to
change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or
factors that caused untrustworthiness, unreliability or other inappropriate behavior, and
such behavior is unlikely to recur;
17. (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability
to exploitation, manipulation or duress.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances.
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
5
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes.
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”             
                                   
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse and personal conduct that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
6
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has  engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant
(Guideline E).  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude
there is a nexus or connection with her security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines H and E of the SOR.  I have considered all of the
evidence presented in this case, including the letters of recommendation, the favorable
performance evaluations and recent promotion and the other accomplishments of the
Applicant.  The Applicant used illegal drugs including marijuana, LSD and cocaine for
the most part in graduate school.  This was a stupid and childish thing to do.  Since
2006, she has not used any illegal drugs and has no intentions of ever using any illegal
drug again.  She is ashamed and remorseful for her misconduct in the past.  She has
matured since graduate school, and no longer associates with illegal drug users.  She
has signed a statement of intent indicating that she will not use illegal drugs in the future
and if she does, her security clearance will be immediately revoked.  This further
demonstrates her commitment to a drug free lifestyle.
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions, 25(a) any drug
abuse, 25(b) testing positive for illegal drug use, and 22(g) any illegal drug use after
being granted a security clearance apply.  Mitigating Conditions 26.(b) a demonstrated
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 26.(b).(1) disassociation from drug-
using associates and contacts;26.(b).(3) an appropriate period of abstinence, and
26(b)(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any
violation applies.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline H, Drug
Involvement. 
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Conditions,16(c). credible
adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as
a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information applies.  However, Mitigating Conditions, 17(d). the
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the
behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that
caused untrustworthiness, unreliability or other inappropriate behavior, and such
behavior is unlikely to recur and 17. (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce
or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress also apply.
Consequently, I find for the Applicant under Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 34 years old, highly
educated, intelligent, successful and a well respected employee of the defense industry
7
who has held a security clearance for over ten years.  She has stopped using illegal
drugs, recently been promoted on the job, is getting married and starting a family soon.
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth above, when
viewed under all of the guidelines as a whole, support a whole person assessment of
good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, a willingness to comply with rules and
regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may  properly
safeguard classified information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that she is trustworthy, and that she meets the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information at this time.  Accordingly, I
find for the Applicant under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct).
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing her request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence
supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations
expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.                                                                   
                                                     
  FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
