  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition to the Executive
Order and Directive, this case is adjudicated under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December
29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1,
2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.
The Directive is pending revision or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is
dated after the effective date.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-07803
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: James L. DelSordo, Esquire
 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on January 9, 2009. The SOR is equivalent to
an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues in
this case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations, Guideline J for criminal
 Because I am deciding this case against Applicant based on Guideline E, the findings of fact are limited to2
those allegations. 
2
conduct, Guideline G for alcohol consumption, and Guideline E for personal conduct
(falsification). 
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR was received on February 6, 2009, and he
requested a hearing. The hearing took place as scheduled on May 5, 2009. The
transcript (Tr.) was received on May 13, 2009. For the reasons discussed below, this
case is decided for Applicant.
Findings of Fact
Applicant replied to the SOR allegations as follows: (1) he denied the financial
considerations allegations because the five debts in question had been paid; (2) he
admitted the eight allegations of criminal conduct; (3) his answers to the alcohol
consumption allegations were mixed; and (4) he denied the two falsification allegations
and attributed the matter to accidental oversight. Based on the record evidence as a
whole, the following facts are established by substantial evidence.2
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is currently
employed as a Java developer. He is seeking to obtain an industrial security clearance
for the first time.  
In May 2005, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for Public Trust
Positions (Standard Form (SF) 85P) as well as a Supplemental Questionnaire for
Selected Positions (SF 85P–S) (Exhibit 1). The supplemental required him to provide
information about his use of illegal drugs and drug activity. In response to Question
3a—which asked whether since of age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter,
have you illegally used any controlled substance or prescription drugs—Applicant
responded in the affirmative. He then listed that he had used marijuana most every day
from October 1997 to June 1998, and had used ecstasy from December 1998 to May
2002.
Two years later in September 2007, Applicant completed a security clearance
application (Exhibit 2). It also required him to provide information about his use of illegal
drugs and drug activity. In response to Question 24a—which asked whether since of
age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any
controlled substance or prescription drugs—Applicant responded in the affirmative. He
then listed a single use of marijuana in June 2004 and a single use of ecstasy in
November 2004. In addition, he provided the following comments about his illegal drug
use:
This is past the 7 year mark but I used to smoke marijuana every day for
about 5-6 months my senior year in high school. I have tried ecstasy 6 or
7 times but only once in the last seven years. I have also tried acid twice
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
3
and shrooms once longer than 7 years ago. This is the extent of all the
drug experimentation I have done (Exhibit 2 at 35, emphasis added).
An interview was conducted in October 2007 to discuss Applicant’s financial,
criminal, drug, and alcohol-related issues (Exhibit 3). For drugs, the report of the
interview is limited to his ecstasy use and it does not discuss marijuana. In the
interview, Applicant admitted using ecstasy about six times during the period of
September 2002 to November 2004, when he was a college student. 
In March 2008, Applicant replied to the agency’s interrogatories concerning
alcohol consumption, drugs, criminal conduct, and finances (Exhibit 3). In response to a
broad-based question about his use of drugs, Applicant replied as follows: (1) he used
ecstasy a total of six times from September 2002 to November 2004; (2) he used
marijuana most every day from October 1997 to April 1998; and (3) he used acid and
mushrooms three times from October 1997 to April 1998. 
In his hearing testimony, he admitted that he used ecstasy about six times from
September 2002 to November 2004 (Tr. 51, 54). And he admitted using marijuana in
June 2004 (Tr. 51–52). 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes5
any existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 10–12 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions).  
4
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Personal conduct under Guideline E  includes issues of false statements and14
credible adverse information that may not be enough to support action under any other
guideline. In particular, a security concern may arise due to:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
 Revised Guidelines at 10.15
 DC 1 is the “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security16
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness,
or award fiduciary responsibilities.”
5
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  15
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
The issues here are the truthfulness of Applicant’s answers to questions about
his illegal drug use on the supplemental and the security-clearance application. For the
2005 supplemental, the allegation is that his answer is false because he omitted his
marijuana use in June 2004 and his use of ecstasy until November 2004. For the 2007
security-clearance application, the allegation is that his answer is false because he
omitted his ecstasy use on six occasions between September 2002 and November
2004. He contends his incorrect answers were due to accident or oversight. 
His contentions and explanations are not credible. It is too difficult to believe that
his omission of September 2002 to November 2004 ecstasy use was due to accident or
oversight when he completed and signed the supplement in May 2005. Instead, a
reasonable conclusion is that Applicant deliberately omitted the information by
understating his ecstasy use, because he had to know that the recent use of ecstasy
could be a problem. The same goes for his marijuana use in June 2004. Concerning the
2007 security-clearance application, it is also too difficult to believe that his omission of
the full extent of his ecstasy use was due to accident or oversight. Instead, a reasonable
conclusion is that Applicant deliberately omitted the information by understating his
ecstasy use when he reported a single use in November 2004. Indeed, in his additional
comments in response to Question 24a, he pointed out that he had use ecstasy once in
the last seven years. Yet one month later in the October 2007 interview he reported
using ecstasy six times from September 2002 to November 2004. For these reasons,
the record evidence supports a conclusion that he deliberately omitted, concealed, or
falsified material facts about his use of illegal drugs.   16
All of the MC under Guideline E have been reviewed and none apply in
Applicant’s favor. Making false statements to the federal government during the
security-clearance or similar process is serious misconduct, and it is not easily
explained away, extenuated, or mitigated. Applicant’s attempts to reconcile his
contradictory statements were not persuasive. Accordingly, Guideline E is decided
against Applicant. 
6
I did not discuss the allegations under Guidelines F, J, and G, because any
favorable findings on those allegations will not change the ultimate outcome in light of
my adverse findings under Guideline E. In this regard, the principle of judicial economy
refers to the practice of a court declining to decide one or more claims in a case on the
grounds that it has decided other claims that are sufficient to decide the case and
satisfy the parties. Although this is an administrative proceeding and not a court of law,
the same logic and reasoning should apply here because addressing the other
allegations will not change the ultimate outcome, and the law, to include the DoD
Directive, does not require a futile or pointless act. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E. Applicant did not meet
his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching
this conclusion, the whole-person concept (to include his favorable character witnesses)
was given due consideration and that analysis does not support a favorable decision.
This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 4, Guideline E: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 4.a–4.b:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
