KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s finding that Applicant knowingly falsified his security clearance
application is sustainable.  There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the
record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-09111.a1
DATE: 06/15/2009
DATE: June 15, 2009
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-09111
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On November 24, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct)  of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided on the written record.  On March 31,
2009, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Rita C. O’Brien denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
In his appeal brief, Applicant claims that the record indicates the presence of two tax liens in the amounts of1
$20,000 and $3,000.  
Applicant’s arguments on appeal specifically address only the SOR allegation dealing with falsification of the2
tax liens.  Another SOR allegation alleged falsification regarding past due debts more than 90 or 180 days delinquent.
Even making allowances for his pro se status, Applicant does not address this allegation on appeal.  There is no
presumption of error below.  The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is therefore sustainable on her resolution
of the allegation of falsification about past due debts alone.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether certain findings of fact made by
the Judge, including the finding that Applicant falsified answers on a security clearance application,
are supported by the record, and (2) whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
Applicant  contends that the Judge made unsupportable findings of fact, including  a finding
that Applicant had a 21-year-old son and including inaccurate details regarding the status of federal
tax liens.  The record indicates that Applicant has two children, both girls, who are listed in
Applicant’s 2008 security clearance application.  The Judge cited this documentary evidence when
making the finding that Applicant had two children, a boy and a girl.  The Board notes that the name
of one of the girls could be misconstrued as a masculine name.  This error on the part of the Judge
is harmless.  Applicant also claims that the Judge’s finding that Applicant incurred two separate
federal tax liens in the amounts of $15,000 and $21,000 is erroneous.   After a review of the record1
evidence, the Board concludes that the Judge’s findings regarding the tax liens are sustainable.
Applicant argues on appeal that he did not falsify his 2008 security clearance application.
He specifically argues that the tax liens that are the subject of one of the falsification allegations do
not appear on a May, 2009 credit report which he attached to his appeal brief.  The 2009 credit report
is new evidence, which the Board cannot consider on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Moreover, the
contents of a May 2009 credit report have no bearing on the state of Applicant’s finances in April
2008, when he completed his security clearance application, nor do they have any bearing on
Applicant’s knowledge or state of mind at the time he completed the security clearance application.
Applicant also argues that the financial events that were the subject of the falsification allegations
took place in 1998, 1999, and 2000, and were thus beyond the 7-year limit imposed by the questions
he supposedly provided false answers to.  A review of the record reveals that the underlying federal
tax delinquencies that led to the imposition of tax liens took place in 1998, 1999, and 2000.  The
liens themselves, however, which were the subject of the question on the security clearance
application, date from 2002 and 2004.
As mentioned by the Judge, the record contains evidence that Applicant admitted to a security
investigator in July 2008 that he did not disclose derogatory information about his finances on the
security clearance application because he did not think the debts or the liens would appear on his
credit report.  The Judge reasonably treated this statement as an admission supportive of a conclusion
that Applicant had the requisite intent to hide information from the government.  Applicant has failed
to demonstrate that the Judge’s finding of falsification was unsupportable.  2
Applicant states that the Judge’s decision is misleading because it focuses on isolated
incidents of his past, and does not look at his full background or all of the “federal documentation”
(unspecified) that exists in the case.
There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge has considered all the record evidence unless
he or she states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).  That
presumption is not overcome in this case, principally because Applicant does not indicate with any
meaningful specificity what portions of the record the Judge failed to consider.
The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a
whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  An applicant’s disagreement with
the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in
a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3
(App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a lengthy and serious history of not meeting
financial obligations.  At the time of the close of the record, Applicant still had substantial delinquent
debts.  In light of the foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial
problems were still ongoing.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-07747 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul.3, 2007).  The
Judge also reasonably concluded that the Applicant hade provided false answers about his financial
history to the government.  The Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against
the length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions and whole-person factors.  She found in favor of Applicant as to one
of the factual allegations listed in the SOR.  However, she reasonably explained why the evidence
which Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s security
concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant
evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for her decision, “including a ‘rational connection
between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfs. Ass’n of the United States v.
State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v.
United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  Therefore, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security
clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple       
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
