                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 08-06023 
 SSN: ---------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Emilo Jaksetic, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) and is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen who has lived in the United States since 1988. Her parents are citizens and 
residents of PRC. Her brother is a citizen and resident of the PRC. In 2006, she 
purchased a condominium for her parents for $60,000. She visited the PRC in 2009, 
2007, 2004 and 1994 for two weeks. Applicant has not mitigated the government’s 
security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 3, 2009, detailing security 
concerns under foreign influence. 
 
 On February 25, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. 
On April 30, 2009, I was assigned the case. On May 7, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing, which was held on June 4, 2009. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on 
her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through E, which were admitted into evidence. 
One witness also testified on her behalf. On June 12, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was 
received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the PRC. The attached documents were not admitted into 
evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) I─XV. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a-f of 
the SOR. She also provided additional information to support her request for a security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old senior information technology consultant who has 
worked for a defense contractor since May 2000, and is seeking to maintain a security 
clearance. Her second line supervisor has daily contact with Applicant and has been 
impressed by Applicant’s exemplary work and her integrity. She produces quality work 
without missing a deadline (AE E). Her dedication to her job and her loyalty over the 
years is without question. She delayed a trip to China on one occasion so that she could 
complete a work project. She is the best person that he has ever worked with in support 
of the client (Tr. 74). Applicant is a kind, intelligent person who is always willing to put 
forth extra efforts to ensure tasks are completed on time, as well as, help others with 
tasks when needed. Applicant is a team player. She greatly contributes to the success 
of the company by sharing technical knowledge (AE B). She is highly respected by her 
peers. Applicant is described as a reliable, skilled and honest person. Her supervisor is 
confident that she is qualified to maintain a secret level security clearance. He also 
believes that her loyalty is to the U.S. (Tr. 78). 
 
Applicant was born and raised in the PRC and came to the U.S. in 1988. She 
attended a Chinese university and received a degree in electronics. After obtaining her 
degree, she worked for a university in China from April 1984 until December 1988 (Tr. 
 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
49). In June 1988, she married her husband in China. She entered the U.S. on a visa 
(spouse) in 1988. She and her husband have a daughter who was born in May 1991. 
From 1995 to 1998, she studied at an American University obtaining a degree in 
computer science (GE 1). In June 2001, Applicant became a U.S. citizen (Tr. 53).  
 
 Applicant’s husband was born in the PRC. In 1986, he came to the U.S. on a 
student visa to study mathematics (Tr. 50). He became a naturalized citizen of the U.S. 
in 2000. Her husband works for a large American company (GE 2). Applicant and her 
husband live together with their daughter in their U.S. home. Her husband’s parents are 
deceased (Tr. 54). Applicant’s husband visited his family in China when his parents 
were alive (Tr. 68). He has also gone to the PRC for an educational conference as part 
of his work (Tr. 69). 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in China and live in the PRC. Her father, age 76, is 
a retired member of a Chinese Opera company and her mother, age 71, is also retired 
from the Chinese Opera (Tr. 56). Her father is ill and has been hospitalized several 
times over the past year. Applicant usually maintains contact with her parents by 
telephone twice a month but it could be more frequent if her father is not well. Her 
parents currently live in a small apartment.  
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of the PRC. He is 39 years old. He 
works for a film company. Applicant does not know the name of the company. She 
contacts her brother by telephone approximately five to six times a year.  She does visit 
with him when she is in China visiting her parents. She also corresponds by email with 
him on occasion (Tr. 58). 
 
Since coming to the U.S. Applicant traveled to the PRC to visit her parents in 
April 1994, June 2004, March 2007, and March 2009. She always reports her trips to 
her employer (AE A). Applicant’s visits are usually two or three weeks in length. She 
stays with her parents in their apartment. When she visits with them she has sometimes 
visited with former colleagues from the university (Tr. 60).   
 
 In August 2006, Applicant purchased a condominium for her parents but she did 
not travel to PRC to do so. She sent her mother the money ($60,000) and her mother 
represented her. Applicant is the listed owner of the condominium. She pays all 
expenses. She does not have a Chinese bank account. She sends money through her 
U.S. account to her mother who handles the bills.  Her parents have not moved into the 
condominium due to her father’s need to be closer to the hospital. The condominium is 
currently empty (Tr. 62). Applicant’s mother hopes to move into the condominium at 
some time in the future.  
 
 Applicant and her husband own a home in the U.S. The current real estate value 
of the property is $659,520. She and her husband have a retirement portfolio. As of May 
2009, the value was approximately $320,000 (AE C). They also have $140,000 in 
savings. They have approximately $430,000 in equity in their house in the U.S., which is 
 
 
 
4
                                                          
their residence. They own no property outside the U.S. except for the condominium 
purchased for her parents (Tr.71)  
 
China 
 
The Peoples Republic of China (the PRC) is a repressive, totalitarian government 
with foreign policy goals antithetical to the U.S. However, the PRC has cooperated with 
the U.S. in the global war on terrorism in recent years. Its authoritarian government is 
dominated by the Chinese Communist Party.2 The PRC possesses large and 
increasingly sophisticated military forces, which include strategic nuclear weapons and 
missiles. 3 In foreign relations, the PRC and the U.S. have been rivals since the Cold 
War, with particular disagreement on the status of Taiwan. The PRC continues to resist 
what it considers U.S. superpower dominance, despite improving economic relations.4 
 
 The PRC has an active, effective intelligence service that targets U.S. 
intelligence and economic information, and operates against its citizens in the U.S.5 The 
PRC obtains access to restricted technology through industrial espionage and the PRC 
operates an aggressive clandestine effort to acquire additional technologies. This is 
such a problem that the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials have rated 
the PRC’s espionage and industrial theft activities as the leading threat to the security of 
U.S. technology.6 
 
The PRC has a poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political 
dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, 
torture, and mistreatment of prisoners.7 PRC authorities monitor telephone 
conversations, e-mail, text messaging, and Internet communication, open and censor 
mail, monitor and enter residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, 
and fax machines. All hotels have a sizable internal security presence and hotel 
guestrooms are sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary material.8 
 
2 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: China, dated January 2009 (Background Note on 
China), at 1-2. 
 
3 Id., p. 13-14. 
  
44 Id., p. 14 -17. 
   
5 Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Intelligence Threat Handbook [Unclassified/For Official Use 
Only] (Intelligence Threat Handbook), dated June 2004, at 17.  
 
6 U.S – China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2007 Report to Congress of the U.S – 
China Economic and Security Review Commission, dated November 2007, at 104.  
  
7 Background Note on China, at 7-8.  See U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices – 2007, China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau), dated March 11, 2008, at 1-6.  
 
8 Id., at 8.  
 
 
 
 
5
 Under PRC law, citizens who become naturalized citizens of other countries lose 
their PRC citizenship. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
 
 
6
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG & 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual=s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(c) counterintelligence information, that may be classified, indicates that 
the individual=s access to protected information may involve unacceptable 
risk to national security; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if the potential for adverse foreign influence or duress 
exists; 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation;   
 
 
 
 
7
                                                          
(f) failure to report, when required, association with foreign national; 
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence service; 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nations from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; [and] 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country.  
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of the PRC. Her brother is a citizen 
and resident of the PRC. Applicant maintains contact with her parents by telephone 
usually twice a month. Although, she acknowledged that it could be more frequent if her 
father is ill. She also maintains contact with her brother by phone perhaps six times a 
year. She sometimes corresponds with him by email. She stayed with her parents when 
she visited the PRC in 1994, 2004, 2007, and March 2009. She also sees her brother 
when she visits the PRC.  
 
 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States.  
 
However, the complicated, competitive relationship of the PRC with the United 
States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that her relationship with her relatives living in the PRC and her relatives in 
the U.S. with close relationships to family members living in the PRC does not pose a 
security risk and she is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the 
United States and her family living in the PRC.9 With its mixed human rights record, and 
9 The Appeal Board has articulated a “heightened risk” or “very heavy burden” in People’s 
Republic of China (PRC) cases because of that country’s hostility to the United States and aggressive 
intelligence collection efforts. See ISCR Case No. 06-24575 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007) (articulating 
“very heavy burden” standard and reversing grant of clearance in case involving family members living in 
 
 
 
8
                                                                                                                                                                                          
political, economic and military rivalry with the United States, it is conceivable that the 
PRC would target any PRC citizen or former citizen living in the United States in an 
attempt to gather valuable information from the United States. 
 
China is a country whose human rights record is dismal and the potential for 
abuse is high. Applicant’s familial relationship with citizens and residents of China 
creates a heightened risk of potential exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure 
or coercion. There is evidence that the PRC intelligence operatives seek classified or 
economic information from U.S. businesses and/or government agencies. Applicant’s 
connections to her family members create a potential conflict of interest because these 
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a possible security concern about her desire 
to help these relatives living in the PRC by providing classified information.  
 
Applicant has travelled to the PRC on various occasions to visit her family. Her 
last visit was in March 2009. She has also seen former colleagues on several 
occasions.  
 
Applicant owns property in the PRC. In August 2006, she purchased a 
condominium so that her parents would have a larger place to live. Although they are 
not living in the condominium at the present time, the hope is that her mother would live 
there in the future. The condominium purchase price was $60,000. The condominium is 
to benefit her parents. This could provide another point of pressure that PRC officials 
might attempt to exploit. 
 
 Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable 
conditions that could raise a security concern, AG & 7(a), AG 7(b) and AG & 7(e) apply.  
 
AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
 
the PRC); ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4-5 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008); ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4-5 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2008). 
 
 
 
9
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority;  
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; [and] 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
 AG & 8(a) and (c) do not apply to Applicant’s parents and brother. She has a 
close relationship with her family. She maintains phone contact with her parents at least 
twice a month and email and telephone contact with her brother about six times per 
year. She has travelled to China on four occasions since coming to the U.S. in 1988. 
Her last visit was only a few months ago in March 2009. Applicant has a husband and a 
daughter in the U.S. but has an emotional bond with her family in China. Applicant is a 
naturalized citizen; however, there is a heightened risk due to her family ties to China. 
Unfortunately, China is a country that causes concern in the area of potential 
exploitation and coercion which makes Applicant vulnerable. Her contact with her family 
cannot be construed as minimal. This creates a potential conflict of interest.    
 Applicant’s relationship with her parents and brother and the nature of the PRC 
Government and its complicated and sometimes contentious relationship to the United 
States, all weigh against mitigating security concerns. See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 
2, 3 n.2 (App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with siblings in PRC “once every two 
or three months” not to be casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 4 
(App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a total of 
about 20 times per year not casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 
(App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four or 
five months not casual and infrequent). Here, Applicant’s contact with her family is not 
casual or infrequent. 
 Applicant’s deep relationship with her daughter and her strong connections to the 
United States partially mitigate foreign interest security concerns under 8(b). Although 
Applicant has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [she] 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest” the 
foreign influence concern related to PRC is too great under all the facts and 
circumstances.  Her daughter is a U.S. citizen who resides in the U.S. Her husband is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. She and her husband have lived in the U.S. since 1988. 
Applicant has worked for her government contractor with dedication and distinction. She 
has substantial property and investments in the United States, and has had a security 
 
 
 
10
clearance for a number of years. She has no desire to return to live in the PRC. She is a 
loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen. She has provided letters and witness statements to 
corroborate her loyalty and trustworthiness. 
 Applicant has a condominium in the PRC valued at $60,000. She intends for this 
condominium to be used by her parents. While Applicant has substantial property and 
investments in the U.S., the condominium could be used to pressure or manipulate her 
parents. AG 8(f) does not fully apply in this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to the PRC and the heavy 
burden an Applicant carries when she has family members in a foreign country.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning the PRC must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in the PRC. The PRC has a mixed to poor human rights record. 
The PRC is one of the most aggressive nations in the collection of U.S. intelligence and 
sensitive economic information.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1988. She became a U.S. citizen in 
2001. Her husband and her daughter live with her in the U.S. She has worked for a 
defense contractor for a number of years. She is described as reliable and honest. She 
 
 
 
11
                                                          
performs her job in an exemplary manner. She has held a security clearance with no 
adverse results for a number of years. She has substantial property and connections to 
the U.S. She was candid and credible in describing a loyalty to the U.S. Her employer 
highly recommends the maintaining of her security clearance. She is a kind and caring 
daughter and sister.   
 
Unfortunately, the totality of the circumstances in this case does not weigh in 
favor of Applicant. Given Applicant’s family ties to her parents and her brother in the 
PRC, the frequency of her contact, her visits to the PRC and her property in the country, 
I cannot find that there is not a heightened risk with respect to the PRC. Applicant 
presents a difficult position given the fact that her family is in the PRC. 
 
After carefully weighing the evidence of her connections to PRC, and to the 
United States, I conclude Applicant has not carried her burden of fully mitigating the 
foreign influence security concerns. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole person factors”10 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is not eligible for access to classified 
information. 
 
I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I find 
that there is potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or exploited because her 
parents and brother live in the PRC. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence 
security concerns. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
10See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
 
 
12
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
NOREEN A. LYNCH 
Administrative Judge 
