 
 
 
 
1
                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE   
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-04728 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
On September 27, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 18, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Appellant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on or about December 19, 2008, and requested a 
hearing.  DOHA assigned the case to me on February 27, 2009, and issued a Notice of 
 
 
 
 
2
Hearing on April 28, 2009. The case was heard on May 12, 2009, as scheduled.  
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through G into 
evidence without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until 
May 27, 2009, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. On May 
26, 2009, Applicant submitted exhibits that I marked as AE H through M, and admitted 
into the record without objection by the Government. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on May 21, 2009.                                                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations contained in the Paragraph 1 of SOR, except 
Paragraphs 1.d and 1.h. He denied the allegations contained in Paragraph 2 of the 
SOR.  His admissions are incorporated into the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and married three times. He has two children from his 
first marriage. He was married from December 2001 to August 2007 to his second wife. 
They do not have children. He married his present wife in November 2008 and has two 
step-children. He enlisted in the U. S. Army in June 1988 and was medically discharged 
in February 2001 due to an injury. He was a staff sergeant (E-6) and taught nuclear, 
biological and chemical warfare to the soldiers. (Tr. 21-22)   
 
 After leaving the Army, Applicant was unemployed for a few months. He then 
worked for a department store and other private companies before beginning his current 
civilian position in July 2004 with a battle command training program for the Army.  He 
is a computer system’s administrator.  He has held a Secret security clearance for the 
last five years. Applicant’s program director supports his request for a security 
clearance. He wrote, Applicant “is a solid, strong employee; one that I count on to 
assume the responsibility for the hard projects. He has consistently demonstrated his 
reliability in the context of this contract for at least the six years that I have been in 
charge. . . . As for his trustfulness and honesty, it is unquestionable.” (AE B) He is 
aware of Government’s security concerns regarding Applicant’s finances. Two other 
colleagues wrote letters of recommendation on his behalf. (AE C and D)  
  
 Applicant’s financial problems began while married to his second wife. During the 
marriage, he traveled for extended periods of time for work and did not monitor the 
family finances. For example, he traveled for approximately 170-180 days annually for a 
couple years. (Tr. 74; 78) While gone, he thought his wife was managing the bills and 
did not know that she was not paying them. In May 2007, his wife moved out of the 
house along with their furnishings. On August 2, 2007, the court entered a final divorce 
decree. According to the property settlement agreement, he agreed to assume about 
$40,000 of marital debt in exchange for retaining the marital residence. (AE M) Prior to 
the entry of the decree, he paid $2,800 in July 2007 for outstanding property taxes for 
2004, 2005 and 2006 that he learned were delinquent. (AE A and L) He also agreed to 
pay his former wife’s car insurance for six months and her health insurance for one year 
after the divorce. (GE 2 at 4) In March 2008, he completed making payments on a 
 
 
 
 
3
garnishment for $2,519 that was ordered in December 2007 for a marital debt he 
assumed. (GE 2 at 8) 
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated November 13, 2007 and January 
29, 2009, the SOR alleges eight debts, totaling about $44,519 that became delinquent 
between December 2005 and November 2007. The status of the debts is as follows:  
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $30,222 debt owed to a creditor for personal loan. The 
original loan was for $21,000. He has been unable to resolve it because the 
creditor wants a lump sum payment that he cannot afford at this time. (Tr. 25; 
50; GE 2 at 10) This is a marital debt that he assumed in the property 
settlement. (AE M) 
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $9,637 debt owed to car company on a repossessed 
vehicle. His lawyer is resolving the debt. He anticipates paying $325 per 
month until the debt is paid. (Tr. 26, 52; AE J) This is a marital debt that he 
assumed in the property settlement. (AE M) 
 
3. SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $957 debt owed to a department store. He paid the debt 
on March 16, 2009. This is a marital debt that he assumed. (Tr. 26; AE E and 
M) 
 
4. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $20 medical debt that he paid electronically on May 10, 
2009. (Tr. 29)  
 
5. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $504 debt owed to a cellular telephone company. He 
paid it on April 23, 2009. This is a marital debt that he assumed. (Tr. 29-30; 
AE F and M)  
 
6. SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $1,361 debt owed to a telephone company. He 
telephoned the listed creditor, who is unable to locate the account. It remains 
unresolved.1 (Tr. 30-31; AE H and M) 
 
7. SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a $1,718 debt owed to his mortgage company. He has 
paid $850 or more from February 2008 to April 2009 to make up any deficits. 
It will be current by January 2010. (Tr. 31-32; AE L; GE 4 at 3) 
 
8. SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a $100 medical debt. He paid it on March 18, 2009. (Tr. 
32; AE G) 
 
 In summary, Applicant has resolved five of the eight debts and his lawyer is 
resolving another debt. He is investigating one debt and is intending to resolve the 
largest debt as funds become available.  
   
                                            
1This debt does not appear on either the November 2007 or January 2009 CBR. (GE 3 and 4)  
 
 
 
 
4
 Applicant’s net monthly income is $4,911, and includes his wife’s unemployment 
and child support. His monthly expenses are $2,444. His payments on his financial 
obligations total $1,832, and include a projected $325 monthly payment on the debt 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.b, leaving approximately $634 at the end of the month. (AE H) He 
anticipates receiving a monthly $584 disability payment through the Veteran’s 
Administration in the coming months that he will be able to use for further debt 
reduction. (Tr. 44)  
 
 In January 2008, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. In response to “Section 28: Your 
Financial Delinquencies. a. In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent 
on any debt(s),” he answered “no.” In response to Section 28: Your Financial 
Delinquencies. b. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts(s),” he 
answered “no.” When he completed the e-QIP, he knew he had debts, but did not 
believe they were delinquent three to six months. His ex-wife had been managing the 
household bills during their marriage and did not inform him of the delinquencies. (Tr. 
35)  He thinks she may have been saving money in anticipation of her departure instead 
of paying their bills. (Tr. 60) He did not intentionally attempt to defraud the Government. 
(Tr. 36) He disclosed a 1986 felony conviction in the e-QIP. (GE 1 at 32) 
 
 Applicant testified credibly and forthrightly. He is aware of his obligations, but has 
not had enough money to pay all of the debts at one time since the divorce.  He is 
attempting to pay them one at a time or as his budget permits. (Tr. 85) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
 
 
5
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the Financial Considerations guideline is set out 
in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and maybe 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant began accumulating a significant amount of delinquent debt in 
December 2005 while married to his second wife and as part of their divorce. Those 
debts continued to accrue through November 2007. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
6
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 20 includes six conditions that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant=s financial problems arose around December 2005 and continue to be 
unresolved into 2009; thus, AG ¶ 20(a) cannot apply because the problems have been 
ongoing for several years.  Applicant’s financial problems are attributable to his second 
marriage and their August 2007 divorce agreement in which he assumed a significant 
portion of marital debts. Those conditions were “beyond his control.” There is some 
evidence that after learning of the debts in the summer of 2007 he took steps to begin 
managing his obligations. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) has partial application.  He has not sought 
credit counseling to-date, but has been addressing some of the delinquent debts, such 
that there are “indications that the problem is being resolved,” warranting a limited 
application of AG ¶ 20(c). He has paid five debts, is negotiating the resolution of 
another, and has attempted to address the remaining two. His action, along with a 
budget that takes into account the delinquent debt, is evidence of a good-faith effort to 
“repay or otherwise resolve debts,” and triggers a partial application of AG ¶ 20(d). 
The record evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(e) or AG ¶ 
20(f). 
 
 
 
 
7
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b that Applicant falsified answers 
to two questions on his e-QIP, regarding disclosure of debts more than 90 or 180 days 
delinquent. The Government contended that his omissions of delinquent debts may 
raise a security concern and be disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(a):  
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied that he intentionally omitted information about his delinquent 
debts.   
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the government has the 
burden of proving it.  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred.  An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
When completing his e-QIP, Applicant knew that he had some debts, but did not 
realize the scope of those delinquencies or the length of time they had been outstanding 
because his former wife managed the household budget and never informed him of the 
outstanding debts. Since his separation from her, he has learned of his financial 
problems and promptly paid outstanding property taxes, and later a marital debt through 
a garnishment. Given the actions he has taken to address his obligations and his 
truthful disclosure of a 1986 criminal conviction, I find his explanation for not disclosing 
delinquent debts credible. The omission of the information was not intentional. Hence, 
the evidence does not establish deliberate falsification. This Guideline is found in his 
favor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 44-year-old man, who 
had a thirteen-year career with the U.S. Army before becoming injured and medically 
discharged. Since 2004, he has worked for a federal employer supporting the Army. He 
began accruing financial delinquencies during his second marriage, unbeknownst to 
him. While in the divorce process in the summer of 2007, he started paying some of his 
outstanding bills. In accordance with an August 2007 divorce decree, he assumed about 
$40,000 of marital debt. Since then, he has paid or is in the process of resolving about 
$13,000 of delinquent debts listed in the SOR. He has paid an additional $5,300 of other 
marital debts, plus covered his former wife’s car and health insurance for a period of 
time. He intends to continue resolving the remaining outstanding debt and has a 
detailed budget that provides money to do so. Should his wife obtain employment, he 
will have additional monies available in the budget. His supervisor and wife are aware of 
this problem, eliminating a potential for pressure of coercion. He acknowledges his 
financial obligations and the potential negative effect it can have on his employment.  
After listening to him, I find that it is unlikely that similar problems will recur in the future 
or that he will fail to resolve his current obligations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial considerations and 
personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
