 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No.  08-09082 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
On June 5, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On April 10, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On May 7, 2009, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine Items, and mailed 
Applicant a complete copy the same day. Applicant received the FORM on May 15, 
2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. On June 4, 2009, Applicant submitted additional information. On June 17, 
2009, DOHA assigned the case to me. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s 
submission and I marked his exhibit as AE 1 and admitted it into the record. 
 
 Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
the SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
  
 Applicant is 31 years old and single. In the summer of 2003, he began falling 
behind in paying his credit accounts because he did not fully understand the implication 
of managing his credit and was spending more money than he earned. At the time, he 
was living with his parents, earning $9 per hour. (Item 5)  
 
 Since May 2004, Applicant has been employed as a security officer for a defense 
contractor. He earns $21 per hour. In January 2009, he submitted his budget. He has a 
net monthly income of $2,600 and $1,110 in expenses. He pays $130 toward his 
obligations, including one of the SOR debts. He has $1,370 remaining at the end of the 
month for any additional obligations or expenses. (Item 6) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated June 2008, March 2009 and May 
2009, the SOR alleged two delinquent debts, totaling $12,574. (Items 7, 8, 9) Both 
debts are resolved: 
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a lists a debt for $10,039 that is being resolved through a debt 
consolidation agreement, which Applicant executed on March 19, 2009. He 
made his first monthly payment of $314 on April 3, 2009, as agreed. (Item 3; 
AE 1 at 2) 
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.b lists a debt for $2,535 owed on a personal loan. That debt was 
transferred to another collection agency. As of October 2008, the balance 
was $1,671, as Applicant has made three $100 payments on the bill. As of 
May 20, 2009, the bill is current. (Item 3 at 4; AE 1 at 3)  
     
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an 
applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
 
4 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19, three of them are potentially disqualifying:  
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on three CBRs and his admissions, Applicant accumulated debts that he 
was previously unable or unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing in 2003 because 
of overspending and poor financial management. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these three disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. The guideline 
includes six examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.   
 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies have been ongoing since 2003, and did not 
arise out of unusual circumstance, but rather overspending and financial 
mismanagement. Hence, AG ¶ 2 (a) and AG & 20(b) do not apply. Applicant presented 
evidence that he received credit counseling and established a repayment plan for the 
debt contained in SOR ¶ 1.a, and, he is making monthly payments on the debt listed 
SOR ¶ 1. b. Hence, he made a good-faith effort to resolve both debts, which are now 
under control, triggering the application of AG & 20(c) and AG & 20(d). There is no 
evidence to support the application of AG & 20(e) or AG & 20(f).  
  
 Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 31-years old and has 
worked for a federal contractor since May 2004. He candidly admitted that he 
accumulated delinquent debts starting in 2003 and takes responsibility for his 
obligations. In October 2008, he began resolving one of the debts and in March 2009, 
he began resolving the other. He took those steps to manage his debts prior to the 
issuance of the April 2009 SOR. According to his budget, he has sufficient money to 
pay both debts. Based on his awareness of the effect that financial delinquencies could 
have on his employment and his actions to resolve the delinquent obligations, I do not 
believe similar problems will recur in the future.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
 
6 
 
 
without doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his 
financial issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                              
   
 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
