 
 
 
 
1
                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE   
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-06133 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
On October 8, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
National Security Positions (e-QIP). On November 20, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Appellant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on or about December 18, 2008, and requested a 
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me on February 27, 2009, and issued a Notice of 
 
 
 
 
2
Hearing on April 28, 2009. The case was heard on May 12, 2009, as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified. He offered Exhibits (AE) A and B into evidence 
without objection from the Government. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record 
open until May 28, 2009, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted exhibits that I marked as AE C through E and 
admitted into the record without objection from the Government. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 28, 2009.                                                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the underlying allegations contained in Paragraph 1 of SOR, 
but denied that he was not addressing them. His admissions are incorporated into the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and married for the second time. He and his wife have 
6-year-old twins. In 1978, he graduated from college and was commissioned in the 
Navy. He served seven years of active duty before resigning and joining the reserves in 
1985. He worked as a stock broker until 1989 when he decided to return to school for a 
Master’s degree in History. In 1991, he completed the degree and started teaching. He 
then began work on his Ph.D.  From 1995 through 1996, he was on active duty. In July 
1999 through December 2000, he returned to active duty. He worked for the IRS from 
May 2001 until September 11, 2001, at which time he was recalled to active duty. He 
was subsequently deployed overseas for seven months. He held a Top Secret security 
clearance while in the Navy.  
 
 In September 2002, Applicant was released from active duty and began working 
for a friend’s medical billing company. In June 2003, he was recalled to active duty 
again and served until January 2004. In February 2004, he resumed work with the 
billing company until October 2007, when he applied for a government position as an 
Army historian. In May 2008, he retired from the Navy as a Captain with an honorable 
discharge. (GE 2) 
  
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to several factors, beginning with the 
birth of his twins in March 2003 and medical bills that began accruing due to their 
prematurity. Prior to their birth, his wife worked but discontinued after they were born. 
While on active duty from June 2003 to January 2004, he maintained an apartment for 
his family in another state, in addition to their house in their home state, which created 
duplicate housing expenses. When he returned to the billing company in early 2004, he 
earned $30,000 to $36,000. He admitted that some of his financial problems were the 
result of poor financial management and overspending. (Tr. 28)  
 
 Before his twins were born, Applicant was earning about $65,000, had about 
$24,000 in savings and $12,000 in credit card debt. By the end of December 2003, he 
had about $14,000 in savings and $38,000 in credit card debt. (Tr. 28) At the end of 
2004, he had $9,000 in savings, almost $50,000 in credit card debt and was earning a 
 
 
 
 
3
$36,000 salary. In early 2005, his salary increased to $48,000 with a promise of a 
$10,000 raise in the near future. By summer of 2006, his student loans became 
delinquent, resulting in a garnishment, and his finances “bottomed out.” (Tr. 36) He 
subsequently moved into a home that his parents owned. In the fall of 2006, his salary 
increased to $60,000 and his wife returned to teaching part-time with an annual income 
of $19,000. (Tr. 30-34) In the following fall of 2007, he started his current position, 
earning $70,000. He and his wife have ceased using credit cards and live on their 
salaries. (Tr. 53) He believes his financial condition is improving. (Tr. 37) 
 
 In October 2007, Applicant submitted an e-QIP to the Government, notifying it of 
his delinquent debts. In July 2008, he completed Interrogatories related to his numerous 
financial delinquencies. He noted that he was establishing hardship payment plans with 
several creditors.   
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated October 24, 2007 and September 
2008, the SOR alleged nine debts, totaling $112,9581 that started becoming delinquent 
in 2006 or earlier. The status of the debts is as follows:  
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $301 medical debt. He has been paying $25 per month 
for several months. The balance is $100. (Tr. 39)  
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $13,116 debt owed to a credit card company. He spoke 
to the creditor but has not made any payments on the debt because the 
company will not establish a small monthly repayment schedule. (Tr. 43)  
 
3. SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $28,459 debt owed to a credit card company. He made 
one payment within the last six months. (Tr. 43) 
 
4. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $6,068 debt owed to a credit card company. Since April 
2009, he has been paying $100 a month. (Tr. 43; AE A )  
 
5. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $26,824 debt owed to a credit card company. He 
recently spoke to the creditor, who is unwilling to negotiate a small monthly 
payment. (Tr. 45)  
 
6. SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $13,377 debt owed to a credit card company. He has 
been paying $125 per month. The balance is $12,000.  (Tr. 46; AE A) 
 
7. SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a $10,097 debt owed to a credit card company. He is 
paying $100 per month. It is the same debt as listed in ¶ 1.h. (Tr. 46; AE A, E; 
Answer) 
 
 
                                            
1SOR ¶ 1.g and ¶ 1.h are duplicate debts, reducing the total amount of the delinquent debts listed 
in the SOR to $103,626.  
 
 
 
 
4
 
8. SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a $9,332 debt owed to the above referenced credit card 
company. (Tr. 47; Answer) 
 
9. SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a $5,384 debt owed to a credit card company. He is paying 
$54.95 per month. The balance is $5,700. (Tr. 47-48; AE B) 
  
 In summary, Applicant is making minimal payments of $405 on six of the eight 
listed debts that total $103,626. He began making some of those payments about six or 
eight months ago. In addition to the above, Applicant and his wife have a combined 
student loan debt of about $200,000. The loans went into default status in November 
2007. In the summer of 2008, Applicant began a rehabilitation program for the loans 
and they are now current. He has also paid off many medical bills, as well as other bills. 
(Tr. 36; GE 2 at 7)  
   
 As of July 2008, Applicant’s net monthly income was $5,337, and includes 
$1,211 from his wife’s teaching position. His monthly expenses are $2,980 and 
payments on debts total $2,380, leaving a $22 monthly deficit. (GE 2) At this time, he 
pays more than one-third of his monthly income for debt reduction. (Tr. 45) He believes 
that he owes about $110,000 in credit card debt and $200,000 in student loans. (Tr. 48-
49)  He anticipates that he will need ten to twelve years to pay off his credit card debt 
and twenty-five to thirty years to pay the student loans. (Tr. 57)  
 
 Applicant admitted that he and his wife did not establish a budget when these 
financial difficulties started developing in 2003. (Tr. 58) Recently, he developed a 
spreadsheet for his bills, but not a budget. (Tr. 59) He has not participated in any form 
of credit counseling because he was told by military people that such actions could 
negatively affect one’s security clearance. (Tr. 37) 
 
 Applicant testified candidly about the reasons underlying his financial 
delinquencies. He accepts responsibility for the decisions he has made over the years 
and the obligations that he has incurred.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
 
 
 
 
5
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the Financial Considerations guideline is set out 
in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and 
maybe be disqualifying in this case:  
 
 
 
 
6
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative case flow, high debt-to 
income ratio, and other issues of security concern. 
 
Applicant began accumulating a significant amount of delinquent debt in late 
2003, which he has been unable or unwilling to address until the summer of 2008. A 
large portion of the debt is attributable to excessive credit card spending. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise these three potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those three 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 20 includes six conditions that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
AG ¶ 20(a) cannot apply because Applicant’s numerous financial problems have 
been ongoing since late 2003 and continue into 2009. Some of Applicant’s financial 
problems are attributable to his twins’ medical problems, low salaries while working for a 
private company, and one period of active duty during which he had additional housing 
 
 
 
 
7
expenses. Those conditions were “beyond his control.” However, there is no evidence 
that he took adequate steps to manage his obligations or control his spending while he 
experienced financial difficulties. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application. He has not 
sought credit counseling to-date, established a firm budget nor presented sufficient 
evidence to demonstrate that there are “indications that the problem is being resolved” 
to warrant the application of AG ¶ 20(c). He has been making minimal payments on six 
of the eight debts since last summer, one of which has a $100 balance. He has 
unsuccessfully attempted to address the remaining two. His action is some evidence of 
a good-faith effort to “repay or otherwise resolve debts,” and triggers a very limited 
application of AG ¶ 20(d). The record evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 
20(e) or AG ¶ 20(f). 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 53-year-old 
man, who is highly educated and retired from the Navy after honorably serving our 
country. He has experienced a series of events that have contributed to some of his 
financial problems. He is candid and embarrassed by his indebtedness and intends to 
continue resolving it in the future. However, what is troubling is the magnitude of the 
debt that has been ongoing for several years. He has voluntarily accrued over $110,000 
in credit card debt and $200,000 in student loans. While he is taking small steps to 
manage the problem, he has not sought professional help or established a detailed firm 
budget with his wife to resolve the problem.  His behavior in accumulating and resolving 
the debt raises questions about his judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under 
financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
8
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.i:  Against Applicant  
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
