                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 08-06087 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) listed 17 debts totaling $24,767. She 
stated one debt was over seven years old, a $42 debt was paid, and one debt was in a 
payment plan. The other debts were admitted, but not resolved. She failed to disclose 
her delinquent debts on her security clearance application. Applicant failed to mitigate 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 24, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (Item 4). 
On December 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and 
modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
December 29, 2005, are effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On December 31, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 3). A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 6, 2009, was 
provided to her, and she was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not provide a response 
to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR 
allegations, except SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e (Item 3). After a complete and thorough review 
of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor.3 She is a supervisor 
in a security team. She has worked for the same employer since 1995. She attended 
college and was awarded a cosmetology license in 1993. She married in 1979 and 
divorced in 1998. She married in 1998 and divorced in 2000. She married in 2001 and is 
currently married. She does not have any children. She has never served in the U.S. 
military. She has never been fired from a job or left employment under adverse 
circumstances. Her file does not contain any adverse information relating to police 
involvement. For example, she has never been charged with a felony, any firearms or 
explosives offense(s), and does not have any currently pending charges. She has never 
been charged with any offense related to alcohol or drugs. She has not been arrested 
for or charged with any other misdemeanor-level offenses. There is no evidence that 
she has abused alcohol or drugs.  
 
 
 
 
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated April 16, 2009; 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated April 22, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after her receipt to submit information. 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3The facts in this paragraph are from Applicant’s October 24, 2007, security clearance application 
(Item 4). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Financial considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 17 delinquent debts, totaling $24,767 as follows: ¶ 1.a 
($11,098); ¶ 1.b ($1,735); ¶ 1.c ($1,664); ¶ 1.d ($250); ¶ 1.e ($42); ¶ 1.f ($94); ¶ 1.g 
($697); ¶ 1.h ($776); ¶ 1.i ($1,733); ¶ 1.j ($2,488); ¶ 1.k ($264); ¶ 1.l ($490); ¶ 1.m 
($740); ¶ 1.n ($319); ¶ 1.o ($1,624); ¶ 1.p ($260); and ¶ 1.q ($493) (Item 1). Her SOR 
response admits all debts except she indicates the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is denied because 
it is over seven years old (Item 3). She admits the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e for $42, a 
department store credit card; however, she describes it as caught up (Item 3).  
 
On July 23, 2008, DOHA provided a list of ten delinquent accounts to Applicant 
and asked her to verify the status of those accounts and provide proof of any 
payments.4 Applicant requested a loan; however, it was denied because of her financial 
situation. She provided a copy of the denial from the financial institution. She explained 
that she and her husband are considering filing for bankruptcy. She said she was going 
to address the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,735), and she provided a letter from the 
creditor indicating automatic $50 monthly payments would start on July 22, 2008. She 
did not provide proof of any payments made to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b. She 
mentioned that recently her mother and sister-in-law died; however, she did not explain 
why or how those deaths contributed to her financial predicament.  
 
Applicant did not describe any financial counseling that she received. Applicant 
did not provide any documentation showing she disputed the validity of any debts.  
 
Falsification of Security Clearance Application 
 
Applicant signed her security clearance applicant on October 24, 2007. In regard 
to her financial record, Applicant disclosed that she was involved in a repossession in 
March 2003 (Item 4). However, when asked about her delinquent debts, Applicant 
incorrectly responded, “No” to questions 28a and 28b (Item 4), which asked: 
 
Section 28: Your Financial Delinquencies 
 
a. In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any 
debt(s)? 
 
b. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)? 
 
Applicant’s security clearance application contains the following admonition: 
 
Certification That My Answers Are True 
 
My statements on this form, and any attachments to it, are true, complete, 
and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are made in good 
 
4The facts in this paragraph are from Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories, dated July 
23, 2008 (Item 7). 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
faith. I understand that a knowing and willful false statement on this form 
can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both. (See section 1001 of title 
18, United States Code). 
 
(emphasis in original) (Item 4). Immediately below this admonition is Applicant’s 
signature. A credit report, dated November 15, 2007, lists numerous debts that were 
currently past due, and that were past due for more than 180 days (on November 15, 
2007), including many debts that were past due for more than a year (Item 5). 
Applicant’s SOR response admits falsification of her October 24, 2007 security 
clearance application (Item 3). 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct).  
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, in her 
response to DOHA interrogatories, and in her SOR response. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a to 1.q, she had 17 delinquent debts totaling about $24,767 disclosed as potential 
security concerns. She provided enough information to reduce security concerns on two 
debts (she paid one debt and the other debt was in a payment plan). Her financial 
difficulties extended over several years and continue today. The government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because she did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve her 17 delinquent 
debts. Her delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant does not receive 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because she did not establish that her financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is some 
residual doubt about whether she is fully committed to resolving her delinquent SOR 
debts and is making adequate steps to do so. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because she 
did not provide any documentation disputing any of the SOR debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial situation was probably 
damaged by deaths in her family and divorce. The cost of funerals and resolving estates 
is very expensive. Similarly, divorce results in a division of assets, property and debts. 
Divorce can cause financial hardship. She evidently lacks sufficient income to address 
most of her delinquent SOR debts. She has not provided sufficient evidence to establish 
that she acted responsibly under the circumstances with respect to her delinquent 
debts.5  
 
5“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Although Applicant did not receive formal financial 
counseling, she probably received some financial advice from the financial institution 
that denied her loan, and has otherwise learned about financial issues. She started the 
process of paying the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant has resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e 
($42) by paying it. She did not provide any evidence of any arrangements to pay any of 
the other SOR debts. These are some initial, positive “indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control.” She has also established some mitigation under AG 
¶ 20(d) because Applicant showed some good faith6 in the resolution of her SOR debts 
by attempting to secure a loan to repay her creditors.    
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve her delinquent debts. She attempted to borrow funds to pay her 
creditors. She generated a payment plan for one delinquent SOR debt (SOR ¶ 1.b) and 
said she paid one SOR debt for $42 (SOR ¶ 1.e). These steps are simply inadequate to 
fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose most of her delinquent debts on her October 24, 
2007, security clearance application. She admitted in her SOR response that her 
answers were false. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
  None of the mitigating conditions apply. The falsification is established. She 
admitted the falsification of her security clearance application without elaboration or 
further explanation.7 Applicant has not provided sufficient information to refute or un-
substantiate the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of her clearance. Applicant deserves substantial credit for volunteering to 
support the Department of Defense in the field of security. She has served well, rising to 
a supervisory position. The same employer has retained her service for 13 years. This 
longevity speaks very well for her contributions to her employer. There is no evidence 
that she has a criminal record or has ever violated security. There is every indication 
 
7The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
that she is loyal to the United States, the Department of Defense, her employer and that 
she is an honorable person. There were no allegations of security violations. She does 
not abuse alcohol or illegal drugs. She has attended college. She is evidently not 
sophisticated in the area of finance. She made mistakes, and her debts became 
delinquent. Expenses from her divorce and deaths in her family may have contributed to 
her financial woes. She probably learned some financial information when she applied 
for a loan and reviewed the DOHA documentation. She paid one small debt and placed 
another debt into a payment plan. She has a track record of successful employment 
working for a DoD contractor. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, 
and mitigation. 
 
The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial. Failure to pay or resolve his just debts is not prudent or responsible. 
Applicant has a lengthy history of financial problems. She began to have financial 
difficulties several years ago, when multiple debts became delinquent. In July 2008, she 
received DOHA interrogatories and in December 2008, she received the SOR. She had 
ample opportunity to contact more of her SOR creditors and to make greater progress in 
the resolution of her SOR debts. She paid one small delinquent SOR debt for $42, and 
started a $50 monthly payment plan on another SOR debt. She attempted to obtain a 
loan to repay her creditors. She is thinking about filing for bankruptcy. She made 
insufficient progress over the last 18 months to resolve her delinquent debts, even 
though she had steady employment and ample opportunity to contact her creditors and 
provide documentation. She was on clear notice from her receipt of DOHA 
interrogatories and even more so after she received the SOR that she needed to show 
substantial progress in the resolution of her delinquent debts; however, she made 
insufficient effort to accomplish this security responsibility.    
   
Applicant’s falsification of her security clearance application is not mitigated. She 
admitted that she falsified her security clearance application, and she did not provide 
any explanation for her conduct. The falsification occurred in October 2007, which is still 
relatively recent.   
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. I take 
this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 
(1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and supporting evidence, 
my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my 
interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has failed to 
mitigate or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is 
not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f to 1.q:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
