                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06533 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On January 15, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 13, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 26, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 7, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on May 27, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
l review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
ake the following findings of fact. 
e first one laid off in October 2005. He was now living in an 
nfamiliar city with no job.2  
 
a job, but to no avail and was 
eventually forced to call his parents and move home.3  
had high interest rates and fees and he would be 
better off paying the debt himself.4  
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through M, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open 
May 22, 2009, to allow Applicant an opportunity to provide additional exhibits, which he 
did, and they were marked as AE N through S. Department Counsel did not object and 
they were admitted.1 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 18, 
2
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and carefu
m
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and a high school graduate. He began working for his 
present employer, a federal contractor, in February 2008. He enlisted in the Navy in 
1997 and was honorably discharged in June 2005. Prior to his discharge, he accepted a 
job which required him to relocate to a different state. His salary was to be $50,000 
annually, in addition to a monthly cost of living allowance of $2,500. After he accepted 
the job and moved, the company had a reduction in work and because Applicant was 
the last one hired, he was th
u
Applicant was unable to find a job in his field and applied for unemployment 
benefits in November 2005. He had financial obligations that were based on his salary 
prior to losing his job. He received $295 a week in unemployment benefits. His monthly 
rent was $875 and his other expenses, such as car, food, and basic living expenses 
exceeded his benefits. Applicant soon began to fall behind in his bills. At the time he 
was engaged to be married, but terminated the relationship because of the financial 
strain. Applicant explained he continued to look for 
 
While living with his parents Applicant could only find minimum wage jobs and he 
was just covering his living expenses. He continued to fall behind further in his financial 
obligations. In November 2007, he applied for a job with his current employer and 
started working for them in February 2008. Since he has been employed Applicant has 
been gradually paying his delinquent debts. He researched using a debt consolidation 
company and concluded that they 
 
1 Department Counsel’s memorandum was marked Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
2 Tr. 18-22, 82-84. 
 
3 Tr. 18-24. 
 
4 Tr. 25-26, 86-89. 
 
3 
 
 
R alleges 13 delinquent debts, totaling $30,000. The status of the debts 
is as follows:  
 it in 
December 2005 after he lost his job. He has settled and paid the debt for $1,900.5 
through the insurance company. He stated if 
he can not resolve it he will pay the debt.6  
to pay off the debt. He notified the creditor 
and they will not accept monthly payments.7 
 He paid the debt in the past month and had not yet received the receipt of 
payment.8 
nd to pay the debt. He stopped paying the debt in October 2005 when 
e lost his job.9  
n he was unemployed. He has not paid this 
ebt, but is saving his income to do so.10 
                                                          
 
The SO
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($2,893) is a personal loan from Applicant’s credit union. 
He incurred the debt in February 2005 while on active duty and stopped paying
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,527) is a jewelry store debt incurred in February 2005 
for an engagement and wedding ring. Applicant paid the debt on time and had an 
insurance rider regarding this debt that if he lost his job the insurance would pay the 
balance of the debt. Applicant complied with the terms of the agreement and sent a 
claim to cover the debt when he lost his job. The company claimed they lost his 
paperwork and the debt was sent to a collection company. He has a pending insurance 
claim and is attempting to resolve this debt 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($6,137) is for a military credit card debt. Applicant 
provided proof that he has already paid $7,722 on the account. Applicant used his 
income tax refund to make this payment. Due to interest and penalties he still owes 
$1,400. Applicant credibly testified he has saved $500 and by September 2009 he will 
have enough to make a lump sum payment 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($347) was a payday loan that Applicant took when he 
lost his job.
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($2,582) was a credit card debt. Applicant has not yet 
paid this debt. He is saving money so he can make a lump sum payment and will use 
his state tax refu
h
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($5,718) is a credit card debt. Applicant used this credit 
card to help pay his living expenses whe
d
5 Tr. 26-30, 39-40; AE B and G. 
 
6 TR. 30-34; AE J. 
 
7 Tr. 35-39; AE I. 
 
8 Tr. 37-38, 44-49; AE P. 
 
9 Tr. 49-54. 
 
10 Tr. 55-56. 
 
4 
 
 
e there and did not open the account. He 
rovided documentation of his dispute.11  
e negotiated a settlement with the creditor to 
ay $450 and provided proof he paid it.12 
 collection 
ompany. Applicant decided to pay the account and settled and paid $600.13 
 their showers. He negotiated a settlement of 
330 to be paid on his next pay day.14  
ducation 
nd anticipates receiving extra money at that time to help with his expenses.15  
tor. This bill has not been paid. 
pplicant credibly testified he intends to pay this debt.16 
 
                                                          
 
 Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($4,136) with the credit bureau because 
it is not his account. The account’s history shows it was opened in Chicago in 2001 and 
Applicant credibly testified he did not liv
p
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($1,127) is for a cell phone account. He credibly testified 
that when he lost his job he needed to keep a cell phone account so potential 
employers had a way of contacting him. H
p
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($1,207) was due to an overdraft on a bank account. 
Applicant credibly testified that his checkbook was stolen and he advised the bank, but 
they continued to cash stolen checks that Applicant did not write. Despite his assertions 
the bank charged him overdraft fees and the account was turned over to a
c
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($550) is an electric bill Applicant incurred when he was 
unemployed. He fell behind on the payments in November and December 2005. He 
turned off his electricity and did not have any power during January and February 2006. 
He would go to friends’ houses to use
$
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($1,755) is a credit card debt that Applicant used for living 
expenses while unemployed. He defaulted on the credit card in November 2005. He 
intends to pay the debt by October 2009. He intends on returning to school in August 
2009 while continuing to work. His employer is permitting him to work in the morning 
and attend school in the afternoon. He is authorized to use the GI Bill for his e
a
 
 The debt in SOR 1.l ($1,931) is a phone bill. Applicant was unaware that he was 
incurring roaming charges that increased his bill. He is following his plan of saving his 
income and then negotiating a settlement with the credi
A
11 Tr. 56-58; AE O. 
 
12 Tr. 58-62; AE Q and S. 
 
13 Tr. 63-65; AE H. 
 
14 Tr. 65-68. 
 
15 Tr. 68-75. 
 
16 Tr. 75-76. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($731) is a credit card debt. Applicant used this credit 
card when he moved with his new job. He negotiated a settlement with the creditor and 
paid $641. This debt is resolved.17 
 
Applicant credibly testified that he was not overspending when he was in the 
Navy and got his first job, but he took for granted that he had a steady income. When he 
started his new job, he was earning, with his additional benefits, about $5,000 a month. 
He did not realize that everything could change so quickly. He is attempting to keep 
some money in savings so the same thing does not happen again. Applicant’s goal is to 
have all of his debts paid by the end of 2009. He is also working towards earning his 
engineering degree to better his situation. He credibly testified that he has been living a 
“hermit’s” life to save money. He regularly works overtime, if it is offered. After he pays 
his monthly expenses, he uses the remainder to pay his delinquent debts. He does not 
have any credit cards. He pays all of his bills and car payment on time.18 He eats only 
two meals a day and skimps on food items to save money by eating soup, cereal and 
fruit. He copiously and regularly examines his credit report. He is learning how to 
manage his finances because he does not want to live paycheck to paycheck. He has 
cut out unnecessary expenditures. Applicant has a written budget that he follows and a 
spread sheet reflecting the status of his debts and his payments toward them.19 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
17 Tr. 76-77; AE F. 
 
18 AE B. 
 
19 Tr. 36-44; 78-91; AE C and D. 
 
6 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, ”The applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
7 
 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts from 2005. He has paid some of the debts, but 
others are still owed. I find both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considering the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because he still has several delinquent debts that 
he has not paid. Applicant admitted he took for granted his good fortune of having a 
regular paycheck and when he lost his job his financial situation collapsed. He 
developed an appreciation for scrupulously maintaining his finances. I find the 
circumstances that put Applicant in a financial bind are unlikely to recur and do not 
casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. Hence, I find 
mitigating condition (a) applies.  
 
 Applicant was paying all of his bills when he was employed. He took a well 
paying job and incurred some moving expenses to do so. Two months after he moved 
to a new location he was laid off and he was unable to find work. He incurred living 
expenses that he could not pay and used his credit cards to survive. As a last and final 
resort, he moved back home with his parents. He could only find minimum waged jobs 
and was unable to pay outstanding bills. Once Applicant was employed in a well paying 
job, he began to tackle his outstanding bills. He reasonably concluded that it was best 
for him to save his income and negotiate his own settlement agreements with creditors 
versus using a debt consolidation company and paying extra fees. He has paid and 
 
8 
 
 
settled many of his delinquent debts. I find Applicant’s unemployment was a condition 
that was beyond his control and the direct result of his financial difficulties. I also find 
that once he was employed he acted responsibly in addressing his debts. Therefore, I 
find mitigating condition (b) applies.  
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he has received financial counseling, but 
he provided a copy of a written budget that he is following and a spread sheet indicating 
his repayment plan for his debts. Although he still has some debts to pay, I find there 
are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under 
control. Applicant paid and settled some of his debts and is saving money to resolve the 
remaining debts, thereby making a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors. I find 
mitigating conditions (c) and (d) apply. 
 
 Applicant formally disputed a debt he did not think belonged to him. He provided 
documents to substantiate his dispute and I found his testimony credible that the debt 
did not belong to him. I find mitigating condition (e) applies.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the Navy for 
eight years and was honorably discharged. He accepted a good paying job with 
additional financial benefits, but was required to move to a new location, which he did. 
The job market slowed down and he was laid off months after he moved. He was then 
confronted with the costs of his move and debts he had been paying regularly. He had 
difficulty finding work and could not pay his bills. He took extreme measures to save 
money, by living without electricity and reducing his food consumption. Despite his best 
efforts, he was forced to move back home with his parents and could only find minimum 
 
9 
 
 
wage jobs. Finally, when he started the job with his present employer he was able to 
begin addressing his delinquent debts. He has paid or settled many of them, but others 
remain unpaid until he can save enough to make a settlement offer. Applicant has a 
new appreciation for being fiscally responsible. He is actively reducing his debts and 
anticipates being debt free by the end of 2009. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising from financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
