1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-02337
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on May 29, 2007.
On October 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines J and G
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 24, 2008 and
answered it on the same day. He requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge
through Counsel. I received the case assignment on April 2, 2009. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on April 15, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May
14, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were received
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. He submitted Exhibits (AE) A
2
and B, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 26,
2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 24, 2008, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a- 1.b; and ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b of the SOR, with explanations. He
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. 
Applicant is 44-years-old. He is divorced and has three children. He has shared
custody of his son. He has been employed in his current job since 1986 (GE 1).
Applicant has held a security clearance since 1984 except for four years (1999-2002)
when his position did not require a clearance (Tr. 24).
In January 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with lane traveling (an
illegal lane change) and driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) (GE 6). He pled no
contest to alcohol-related reckless driving and was sentenced to a fine of $950 and a 90
day suspended jail sentence. He attended 16 hours of Alcohol Awareness classes and
served 24 hours of community service (GE 5). On that particular evening Applicant had
three glasses of wine during a meal at a restaurant (Tr. 51). He walked to a club after
that and had two whiskey and cokes (Tr. 51). He did not believe the officer complied
with correct procedure and Applicant refused to take the Breathalyzer test (Tr. 56). The
police report notes the Preliminary Breath Test (PBT) was less than .08 (the legal limit
in the state). 
Applicant’s drinking habits after the 2004 incident changed dramatically. He did
not drink and drive for about two years. He then decided not to drive if he had more than
one or two drinks (Tr. 61). Applicant’s habit was to have some wine one day a week (Tr.
61). He acknowledged that he believed the 2004 alcohol classes to be “superficial.” He
compared the later 2007 counseling to the classes. After the 2007 court program,
Applicant had a better understanding of the effect of alcohol on his behavior (Tr.60).  
On April 1, 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with a DUI and improper
lane operation. That evening Applicant had approximately four or five glasses of wine
(one bottle) in his home over the course of five hours (Tr. 27). After his dinner, he had a
whiskey and coke. He had an argument with his girlfriend on the telephone. After that
discussion he drove to a nearby bar. He consumed three whiskey and cokes (Tr. 29).
He acknowledges that he was intoxicated at that point. The police pulled him over for an
improper left turn. 
Applicant pled guilty to the DUI and agreed to participate in a state sponsored
substance abuse court program (DASAC) program. The participation in the program
permitted the DUI charge to be held in abbeyance (no sentencing) provided Applicant
He reported to the court on one occasion he had half a glass of wine at a dinner. He was tested1
immediately following that but the test result was negative.
3
successfully completed the program (Tr. 38). The improper lane charge was dismissed
in 2007 and the DUI was dismissed on July 7, 2008 (GE 3).
Applicant takes full responsibility for the 2007 incident. He acknowledges that he
put his life and the lives of others in danger. He deeply regrets having done that (Tr. 17).
He admits that he argued with his girlfriend and did not show good judgment by driving
to the local bar (Tr. 17). 
In 2007, an LCSW assessed Applicant upon entering the DASAC alcohol
treatment program. He was diagnosed as a chronic alcohol abuser. During the one year
treatment program Applicant was tested randomly (four times a month) for the use of
illegal substances, including alcohol (AE B). Applicant did not use any illegal substance
or alcohol for this period of time.  1
In July 2008, Applicant completed the DASAC program. He attended 30 hour-
and-a-half counseling sessions. The prognosis for complete recovery was “good.” He
reported to court and his probation officer initially every week. His court ordered
probation ended in 2008. He now attends AA meetings on a weekly basis.
Applicant describes his present day drinking as very moderate and very
infrequent. He believes he makes good choices and he no longer frequents places
where he would drink excessively. He has had something to drink on three separate
occasions over the last nine months. He limits himself to two drinks and only if there is a
special event (wedding, Christmas). In March 2008, he ended the relationship with his
girlfriend in part because of pressure to drink. He was uncomfortable with her level of
drinking every weekend and did not want to live like that any more (Tr. 18). He
discussed his relationship with his counselor who suggested that many people revert to
old behaviors. Applicant did not discuss “moderate drinking” with his counselor but did
heed the caution about “hanging around people who may lead one to drink to excess.”
He believes he has truly changed his direction in life. He continues to attend AA
meetings voluntarily because it reminds him of what could happen. He does not
frequent bars or associate with people with whom he used to drink (Tr. 79). He does not
drink and drive (Tr. 78)
Applicant is a systems engineer for a contractor. He is a trusted, reliable
professional. He travels frequently for his work. Applicant consistently demonstrates top
performance. For the past five years, he has achieved an “Exceeds Expectation” rating
which ranks him in the top 30% of approximately 400 employees (AE A). 
Applicant provides direction to subcontractor teams with little supervision. He
completes every project in an excellent manner. His work quality has been
acknowledged by the Air Force customers and upper management in the company. He
is one of the most valued and trusted employees. He acts responsibly and has no
4
attendance problems. He has never missed deadlines or meetings. His supervisor has
traveled with him and has never observed any impairment due to alcohol while on
business travel. Applicant’s supervisor is aware of the alcohol charges and he
recommends him for a security clearance (AE A). 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
5
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent,” and “(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent.”
In this case, Applicant has two alcohol-related driving incidents (2004 and 2007).
In 2007, he admitted driving with impaired judgment due to the alcohol he consumed
that evening. In 2007, he consumed so much alcohol before his DUI, it is considered
“binge” consumption of alcohol. Applicant admitted that he was intoxicated in 2007 and
then drove his car.  Thus, AG ¶ 22 (a) and (c) apply.
In June 2007, Applicant was given a diagnosis of chronic alcohol abuse by a
licensed clinical social worker during the court program. Thus, AG ¶ 22(e), “evaluation
of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a
staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program” applies.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
6
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and,
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant has two alcohol-related driving incidents. Since 2007, he has not had
any other alcohol-related incidents. Applicant attended alcohol classes after his 2004
incident. He abstained from drinking and driving for almost two years. He has received
counseling and treatment in a court program after the incident in 2007. Applicant has
acknowledged that he abused alcohol in the past but now he is committed to a different
life style. Applicant attends AA of his own accord. Applicant maintains that his drinking
is responsible at this point in his life. He has received a favorable diagnosis from a
LCSW. He does not drink and drive. Applicant has mitigated the alcohol consumption
concerns under AG ¶¶ 23(b and (d).
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By it’s
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and “(c) allegation
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” Applicant’s criminal conduct consists of the
two alcohol-related DUI charges in 2004 and 2007 as discussed under the alcohol
consumption guideline. Thus, AG 31(a) and (b) apply in this case. 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
7
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.
Applicant has provided mitigation under this guideline. The events occurred in 2004 and
2007. There have not been any other instances. Applicant completed his court program
and his 2007 DUI was dismissed in 2008. His rehabilitative efforts are described under
the previous guideline.  He understands the impact of consuming alcohol and then
driving, and assures this will not occur in the future. Future criminal conduct is unlikely
to occur and thus his 2 previous DUIs do not cast doubt on his current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment. He continues to excel in his work and expressed
remorse for the 2007 incident. Thus, AG ¶ 32(a) and (d) apply in this case.
 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has held a secret
clearance for many years. He has no incidents or issues with protecting information.
Applicant has excellent references from his employer. He has been charged with two
alcohol-related driving incidents. Since that time he completed a court ordered
treatment program and modified his drinking. He was diagnosed recently by a licensed
social worker of alcohol abuse. He has a good prognosis. He involved himself in AA on
his own accord. He left a relationship that could interfere with his commitment to a
different life. Applicant has had no other legal problems during his life. The last incident
occurred in 2007.  
.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all these
8
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from criminal
conduct and alcohol consumption. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: FOR Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
