                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-05959 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Menedez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
denied. 
 
On February 27, 2009 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as 
amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing March 20, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. I was assigned the case on May 7, 2009. Applicant was 
notified by email on May 18, 2009 that her hearing was scheduled for June 3, 2009 by 
1 
 
2 
 
                                                          
video-teleconference. DOHA issued a formal Notice of Hearing on May 21, 2009, and I 
convened the hearing on the scheduled date. Applicant affirmed receipt of the email 
notice and was ready to proceed, waiving any potential delay. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
her own behalf and offered Exhibits (AE) A through L, which were admitted without 
objection.1 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 11, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.e, I.h, 1.i, and 1.j and denied the remaining allegations. Her admissions to the 
allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 38 years old and works for a federal contractor in administrative 
support. She married in 2005 and her husband is in the military. They have no children, 
but she has a six-year-old stepdaughter. Applicant earned a Bachelor of Science 
degree in 1994 and a master of business administration in 2000.2  
 
Applicant has accumulated approximately $30,770 in delinquent debts. She 
accumulated approximately $200,000 in student loan debt that she stated was either 
deferred or in forbearance. She has only made some small payments towards the 
interest of these debts sometime between 2000 and 2003. A couple of months ago she 
made another request for forbearance that extends to approximately August or 
September of 2009. She believes her monthly payment will be more than $1,000 a 
month. She plans on using her income to pay this debt. The debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.e 
($5,846), 1.f ($6,023) and 1.g ($5,761) are student loan debts that are alleged to be in 
collection status that Applicant stated are now in forbearance. It is difficult to determined 
what the current status of these debts are as the credit report has contradictory 
information, showing both deferral and collection. In any event, Applicant did not provide 
documentation to confirm the status of these debts.3 
 
The debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($945) and 1.b ($1,044) are to the same creditor. 
In February 2008 Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator regarding these delinquent debts. She advised the investigator she 
disputed the accounts because she did not believe she held accounts with the creditor. 
She indicated she believed these were fraudulent accounts opened in her name and 
was not going to pay them. She planned on contacting the creditors and credit bureaus 
as soon as possible to dispute the accounts and have them removed from her credit 
report. At her hearing she testified she had contacted the creditor, but the account was 
not removed from her credit report. She provided a copy of the creditor’s demand for 
1 Many of Applicant’s exhibits were unintelligible and had handwritten notes on them that were 
illegible and were impossible to determine which debt she was referring to. I consider the documents to 
the best of my ability, but without specific clarification they were, in most cases, unhelpful.  
 
2 Tr. 109. 
 
3 Tr. 32, 65-74; GE 6.  
3 
 
                                                          
payment letter which included her handwritten notes on the letter that she faxed back to 
the creditor telling them not to contact her. She has not taken any other action regarding 
these debts since June 2008. She stated she believed these debts are a result of 
identity theft because she never had an account with the creditor. She did not file a 
police report or dispute them with the credit bureau. She said she would file a report 
when she returns to the U.S.4  
 
Applicant stated she believes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. ($1,221) is the same as the 
debt in ¶ 1.k ($614). She failed to provide substantiation for why she believes they are 
the same. She also stated she believes these debts are fraudulent and she “needs to 
file a police report.” In her OPM interview she believed there was a different debt that 
was the same as the one in ¶ 1.k. She has now retracted that and believes it is ¶1.c and 
¶ 1.k that are the same creditors. She acknowledged in her OPM interview the debt in ¶ 
1.k is a credit card debt. She now believes that because it is not the debt she originally 
thought it was, but that these are fraudulent entries and she plans on filing a police 
report when she returns to the U.S. for vacation in several weeks. She has been aware 
of her dispute since August 2008 and has not disputed the debts with the credit 
bureau.5  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($168) Applicant stated she paid but did not retain any 
documents. She admitted she was delinquent on paying the debt for about a year and 
she has been disputing the debt. The debt was for phone services. Applicant did not 
provide documented proof regarding her position.6  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($474) is a credit card debt that Applicant stopped paying 
sometime in 2006. She knows she owes the money, but did not have the money to pay 
it at the time. She acknowledged the debt at her OPM interview in February 2008 and 
agreed to pay the debt in full. She planned on making payment arrangements and 
settling the account no later than October 2008. She has not made any payments on 
the debt, but stated she contacted the creditor in February 2009. She plans on paying 
the debt in a couple of months.7  
 
The debt in SOR ¶1.i ($7,538) is for a repossessed car. In her OPM interview she 
agreed her vehicle was repossessed, but disputed that she owed any money to the 
creditor. She acknowledged she got behind in her payments on the loan when she and 
her husband moved. She received a letter from the finance company advising her she 
owed the alleged amount. However, she did not believe she owed anything after the 
vehicle was repossessed because she no longer had the vehicle. In her interview she 
felt she owed the creditor nothing and had no intention of ever paying anything further 
on this account at any time in the future. At her hearing she stated she was two months 
behind on payments when the vehicle was repossessed. She stated she contacted the 
4Tr. 33-38, 49-58; GE 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9; AE B. 
  
5 Tr. 58-62; GE 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
 
6 Tr. 62-65. 
 
7 Tr. 74-81; GE 3, 4 and 6 
4 
 
                                                          
creditor, but has not resolved the debt. She stated she would pay the debt when she 
could get to it. She stated she needed to contact the creditor and see if they sold the 
vehicle and how much she owed.8  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($1,131) is a state tax lien. In her OPM interview Applicant 
believed the lien was for taxes owed on a vehicle purchase. She admitted that she was 
behind in paying her state income taxes at one point and paid $300 toward the back 
taxes and believes she owes a remainder of $500. She did not believe the tax lien on 
the SOR was for state income taxes, but thought it was for the vehicle. She stated she 
planned on contacting the state within a couple of months of her interview to follow up 
and to pay the lien in full via a payment arrangement. She was not sure when it would 
be paid in full. At her hearing she stated she believed the tax was a city income tax. The 
tax lien was filed in March 2004. She believed that the tax was being withheld from her 
pay until she moved to a new job and the new employer did not withhold the tax. She 
was unaware the new employer was not withholding the taxes. She stated she became 
aware of the tax lien in 2007 and made an arrangement to pay $150 a month. She 
stated she made a $75 payment in August 2008 and has not made any other payments. 
She stated she has contacted the state and advised them she will pay the amount in full 
in July 2009.9  
 
Applicant does not have a budget. She handles the money in the family. She has 
not had any financial counseling. She has no savings and about $400 in cash at home. 
Her husband’s rank is E-4. She believes at the end of the month, they have 
approximately $300 to $500 in expendable income. Her husband was deployed during 
the past year. While deployed he earned tax-free income and special pay. She 
experienced periods of unemployment. She stated she was unemployed during 2007 
and began her current job in January 2008. She was unemployed for about a year in 
2002 to 2003. She worked for Company A from 2003 or 2004 to 2005 and left because 
of her husband’s military move.10 She experienced periods of unemployment from 
December 2005 to April 2007, but did work July 2006 to December 2006. She stated 
she has a plan to work on her debts and has cleared up things on her credit report.11  
 
Applicant testified she had retrieved credit bureau reports from 2005, 2006 and 
2007 and was provided a credit report from the Government in 2008. Applicant is 
returning to the U.S. for leave in June 2009. She and her husband will fund their trip 
from their income. She has a small amount of money in an IRA ($400) and a 401K 
account ($1,000). Applicant earns approximately $3,800 a month after taxes are 
withheld.12  
8 Tr. 32-33, 74-81; GE 3, 4 and 6. 
 
9 Tr. 32-33, 81-92; GE 3, 7, 8 and 9. 
 
10 Tr. 112-115; Applicant had a difficult time remembering what periods of time she was 
unemployed.  
 
11 Tr. 96-107, 113-115. 
 
12 Tr. 60-61, 94-96, 117-120. 
5 
 
                                                          
Applicant provided numerous character letters that I considered. Those writing 
letters believe her to be trustworthy, dependable, and loyal. She is considered a good 
person with a strong work ethic, reliable and hardworking. Applicant completed over 211 
hours of volunteer service from May 2007 to February 2009 and provided a letter from 
the volunteer coordinator who considers her a true team player.13  
 
Applicant’s testimony was often convoluted and confusing and lacked candor. I 
did not find her testimony regarding her disputes with creditors or her actions to resolve 
her debts as credible. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
13 AE K and L. 
6 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
Applicant has been aware of her delinquent debts for a significant period of time 
and although she made promises to contact creditors, pay the debts, dispute the debts, 
and file police reports about some of them, she has not taken action on them. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
7 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 At Applicant’s OPM interview she made promises to address her delinquent 
debts. She failed to follow through on her promises. She continues to owe the debts 
alleged. She testified that some of the delinquent debts are the result of identity theft, 
but failed to show she filed police reports about them or formally researched the debts 
and disputed them with the creditors or credit bureaus. The most she did was make a 
handwritten notation on a payment demand letter telling the creditor to not contact her. 
Applicant has neglected to follow through on addressing her delinquent debts and 
instead at her hearing made new promises to take care of her debts. She has not 
received financial counseling. She has not made a good-faith effort to resolve her debts. 
There are not clear indications the problem is being resolved. Applicant may have 
legitimate disputes with certain creditors, but despite having adequate time since her 
OPM interview to formally dispute the debts, she has not. I find mitigating conditions (a), 
(c), (d) and (e) do not apply. Applicant experienced some periods of unemployment. 
However for mitigating condition (b) to be fully applicable she must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. There is no evidence she acted responsibly in 
addressing her delinquencies. I find mitigating condition (b) only partially applies.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
8 
 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are:  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives high praise from 
those who provided character letters. Applicant has been aware of her delinquent debts 
for a long period of time. She has done very little to resolve them. She made promises 
to contact creditors, research and dispute different debts, but has not. She does not 
have a budget and has not gone to any financial counseling. In the next few months she 
will have to start repaying her student loans totaling approximately $200,000, with 
monthly payments of $1,000. Based on her financial situation it is likely she will be 
unable to make the total monthly payments. Applicant owes a significant amount of debt 
and has failed to take action to resolve it. She made many promises in her OPM 
interview, but did not follow through. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:  Against Applicant 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
