                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-08938 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 19, 2008, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On February 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 11, 2009, and requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On April 3, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case.  
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant. 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the file on April 17, 2009.  Applicant filed 
a response to the FORM on May 13, 2009, within the 30 day time allowed that would 
have expired on May 17, 2009. I received the case assignment on May 28, 2009. Based 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated March 11, 2009, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶ 1 (Financial Considerations) of the SOR, with explanations. He denied 
the factual allegations in ¶ 2 (Personal Conduct) of the SOR. He also provided 
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 52 years old, married with two children and one stepchild, and works 
for a defense contractor.  Applicant worked for one company for 12 years into the 1990s 
until he was laid off when the factory closed.  He found another job, and then was to be 
laid off unless he accepted another job at the same company for less income.  He 
accepted that position. He was laid off in 2000 for seven months, and then returned to 
work until 2002 when he was laid off for another six months.  Since late 2002, he has 
worked steadily without a lay off.  His net monthly income at the present is $2,328.98. 
(Items 3-7) 
 
 Applicant’s wife developed a pituitary tumor requiring an operation in 1999 and 
radiation treatment in 2003.  She is now on disability payments from Social Security.  
Applicant also provides financial support to the younger of his two daughters, who are 
26 and 25 years old. (Items 3-5) 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in December 1998 and was discharged in 
April 1999. The amount of debts discharged in the bankruptcy is not disclosed. (Items 3-
7) 
 
 Since April 2001, Applicant accumulated 13 delinquent debts totaling $9,048.  
Eight of these debts are medical accounts.  The other five debts are owed to various 
creditors.  Applicant’s Response to the FORM listed 10 payments to the same creditor, 
a collector listed in the SOR as being owed $10.  None of these payments are directly 
linked by Applicant to specific debts in the SOR.  Three of the payments are $9.96, 
$8.07, and $10.20, the amounts closest to the $10 owed to that one collector.  Three 
other debt payment sheets merely state the account is “Paid in Full” without a payment 
amount.  The total amount paid as shown in Applicant’s Response is $240.63.  But 
none of the account numbers listed by Applicant match the account numbers listed in 
the credit reports submitted by the Government. (Items 3-7, Response) 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are listed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR and are 
contained in the following subparagraphs: 
 
 
3 
 
 
  1.b: Medical debt for $115, unpaid; 
  1.c: Medical debt for $41, unpaid; 
  1.d: Medical debt for $10, possibly paid; 
  1.e: Medical debt for $59, unpaid; 
  1.f:  Medical debt for $33, unpaid; 
 1.g: A collector for a loan company, $32, unpaid, though Applicant claims 
he paid it at some time in the past; 
 1.h: Medical debt for an MRI for his wife, $2,996, unpaid; 
 1.i:  Medical debt for $25, unpaid; 
 1.j: Apartment rent debt for two months, $990, unpaid and Applicant 
disputes this debt because of water damage to his household goods in the 
apartment; 
 1.k: A bank debt for $2,485 for the balance owed on a car he purchased 
for his daughter; 
 1.l:  A collector for a bank credit card debt, $1,560, unpaid and Applicant 
claims he has not had a credit card for six years; 
 1.m: A satellite television service, $119, unpaid, and Applicant claims it 
was incurred immediately prior to his filing bankruptcy in 1998; 
 1.n: A medical debt for $583, unpaid. 
 
 Applicant completed his SF-86 on May 19, 2008.  He answered Question 28a 
(debts delinquent more than 180 days in the past seven years) and Question 28b (debts 
currently more than 90 days delinquent) with “no” responses.  In fact, Applicant’s debts, 
listed in the SOR, met both criteria at the time he completed the form.  He certified on 
the form his answers were true and correct.  Applicant should have answered both 
questions with positive responses and listed the debts which were delinquent then.  
Applicant explains in his Answer that he knew the Government would check his credit 
report, and thought the questions referred to debts not listed in the credit report. (Items 
3-7, Answer) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
4 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The Applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
&19: 
 
5 
 
 
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying; and,  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated 13 delinquent debts between 2000 and 2008 totaling 
$9,048 after being discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999.  Applicant has a net 
monthly income of $2,328.98, but did not pay his delinquent obligations over the past 
six years. Six of the delinquent accounts are less than $100, and two other debts are 
more than $100 but less than $200.  Two other delinquent debts are more than $200 
but less than $1,000.  All of these debts could have been paid very easily by Applicant 
out of his net income.  At the same time he is not paying these debts, he purchased a 
house in 2007. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20 they are as follows: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due 
debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate 
the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems in 1998 and 1999 would qualify him for application 
of AG ¶ 20 (b) at that time.  But he admits he has worked steadily since 2002, 
purchased a house in 2007, and has a net income of $2,238.98 every month.  He has 
not acted responsibly since 2002 by allowing these debts to become delinquent, 
especially those under $100.  Therefore, this mitigating condition does not apply under 
his present circumstances. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s Response to the FORM purports to show he is paying 10 delinquent 
debts.  He paid $240.63 on those debts, three of which did not show an amount paid on 
his Response documents.  Applicant did not connect those payments to any specific 
debt listed in the SOR, except I could find one collector with a $10 account which was 
the same collector listed in all of Applicant’s Response payments.  Therefore, only one 
$10 debt payment could be confirmed, which was Subparagraph 1.d.  The burden of 
proof and persuasion is on Applicant, and he should have clearly identified which 
payment applied to the specific debts listed in the SOR.  AG ¶ 20 (d) is applicable to 
only one $10 debt. 
 
The remaining mitigating conditions do not apply under the facts.  Therefore, I do 
not need to make specific statements about each of them. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in 
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or 
that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve 
as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or 
intelligence service or other group; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the 
individual to the employer as a condition of employment; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
8 
 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16 (a) is the only disqualifying condition applicable.  Applicant did 
not disclose his delinquent debts in answering Questions 28a and 28b on his SF-86.  
That form requires full disclosure by any applicant, even if the Government may have 
access to credit or other records to verify the disclosed information.  Applicant’s excuse 
for not answering the questions truthfully was that he knew the Government could get 
his credit records, and he assumed the questions referred to items not on the credit 
records.  However, Applicant fails to explain how he knew what was or was not on his 
credit record, and he failed to use the “Additional Comments” section of the SF-86 to 
explain his debts or his rationale for not disclosing them.  I conclude Applicant knew he 
had delinquent debts and chose not to disclose them as required by the SF-86. His 
reasons for not disclosing them, because he thought the questions on the SF-86 only 
applied to debts not listed on his credit report, is not persuasive. Therefore, it is logical 
to conclude he deliberately failed to disclose them to the Government. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability; and, 
 
 
9 
 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased 
or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
Applicant did not take any action after completing his SF-86 and before being 
questioned by the Government investigator to correct this deliberate failure to disclose 
his delinquent debts.  None of these mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy and 
then continuing to fail to pay his debts over the past decade is serious misconduct by 
Applicant.  The majority of these debts was small, and could have been paid long ago.  
Applicant obviously ignored his financial obligations.  There is a repeated failure to pay 
these debts from 2001 to the present.  Applicant was a mature adult when he failed to 
pay his debts, and then deliberately failed to disclose them to the Government.  He 
voluntarily made these decisions; no one coerced him to do them.  There is no evidence 
of any rehabilitation. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence is shown by 
Applicant’s futile attempt to show he paid some debts, but did not submit proof they 
were the debts of concern to the Government in the SOR, serving only to obfuscate the 
issue. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations 
 
10 
 
 
and personal conduct security concerns.  I conclude the “whole person” concept against 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e to 1.o  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
