                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:   )
  )
  )
          )       ISCR Case No. 08-09808
           SSN:        )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance                   )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On January 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 19, 2009, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on April 21, 2009.  The case was scheduled for hearing
on May 19, 2009.  A hearing was held as scheduled, for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, or
deny, Applicant’s application for a security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of five exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and five
2
exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received May 31, 2009.  Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have (a) accumulated two related
debts (one charged off and the other associated with a mortgage foreclosure)
exceeding $110,000.00 and (b) filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2004 and
received a discharge in September 2004.  
For his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the alleged debt covered by
subparagraph 1.a and admitted the subparagraph 1.b debt and Chapter 7 bankruptcy
petition and discharge covered by subparagraph 1.c.  Applicant claimed he did not owe
monies to creditor 1.a and disputes the debt covered by creditor 1.b.  He claimed his
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge afforded him a fresh start and chance to improve his
financial situation.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old system administrator for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Applicant is unmarried and has no children (see ex. 1).  Aided by student loans,
he earned a two-degree in information technology from a technical institute in June
2002 (ex. 1; R.T., at 136-137).  He has since earned some additional college credits
and plans to return to school next semester (ex. 1; R.T., at 101-102).  His company
assists him financially with his schooling (R.T., at 102).
Concerned about his mounting credit card and student loan debts, Applicant
petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in June 2004 (see exs.1 and 3; R.T., at ).
He scheduled $30,000.00 to $40,0000.00 in credit card debts and student loans that he
still is paying on (R.T., at 76).  The bankruptcy discharge he received in September
2004 did not wipe out all of his credit card debts or his student loan debts (R.T., at 76-
78).  
In August 2004, a friend recommended an investment property to Applicant  and
referred him to another individual to complete the investment (R.T., at 41, 80-81).
Applicant formed an oral partnership with this referred friend, with the understanding
his new partner would take care of needed repairs and cover the monthly loan
payments, and Applicant would obtain the financing for the purchase (R.T., at 41-43,
49).  Applicant, in turn, applied for financing of a residential property (priced at
$270,000.00) in the current state of his residence for a 100 per cent interest in the
property (R.T., at 43, 81-82).  He paid nothing down on the financing he obtained for his
3
purchase (R.T., at 48). The lender broke the loan into separate loans (one for
$55,000.00 to facilitate his buying the property) and the other a conventional first
mortgage for around $220,000.00 (R.T., at 64-65, 83).  Both of these loans were
completed with the same lender (R.T., at 53-55, 83-84).  Just how Applicant was able to
finance the purchase of his investment property for nothing down and little track history,
and during a pending bankruptcy, is unclear.  Without any of the closing paperwork to
cross-check for helpful clues, definitive answers cannot be gleaned from the record. 
Records reflect that In August 2005, the original lender sold its second mortgage
(most likely a purchase money mortgage) to creditor 1.a (see exs. 2, 3 and A; R.T., at
66, 109-110). The following month the same lender sold its first mortgage to creditor 1.b
(see exs. 2 and 3). 
Applicant purchased his investment property with the intention of making repairs
and reselling the unit for a profit of around $2,500.00 (R.T., at 49, 80).  Although just 23
years of age and with no real estate training, he never discussed the purchase with his
parents, never visited the property, and never anticipated having to repay the
$270,000.00 purchase price (R.T., at 48-50, 80-81).  
After singularly completing the purchase of the investment property, Applicant
deferred to his new partner who committed to making the required $1,500.00 monthly
payments under the terms of his mortgage (R.T., at 49).  This putative partner made two
or three payments towards both mortgages on the property, and then quit making
monthly payments altogether (R.T., at 49-50, 82).   Because Applicant did not try to rent
the property while it was in a past due status, it generated no income (R.T., at 106).
Incoming rents could have been applied (in part) towards the mortgage, or upkeep of
the property, even if rents could not fully cover the mortgage given the state of the
property at the time (R.T., at 106, 111-114).  
Records reflect that the lender resold its two loans in 2005 to two separate
entities.  It sold its $55,000.00 second mortgage in August 2005 to creditor 1.a (see exs.
3, 4 and A).  The same lender then sold its $220,000.00 conventional first mortgage the
following month to creditor 1.b (exs. 3, 4 and A).  
When Applicant’s partner ceased making payments on Applicant’s investment
property, Applicant tried to contact the partner, but without any success (R.T., at 51-52).
From November 2004 through October 2006, neither Applicant nor his partner made
any payments on the investment property.  During this period, Applicant received
regular collection notices on his two loans (R.T., at 84-85).  He also made several
attempts to contact creditor 1.a and perfect a short sale, but without success (R.T., at
55-56, 86-87).  Sometime in 2006, creditor 1.a charged off its second mortgage account
(R.T., at 86).  Applicant could not account for what the charge off meant (R.T., at 86).  
In November 2006, the first mortgagee mailed a foreclosure notice to Applicant,
and proceeded to try to sell the property at public auction in February 2007 (R.T., at 54-
56).  Apparently unsuccessful in finding a buyer at the foreclosure sale, creditor 1.b
4
redeemed the property, assumed ownership, and, according to Applicant, either
retained title to the property, or resold it to a third party (R.T., at 59-60, 68-71, 88-89).
While Applicant can not document creditor 1.b’s ownership interest in the property (R.T.,
at 69-70), he expresses confidence the creditor will not seek any money from him (R.T.,
at 89).  He assures he checked the county records and identified a third party as the
owner of the property (R.T., at 71).  Whether this party, Applicant, or creditor 1.b is the
actual owner of the property is unclear.  His credit reports (exs. 3 and 4) reflect creditor
1.b as the mortgagee of the property, not the owner. 
Ownership of the investment property Applicant purchased in 2004 remains a
troublesome issue, that cannot be reliably resolved without the aid of a title report or
some clear documentation from the lender or official records from the county recorder
where the property is located.  Creditor 1.a, in the meantime, has charged off its
$55,000.00 second mortgage purchase for reasons unclear (see exs B and E).  When
Applicant contacted creditor 1.b to ascertain any collection intentions, he was
telephonically informed that the creditor was not looking to collect any owed  deficiency
without any apparent elaboration (R.T., at 110-111).  The evidence in the record does
not contain any confirmations of collection intentions from either creditor.
Still, Applicant assures he has no deficiency exposure with either creditor 1.a or
creditor1.b (R.T., at 109-111).  While his assurances are certainly plausible, they cannot
be verified and adopted without corroborative proof from the underlying documentation
and/or written confirmation from the creditors themselves.
For the past few months, Applicant has been working with a credit building firm to
resolve his disputes with creditor 1.a and 1.b and have these reported debts removed
from his credit reports (see ex. E). He assures his credit rebuilding efforts have enabled
him to increase his credit score to above 700 (R.T., at 74).  He lives in rental housing,
earns over $3,400.00  a month, and adheres to a budget that nets him over $1,100.00
a month in remainder after all of his expenses and debts have been paid (see ex. 3;
R.T., at 75, 91-103). 
Applicant has a 401(k) retirement account and a pension plan that are funded by
his employer.  He estimates to have between $5,000.00 and $6,000.00 invested in the
two accounts (R.T., at 105).  He enjoys working on military contracts and believes his
overall finances have improved, and will continue to improve “as time goes on” (R.T., at
107-108). 
Endorsements and awards
Applicant did not provide any endorsements from his command or community.
Potentially helpful but not available either are his company performance evaluations and
any commendations he may have earned.  
5
Policies
 The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued or
denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively in
arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E2(a) of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.” Adjudication Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
6
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a system administrator for a defense contractor who accumulated
several delinquent debts over the past several years.  To resolve his credit card
delinquencies in 2004, he sought the protection of the bankruptcy laws.  Before
completing his Chapter 7 bankruptcy, he contracted to purchase an investment property
on the strength of a referral from a good friend.  Applicant’s purchase was facilitated by a
first and second mortgage sans any down payment.  When his new partner abandoned
his monthly servicing commitments on the purchase, Applicant abandoned his property
investment and accepted non-judicial foreclosure by the lender. Whether or not the
foreclosing lender actually foreclosed on the property and retains a right to a deficiency
is unclear. 
Potentially applicable to Applicant’s foreclosure in this case is the state’s anti-
deficiency law (CCP, § 580b).  Section 580b of his state’s code is fairly all encompassing
as it pertains to debt instruments created to facilitate a purchase of a home in the state.
Case authorities certainly leave little room for excluding mortgage instruments
considered integral to the financing of the home in question.  The only exception would
be if the listed second mortgage with creditor 1.a can be legally characterized as post-
purchase security, which is not covered by CCP, § 580b.   Without any furnished loan
documentation, it is difficult to ascertain with any degree of certitude whether the creditor
1.a debt qualifies as a purchase money obligation eligible for coverage by the state’s
anti-deficiency law, or falls outside the law’s anti-deficiency exclusion.
Security concerns are raised here under the financial considerations guideline of
AG ¶ 18 of the Directive.  Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information” AG ¶ 18.  To resolve his accumulation of significant credit card and student
loan debt, Applicant (in his early twenties) turned to Chapter 7 bankruptcy for protection.
His utilization of Chapter 7 bankruptcy procedures and his exposing himself to potential
deficiency enforcement as a result of his post-bankruptcy loan defaults and ensuing
foreclosure warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs
for financial considerations: ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and ¶
19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
7
When Applicant made his referenced investment  purchase, he had no capital
resources of his own to commit and obtained financing of the property with nothing
down.  He was still involved in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding at the time and was
forced to rely on a friend for loan servicing assistance.  Exactly what this friend
committed to and expected to derive from the investment is unclear.  The record lacks
documentation of the purchase and the financial arrangements Applicant reportedly
made with this friend.  What made Applicant’s real estate investment especially risky is
his absence of any down payment to secure conventional mortgage financing.  Without
capital of his own, he relied  on a rising real estate market, an extraordinary institutional
supply of leverage capital to fund purchase money needs, and a vast array of available
mortgage services, to facilitate his investment property purchase.  From the outset,
Applicant’s purchase was laden with risk,  even in an advancing real estate market.
For the first several months following his investment property purchase, Applicant
and his new partner made the required monthly mortgage payments in a timely way and
looked to reaping considerable rewards from their investment.  Their hopes for a quick
turnaround on their investment were quickly dashed, though, after Applicant’s partner
ceased making payments, and Applicant failed to cover him. 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in financial cases (as here) and bring
into play security concerns covered by the financial considerations guideline. 
Extenuating circumstances are not clearly associated with either Applicant’s
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, or his ensuing investment foreclosure.  Based on the
circumstances presented here, MC ¶ 20(b) of the financial considerations guideline, “the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibility,” has no visible applicability
to Applicant’s financial difficulties.   
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has made no manifest attempt to check his
loan documents to ascertain whether creditor 1.a has a potential deficiency claim that it
could conceivably enforce against him.  He assures that creditor 1.a is not seeking a
deficiency on its second mortgage position, and he has relied on a credit building firm to
obtain the removal of creditor 1.a’s debt from his credit reports.  Still, he has not provided
any loan documentation or other written proof that creditor 1.a has no deficiency
entitlement.  His limited contacts to date with creditor 1.a and his credit rebuilding firm by
themselves are not enough to justify application of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” 
8
Applicant provides no evidence either of any financial counseling, or personal
budgeting.  Without any documented counseling or budgeting in the record, MC ¶ 20(c),
“the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” may not be applied.
From a whole person standpoint, Applicant fails to provide sufficient anti-
deficiency documentation and documented support from his employer, friends or
acquaintances who are familiar with his work and community contributions and can
vouchsafe for his good judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  Nor is he able to
document extenuating circumstances associated with his financial difficulties.  To his
credit, Applicant exhibits remorse for his indiscretions, which he attributes to youth and
immaturity.  His lifestyle changes to date do reflect some improvements in his managing
his finances and are to be encouraged.  At the same time, his efforts in restoring sound
managerial control over his finances remain a work in progress and require additional
seasoning before safe predictions can be made that his finances are safely stabilized
and averse recurrence risks.
Taking into account all of the presented mitigation considerations in this case,
Applicant fails to mitigate judgment, reliability and trustworthiness concerns related to his
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge and his mortgage-related debts. Unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by the financial
considerations guideline.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E 2(a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies9
