 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09905 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
On March 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 8, 2009, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on May 4, 2009. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
 
2 
 
Applicant received the FORM on May 12, 2009. He responded with a letter dated May 
28, 2009, and an attached letter from his facility security officer (FSO). Department 
Counsel did not object to his response. The letter from the FSO is marked Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A and admitted. The case was assigned to me on June 17, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was born in 
Canada. He came to the United States in 1984 to attend school and never moved back 
to Canada. He has a Master of Science degree in engineering awarded by an American 
university in 1988. He became a U.S. citizen in September 2007. He has never been 
married and has no children.1 
 
 Applicant had a Canadian passport that was issued in August 2004, and is due to 
expire in August 2009. He retained the passport after he became a U.S. citizen for ease 
of travel to Canada. His mother, two siblings, and other extended family members still 
live in Canada. The Canadian passport made it easier to enter Canada, and he wanted 
to keep it so that he would not have any difficulties entering the country in case of an 
emergency. He used the Canadian passport to travel to Canada after he became a U.S. 
citizen.2  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he was a dual citizen and that he had a Canadian 
passport when he applied for his security clearance in June 2008. When he was 
interviewed for his background investigation in July 2008, he told the investigator that he 
was reluctant to renounce his dual citizenship with Canada. He stated that he planned 
on renewing his Canadian passport when it expired. Applicant responded to DOHA 
interrogatories in December 2008. He stated, “I am not willing to destroy or surrender 
this [Canadian] passport at this time.3 When he responded to the SOR in April 2009, 
Applicant wrote: 
 
I am willing to destroy the Canadian passport I currently possess and not 
renew it and provide any necessary documentation or actions in support of 
that if its possession by me precludes obtaining the Defense Personnel 
Security Clearance my employer is seeking.4  
 
 Applicant stated in his response to the FORM that he destroyed his Canadian 
passport in front of his facility security officer. He stated that he would not renew or 
                                                          
1 Item 5. Information in this paragraph was obtained from Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) dated June 25, 2008. 
 
2 Items 3-6. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Item 3. 
 
 
3 
 
apply for another Canadian passport and he was willing to renounce his Canadian 
citizenship. His FSO certified that the passport was destroyed.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
                                                          
5 AE A. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 Applicant possessed and used a Canadian passport while a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 
10(a) is applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant maintained and used his Canadian passport after becoming a U.S. 
citizen. Because he chose to actively exercise his rights and privileges as a Canadian 
citizen, his dual citizenship was not based solely on his parents’ citizenship or birth in 
Canada. AG ¶ 11(a) is not applicable. He was initially reluctant to give up his Canadian 
passport because he wanted the flexibility it provided to visit his family. It took some 
time, but when Applicant finally realized that possession of a foreign passport could be 
 
5 
 
a concern, he destroyed the passport. He stated that he would not renew or apply for 
another Canadian passport and he was willing to renounce his Canadian citizenship. 
AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) are applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Canada. He 
came to the United States in 1984 as a young man to pursue his education and 
remained. He became a U.S. citizen in September 2007. He maintained his Canadian 
citizenship and passport for ease of travel to Canada to visit his family. When he 
realized that could be a concern, he destroyed the passport and stated that he would 
not renew or apply for another Canadian passport. He is willing to renounce his 
Canadian citizenship. There are no other issues of concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
