 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08740 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Drug Involvement security concerns, but has not mitigated 
the concerns raised under the Personal Conduct guideline. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
On January 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 4, 2009, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on May 
7, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 18, 2009. The case was reassigned 
 
2 
 
to me on June 16, 2009. The hearing was convened as scheduled on June 16, 2009. 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf but did not submit any documentary 
evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 22, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since November 2005. He worked for a different defense 
contractor from about February 2003 through November 2005. He has held a security 
clearance since 2003. He graduated magna cum laude from college in 2000 and 
summa cum laude when he obtained his master’s degree in 2003. He is single with no 
children.1  
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana periodically from about 1996 through September 
2005. He occasionally sold marijuana to his friends if he had any extra, but he did not 
sell for profit. He used a pill that he believes was ecstasy (MDMA) in 2003, and he took 
ecstasy on six to eight occasions between about July 2005 and September 2005.2  
 
 Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) in February 2003. 
Question 27 asked: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?3 
 
Applicant answered “Yes,” and stated that between “1996/08/18” and “1999/05/31” he 
used marijuana “no more than 10” times. This was inaccurate information because he 
had used marijuana on multiple occasions up to the time he submitted the SF 86. 
Applicant admitted that he provided false information, but stated that he was not truly 
briefed on the importance of the SF 86 or what a security clearance involved.4  
 
 Applicant was granted a Secret security clearance in 2003. He continued to use 
marijuana after he was granted his clearance. He had a clearance, but he did not have 
access to classified information. He stated that security was not emphasized at the 
company and he was never told about the importance of being drug-free while holding a 
clearance.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19-28, 84; GE 1, 6, 8. 
 
2 Tr. at 32-41, 48-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3, 8. 
 
3 GE 9. 
 
4 Tr. at 32-37, 77-82; GE 9. 
 
5 Tr. at 19-22, 32-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3 
 
3 
 
 Applicant switched jobs to work for his current employer in November 2005. He 
submitted another SF 86 on December 6, 2005, to upgrade his Secret clearance to Top 
Secret/ Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI). He answered “Yes” in response 
to Question 27 and stated that between “1996/08/18” and “2001/08/11” he used 
marijuana an “unknown” amount of times. He did not list his ecstasy use. He 
intentionally failed to list his ecstasy use and misrepresented the last time he used 
marijuana.6   
 
Applicant had a polygraph and interview in January 2006, pursuant to the request 
to upgrade his clearance to TS/SCI. He stated during the pre-polygraph interview that 
he used marijuana between 1996 and 2002, and ecstasy on one occasion in 2003. After 
the polygraph, he admitted that he used marijuana approximately one and a half times a 
month from 2002 through September 2005. He told the interviewer that he did not 
disclose his full involvement with illegal drugs because he was told he would not receive 
his clearance if he used illegal drugs within one year prior to the polygraph. He did not 
correct the amount of times he used ecstasy.7 
 
Applicant was denied access to SCI in a clearance decision statement issued on 
March 2, 2006. The decision was based on his drug use and the falsification of his SF 
86 in December 2005.8  
 
Applicant forwarded an appeal to the denial of his SCI access in a May 1, 2006 
letter. He denied using marijuana between 2002 and 2005. He stated that after 2002 he 
only used marijuana on one occasion in September 2005. He also stated that he only 
used what might have been ecstasy on one occasion in 2003. Applicant intentionally 
misrepresented the extent of his drug use in his statement. Applicant’s appeal was 
denied on May 24, 2006. He was informed that he could reapply for SCI access in 
September 2006.9 
 
 Applicant submitted a third SF 86 on October 11, 2006, in another attempt to 
upgrade his clearance to TS/SCI. He answered “Yes” in response to Question 27 and 
stated that between “1996/08/18” and “2005/09/30,” he used marijuana an “unknown” 
amount of times. He listed the use of an “unknown” substance on one occasion on 
January 1, 2003. He intentionally did not list his ecstasy use in 2005.10  
                                                          
6 Tr. at 26-29, 41-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6. 
 
7 Tr. at 55-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-3. The results of the polygraph are not 
considered for this decision, except insofar as the impact the polygraph had on Applicant providing details 
about his drug use. 
8 GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 62-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5. The SOR does not allege that Applicant 
falsified the appeal letter. Any false statements that were not alleged will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. All of Applicant’s statements will be considered in assessing his credibility, in the application of 
mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
10 Tr. at 72-76; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant had another polygraph and interview in late 2006 or early 2007. He 
fully discussed and admitted to his drug use. He provided a written statement on 
September 4, 2007, and again was truthful about his drug use.11  
 
 Applicant has not used illegal drugs since September 2005. He has matured and 
realized that illegal drug use is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. He is 
willing to sign a statement of intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 70-72, 75; GE 8. 
 
12 Tr. at 82-83, 89. 
 
 
5 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant possessed, used, and distributed illegal drugs. He continued to use 
illegal drugs after he was granted a security clearance in 2003. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 
25(g) are applicable as disqualifying conditions.  
 
Two Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
 
6 
 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana at a young age and used it regularly for 
years. He used ecstasy in 2003 and on six to eight occasions in 2005. He continued to 
use illegal drugs after he submitted his SF 86 and was granted a clearance. He was 
dishonest about his drug use on at least four occasions. He stopped using illegal drugs 
in September 2005. He has matured and now realizes it is inconsistent with the 
responsibilities of his job and with holding a security clearance. He is willing to sign a 
statement of intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
 
7 
 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 in February 2003, December 2005, and 
October 2006. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable as a disqualifying condition. His drug use while 
holding a security clearance was also alleged under Guideline H. It establishes AG ¶¶ 
16(c) and 16(e) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant was dishonest about his drug use on at least four occasions. He finally 
revealed the extent of his drug use during a polygraph and interview in late 2006 or 
early 2007, and again in his September 4, 2007 statement. I also found him to be 
credible at his hearing. While he receives credit for finally being honest, that is 
insufficient to overcome his multiple lies. I find that no mitigating conditions are 
applicable to the falsifications of his Security Clearance Applications. Applicant’s drug 
 
8 
 
use while holding a security clearance is mitigated under AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) 
under the same rationale discussed under the Drug Involvement guideline. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 31 years old. He lied 
about his drug use on multiple occasions and continued to use illegal drugs while 
holding a security clearance. He deserves some credit for finally coming clean about his 
drug use and for abstaining from further drug use. However, I cannot ignore the number 
of times that he misrepresented the truth and falsified his answers during the security 
clearance application process over a several-year period. He appears to be remorseful, 
but at this time, concerns remain about his truthfulness, judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Drug Involvement security concerns, but has not mitigated 
the concerns raised under the Personal Conduct guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
   
 
9 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
