KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant was arrested twice for assault and has numerous delinquent debts. 
Applicant’s criminal conduct caused or threatened to cause harm to others, yet she did not
express remorse.  It was not clear from the record that Applicant’s apparent inability to hold
long-term employment was the result of a condition beyond her control.  The Judge’s adverse
conclusions are sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-03432.a1
DATE: 06/10/2009
DATE: June 10, 2009
In Re:
--------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-03432
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
“Applicant was driving in traffic.  A police officer, who was directing traffic, gave her hand signals indicating1
where she should drive.  She ignored the officer’s instructions.  Another officer then followed her in a police car and
signaled for her to pull over.  She did not immediately comply.  When she finally stopped, an officer came to her vehicle
and banged on the window and signaled her to get out of her car.  When she came out of her car, she cursed the officer.
Applicant was arrested, taken into custody, and charged with Assault Police Officer.”  Decision at 2.
Applicant was pulled over by police because her license plate was not properly attached to her car.  In checking2
Applicant’s information in the police database, the officer who stopped Applicant learned that an arrest warrant had been
issued for Applicant . . .  The warrant had been issued because in January 2006 she had hit an automobile dealer’s
employee with her automobile and left the premises.”  Id. at 2-3.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 20, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 18, 2008, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Joan Caton Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings are supported
by substantial record evidence; whether the Judge erred in failing to mitigate the security concerns
raised in Applicant’s case; and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant has been arrested twice.
The first incident occurred in 1995, when she was charged with assaulting a police officer.   The case1
was dismissed before trial as a nolle prosequi.  The second incident occurred in 2006.  Applicant was
arrested for reckless endangerment, first degree assault, second degree assault, and theft of property
valued at less than $500.   She pled guilty to second degree assault and to theft.  The court imposed2
probation before judgement, her probation period being three years.  Applicant has numerous
delinquent debts, beginning in 2001.  Her security clearance application listed 23 “employment
activities” between 1994 and 2007.  Decision at 3.  Concerning the Guideline F security concerns,
the Judge stated that Applicant’s “employment history shows short-term employment and periods
of unemployment.  It was not clear from the record that Applicant’s apparent inability to hold long-
term employment was the result of a condition beyond her control.  She admitted that the
delinquencies alleged on the SOR remained unresolved, resulting in substantial debt which continues
to the present day, a situation which raises concerns about Applicant’s good judgment.”  Id. at 7. As
regards Guideline J, the Judge noted that Applicant’s conduct caused or threatened to cause harm
to others, yet she did not express remorse. 
The Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by
substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”) Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that she
had committed the offenses listed under Guideline J.  She states that the fact that the cases were
resolved without formal convictions means that she did not commit the alleged misconduct.
However, “the fact that criminal charges were dropped, dismissed, or resulted in an acquittal does
not preclude an Administrative Judge from finding an applicant engaged in the conduct underlying
those criminal charges.”  ISCR Case No. 99-0119 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 1999).  After reviewing
the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a
satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly consistent with national security to grant
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance” is sustainable on this record.  Decision at 10.  See also
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The general standard is that a clearance
may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security’”). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael D. Hipple       
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
