1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-05777
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns. Clearance is granted.
On October 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 12, 2009, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on March 5, 2009. On March 16, 2009, a Notice of
Hearing was issued scheduling the case for April 8, 2009. It was held as scheduled. At
the hearing, I received two government exhibits, ten Applicant exhibits, and Applicant’s
testimony. Also, at the government’s request, I took administrative notice of the facts set
2
forth in seven exhibits, marked I through VII, regarding the Republic of Georgia. DOHA
received the transcript on April 15, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 58-year-old married man with three children. The oldest are adults,
and the youngest is 11 years old. Two previous marriages ended in divorce.
From 1969 to 1972, Applicant served in the U.S. Army. He graduated from the
Special Forces Officer Course at age 20 (Exhibit F). In February 1972, he was awarded
the Army Commendation Medal (Exhibit G). 
After leaving the military, Applicant attended college, earning a bachelor of arts
degree in Russian in 1975. He speaks fluent Russian, Spanish, French, and Polish. 
Applicant joined the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in 1980, serving until 1993.
As an “official cover officer,” he collected intelligence and recruited spies (Tr 43; Exhibit
2 at 7). Some of these spies were themselves foreign intelligence officers. He spent
approximately two years in the 1980s stationed in the former Soviet Union, a “hostile
threat environment,” (Exhibit 2 at 14, 39) and served as a station chief in another region.
The intelligence he collected focused on adversaries’ research and development.
During this time, he held a security clearance (Tr. 66).
In 1983, the CIA awarded Applicant the Certificate of Exceptional
Accomplishment for his work in the former Soviet Union (Tr. 26). This award is typically
given posthumously (Id.). In 1985, the CIA selected Applicant as an “Exceptional
Intelligence Collector” (Exhibit B). 
After leaving the CIA, Applicant worked in a variety of consulting jobs. Also, he
pursued entrepreneurial endeavors that focused on economic development in the
former Soviet Union (Exhibit 2 at 5).
From June 2003 through August 2003, Applicant worked as a consultant for a
U.S. company (Item 2 at 12). During this time, he lived in Georgia (Tr. 47). Along with
two retired U.S. lieutenant colonels who were also consultants for the company, he
taught U.S. Army progression techniques to the Georgian army (Tr. 46). From January
2004 to May 2004, Applicant worked for a company tasked with assisting the Republic
of Georgia’s Ministry of Defense transition to a “more NATO style” of doing business,
and helping the country advance to a market economy (Item 2 at 12).
Since 2007, Applicant has worked for a company that supplies special needs
equipment to support special operations within the U.S. armed forces (Tr. 62). The
products they market include robotics, tactical communications, and counter-improvised
explosive device technology (Tr. 63). The company also markets its products to foreign
countries. Applicant is its director of international sales (Tr. 69). Applicant’s company
has to obtain export licenses for any of its products it markets overseas (Tr. 64). 
3
The Republic of Georgia is seeking to purchase some of the company’s products
with funding provided by the U.S. European Command (EUCOM - Tr. 65). The
Georgian military intends to supply the technology to its special forces that are about to
deploy to Afghanistan in support of the NATO coalition (Id.).
Applicant met his current wife in August 2003 while living in Georgia. At the time,
she was working for the Georgian Ministry of Defense as an information technology
specialist (Tr. 45). Applicant and his wife married in June 2005 (Exhibit 1 at 25). She
obtained her permanent resident alien status in February 2006, and currently lives in the
U.S. with Applicant. She intends to apply for U.S. citizenship as soon as she is eligible
(Exhibit 2 at 8). Currently, she works as the manager of a cell phone company (Item 2 at
18). Since getting married, Applicant and his wife have visited Georgia in July 2007 and
September 2008.
Applicant’s parents-in-law are Georgian citizens and residents. His father-in-law
is a mechanical engineer who works at an Italian-owned company that makes wine and
fruit juice (Tr. 47). Applicant’s mother-in-law is a homemaker who provides daycare for
her two grandchildren. She previously taught English in the Georgian educational
system (Tr. 47, 57). Applicant’s wife talks to them about once per week. Although
Applicant and his parents-in-law are friendly, he talks with them only if he coincidentally
happens to be present when his wife calls them (Tr. 47, 57). Such conversations
average about once per month.
Applicant’s sister-in-law is a Georgian citizen and resident. She has a medical
degree in addition to a master’s degree in business administration (Tr. 48). Currently,
she works at a Georgian bank (Tr. 48). Applicant talks with her approximately one to
three times per year.
Applicant’s wife’s uncle is a high-ranking Georgian official who directs a quasi-
governmental agency that ensures the security of the prime minister’s communications
channels (Tr. 50). As part of his duties, he travels with the prime minister on trips
abroad (Id.). Under the Soviet regime, as part of his mandatory military assignment, he
was assigned to a KGB unit (Tr. 49). During Georgia’s first independent administration,
he worked in the defense ministry, specializing in signals intelligence (Tr. 61).
Applicant talks to his wife’s uncle approximately once every two to three months
(Tr. 52, 60). He has encouraged the uncle to visit the next time he travels to the U.S.
(Tr. 82).
Applicant’s brother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Georgia. He is an
information technology professional who works part-time for his uncle, the high-ranking
Georgian official. Applicant talks to his brother-in-law one to three times per year.
Applicant spent time with all of his wife’s family during his two trips to Georgia.
The Republic of Geogia is a constitutional republic with a developing economy
(Exhibit I at 1). The prime minister received his graduate education in the U.S. (Exhibit V
This program offers grant assistance to countries that meet certain requirements for good government1
and commitment to reform.
4
at 5). Presidential, parliamentary, and municipal elections are largely free and fair
(Exhibit II at 4). The government is sincerely committed to reducing corruption (Id.).
Constitutional amendments ratified in 2006 increased the judiciary’s independence (Id.).
In 2007, legislation was passed banning litigants from communicating with judges during
pre-trial and trial (Id.).
Georgia’s constitution protects religious freedom, freedom of assembly, and
freedom of the press (Exhibit 4 at 22). The government neither restricts the Internet, nor
limits academic freedom or cultural events (Id. at 20). 
The World Bank has recognized Georgia as the world’s fastest-reforming
economy. Georgia was one of the first countries to receive a compact, in the amount of
$295 million, from the U.S. Millennium Challenge Corporation (Exhibit II at 7).  1
The U.S./Georgia relationship is close (Id. at 7). A new highway leading from the
capital is named after President George W. Bush, and contains his mosaic at the
entrance (Answer). 
Georgia was one of the earliest and staunchest supporters of the U.S.-led
Operation Iraqi Freedom (Exhibit IV at 3). In this conflict, Georgian troops have served
under U.S. command (Id.). 
The mutual support of the U.S. and Georgian militaries predates Operation Iraqi
Freedom. In 2002, the U.S. initiated the Georgia Train and Equip Program (GTEP).
Through this program, the U.S. trained 200 Georgian officers, in addition to 2000
Georgian soldiers and border guards. The training goals were, among other things, to
resist Russian pressure and combat terrorism (Id.). The U.S. continues to provide
military professionalism training and advisory assistance to the Georgian military
(Exhibit II at 7). Georgia has hosted the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s Partnership
for Peace military exercises annually since 2001 (Exhibit IV at 3).
Georgia is one of the most unstable parts of the former Soviet Union in terms of
the number, intensity, and length of ethnic conflict (Exhibit VIII at 2). In August 2008,
ongoing conflict between Georgia and one of its separatist regions escalated into a full-
scale military conflict with Russia, a supporter of the separatists (Exhibit V at 11). On
August 15, 2008, the countries agreed to a cease-fire. Under the cease-fire, Russia
retained control of previously undisputed Georgian territory (Id.). Since the 2008
Russian incursion, the U.S. pledged one billion dollars in foreign assistance including
$150 million in loans and guarantees for construction, manufacturing, and affordable
mortgages (Exhibit IV at 2).
5
Crime remains a serious problem in Georgia (Exhibit III at 1). Georgia’s
commitment to human rights suffered a setback after the 2008 Russian incursion
(Exhibit IV at 1). Since then, many areas have worsened including the use of excessive
force by law enforcement officers, torture and mistreatment of detainees, and
restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, and political participation (Id.).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 explains the foreign influence security concern as follows:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
6
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
Applicant’s wife is a Georgian citizen living with him in the U.S., and his in-laws
are citizens and residents of the Republic of Georgia. Although it is a friendly country, it
was once part of the Soviet Union, and as such, is still periodically subjected to Russian
aggression and intimidation. Moreover, Applicant’s relationship with his uncle, a high-
ranking Georgian official, creates a security concern notwithstanding Georgia’s good
relationship with the U.S. AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” and AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a foreign person,
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing the information,” apply.
Although Georgia is not a paragon of democracy, it is certainly not a hostile,
totalitarian state seeking to project its power worldwide through the brute intimidation or
coercion of its citizens abroad. Consequently, Applicant’s relationship with his wife does
not generate AG ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”
Applicant only talks with his brother-in-law and sister-in-law, at most, three times
per year. AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation,” applies to these relationships.
There is a presumption that one’s relationship with parent in-laws is not casual.
Nevertheless, Applicant’s father-in-law’s innocuous career, together with his mother-in-
law’s homemaker status, and Georgia’s warm relationships with the U.S. are sufficient
enough to trigger the application of AG ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the relationships with
foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or
activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual,
group, organization, or government, and the interests of the U.S.” applies.
Conversely, the security concern generated by Applicant’s uncle’s expertise in
signals intelligence and his current position as the director of the prime minister’s
network security is significant. However, when balanced against Applicant’s experience
as a special forces officer, and a CIA officer who served with distinction for 13 years, I
conclude that AG ¶ 8(b), “ . . the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” applies.
7
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
The risk of inducement and potential for conflict of interest that Applicant’s wife’s
uncle poses is significant given his position in the Georgian government. These factors
must be balanced against the strength of the U.S./Georgian relationship. Since its
independence, the U.S. has made tremendous investments in Georgia’s economy. U.S.
advisors are in Georgia engaged in tasks ranging from border security enhancement to
military training. Georgian troops have served under U.S. command in Operation Iraqi
Freedom. Although the possibility of Russian aggression and intimidation still exists,
Georgia has been undeterred in strengthening its ties to the U.S.
Applicant spent nearly half of his career in the CIA. He spent two of these years
in the former Soviet Union, recruiting spies to collect intelligence. This work was
inherently dangerous because some of the potential spies in the network he managed
were themselves foreign intelligence agents. He could have been subjected to life
imprisonment or death if any of these spies were merely feigning interest in working
surreptitiously for the U.S. in order to expose his cover. Working in this high-pressure,
life-threatening environment, Applicant excelled earning the CIA’s Certificate of
Exceptional Accomplishment in 1983. After the Soviet Union collapsed, Applicant left
the CIA and pursued several private endeavors focused on developing the civil, military,
and economic infrastructures of the newly independent countries. Although these
projects have not always succeeded, they have always been consistent with U.S.
objectives.
I conclude that the strength of the U.S./Georgian relationship, together with
Applicant’s exceptional and unique career history, outweigh the security risks generated
by his Georgian in-laws. Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns
generated by his Georgian in-laws. Clearance is granted.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
