                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:   )
  )
  )
           -------------------------                             )       ISCR Case No. 08-08976
           SSN: -----------------   )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance                   )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jennifer M. Kies, Esquire; Daniel C. Schwartz, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On November 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 9, 2008, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to another judge on January 6, 2009, and re-assigned to me on
March 4, 2009.  The case was scheduled for hearing on March 24, 2009.  A hearing
was held as scheduled, for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, or deny, Applicant’s application
for a security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of nine exhibits;
2
Applicant relied on two witnesses (including himself) and 24 exhibits.  The transcript
(R.T.) was received March 31, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record with documentation of his efforts to resolve his creditor 1.a debt and payment of
his creditor 1.b debt. . For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 10 days to April 3,
2009 to supplement the record.  The Government was granted three days to April 6,
2009, to  respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant provided copies of his statement
covering his payment efforts, letters to his creditor 1.b creditor seeking confirmation of
payment, and a payment confirmation from creditor 1.b.  Department Counsel offered
no objection to the admission of any of Applicant’s proffered exhibits. The submissions
were admitted as exhibits Y through CC.  
Following the close of the record, Applicant moved to supplement the record with
additional documentation from creditor 1.b regarding this creditor’s acceptance of
Applicant’s settlement payment and expressed intention to report his account with the
credit bureaus as “settled.”  Department Counsel did not oppose Applicant’s request,
and for good cause shown, his request was granted.  Applicant’s proffered
supplemental exhibit  was admitted as exhibit DD.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have accumulated three debts
exceeding $91,000.00.  They are listed as creditors 1.a through 1.c and will be referred
to in this way in the findings and conclusions.
For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to of the debt  allegations.  He
claimed that his creditor 1.a debt had been written off, and that he had successfully
worked with the creditor to satisfy other debts without hearing anything back on this
debt.  He claimed he has made good-faith efforts to resolve his creditor 1.b debt as best
he could given his divorce and court orders for child support and alimony. Appellant
denied being indebted to creditor 1.c, citing his executed deed in lieu of foreclosure on
his marital residence, which was necessitated after his wife moved out of the residence
and obtained child support.  Applicant explained that the bank which accepted the deed
in lieu of foreclosure took possession of the property and resold it.  He is currently
working with credit reporting agencies to remove any reported bank claims from his
credit reports. 
Applicant claimed he is required to hold a security clearance to retain his job and
has never committed a security violation in the 24 years he has held a security
clearance.  He claimed he acted responsibly in his efforts to contact his creditors and
resolve his debts.  He claimed he can never be blackmailed, and has since stabilized
his finances. 
3
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48-year-old deputy chief engineer for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Applicant married W in October 1992 (see ex. 1).  He has two twin four-year old
boys from this marriage.  While married, Applicant and W each worked an relied on their
dual income to pay their bills (R.T., at 89).  Applicant and W maintained a budget and
kept track of their bills and spending (R.T., at 90).  Rarely did they encounter any
financial problems during their marriage (R.T., at 90-91).
Applicant received his bachelor of science degree in computer science from a
recognized university in 1987, and earned a master degree in information systems from
an accredited university in 1998 (see exs. 1-3 and G; R.T., at 46-47).  Between 1992
and June 2007, Applicant worked for a number of companies.  Most of his work required
a security clearance (R.T., at 49, 52, 68). 
For over 20 years during his marriage to W, Applicant exercised excellent
financial responsibility in supporting his family and managing his finances.  He and W
refinanced their home (purchased in 2001) in July 2006 based on an appraised value of
$627,000.00 (see ex. J).  The new mortgage payment of $4,000.00 a month required
the incomes of W and Applicant to support their household expenses and mortgage
payments (ex. J; R.T., at 107). 
Applicant and W separated in February 2006 (see ex. H; R.T., at 165) after
Applicant learned of his wife’s having an affair with another man (R.T., at 92).  W filed
for divorce in November 2006 (see ex. J; R.T., at 92, 164-65).  In February 2007, W and
their two children moved moved out of their house.  Once she vacated the home, she
stopped contributing to household expenses and the mortgage (R.T., at 164).  In May
2007, W filed for divorce and sought both child support and alimony (R.T., at 92-94).
Applicant and W finalized their divorce in January 2008 (see exs. 1 and H; R.T., at 96,
165-66). 
Under his separation agreement with W, Applicant is obligated to pay W monthly
child support of $2,250.00 and monthly alimony of $850.00 (see exs. H and J; R.T. ,at
94-97).  Applicant expects his alimony payments to end in seven years (R.T., at 95).
His separation agreement provides for broad joint custody of his two children that
permits him to keep his children twice a week (R.T., at 94).  W has never expressed any
interest in marriage counseling, and they have never pursued reconciliation after their
separation.  
With his limited income following his separation to cover his mortgage and
household expenses, Applicant encountered considerable difficulty paying the mortgage
and keeping up with his credit card obligations (R.T., at 107-08).  Sale opportunities
4
were limited, too, as the value of his house had fallen below the face amount of his
mortgage.  Not only could he not pay his mortgage or effectively dispose of the
property, but he fell behind in his card debts with creditors 1.a and 1.b.  Ultimately,
these latter debts were written off by the creditors in the respective amounts of
$5,503.00 and $43,610.00 (see exs. 5 and 6; R.T., at 104).  
Unable to cover his mortgage and other expenses, Applicant contacted his
creditor 1.c mortgagee in March 2007 to explore prospects for lowering his monthly
mortgage payments (see ex. J; R.T., at 107).  Creditor 1.c, in turn, informed Applicant
that it could do nothing for him until he had defaulted on his mortgage payments and
documented his listing of the property for sale in a vacant state of condition (R.T., at
108-09).
Creditor 1.c followed up its oral advice with a written letter in June 2007
acknowledging Applicant’s request for a loss mitigation work out plan and forwarding an
explanation of financial hardship form (see ex. J).  Appellant promptly completed the
furnished financial hardship form and returned it to creditor 1.c.  In his letter he
explained his circumstances. He also informed creditor 1.c that due to the permanent
circumstances of his situation, he could foresee no other recourse but to request
consideration of a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure (ex. J).  Applicant asked creditor !.c to
work with him on accepting a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure. 
Creditor 1.c accepted Applicant’s request for a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure in
August 2007 (see ex. L; R.T., at 117), and furnished Applicant a prepared deed for his
written execution.  Applicant and W executed the prepared deed in February 2008 and
returned it to the creditor (see ex. M; R.T., at 117-18).  Creditor 1.c, in turn, assigned
Applicant’s mortgage on the covered property to another financial institution for valuable
consideration in April 2008 (see ex. N, R.T., at 120).  Creditor 1.c furnished a
transaction listing report to Applicant in December 2008 (ex. O). The report tracks
Applicant’s payment history with his mortgage and confirms the payoff of Applicant’s
$595,000.00 first trust deed in October 2008 (see ex. O; R.T., at 120-21).  In a
December 2009 letter to Applicant, Creditor 1.c confirmed its removal of Applicant’s
mortgage debt from his credit reports upon its acceptance of a deed-in-lieu of
foreclosure from him (see ex. P; R.T., at 121-22).
Prior to his divorce, Applicant had three separate accounts with creditor 1.a: a
checking account, a savings account, and a credit card (R.T., at 152).  Following his
divorce, he made concerted telephonic efforts throughout 2008 and early 2009 to settle
his creditor 1.a checking account (see exs. Y and Z; R.T., at 156-57).  Applicant did
provide documentation of a written offer to creditor 1.a in July 2008 to settle another of
his accounts with the same creditor with a lump sum $5,000.00 payment by credit card
(see ex. X).  Applicant confirms he was able to successfully settle this account (R.T., at
152-53, 180-81).  
Applicant, however, has not experienced any success in discussing his creditor
1.a account with any representative of the creditor. (R.T., at 178-79).  When he was
5
able to reach a customer operator associated with creditor 1.a in March 2009, he was
told the account was previously written off as a bad debt and could not be accessed
(see exs. Y and Z; R.T., at 156-57).  The creditor 1.a operator furnished him a number
to call to discuss his account.  When Applicant called this number, he determined it to
be a wrong number (see ex. Z).  Applicant assures he would very much like to resolve
his creditor 1.a debt, and would like a number or address to reach a creditor 1.a
authorized representative to resolve this debt (ex. Z).
Applicant’s creditor 1.b debt represents an accrued debt on a line of credit
opened by Applicant in or about 1994.  Applicant obtained the line of credit  to finance
home expenditures for an upgraded bathroom in the basement of his home to
accommodate his in-laws while they helped in the child support of his young twins (R.T.,
at 124-25, 168-69).  For so long as he and his wife maintained their dual incomes, they
were able to comfortably manage this creditor 1.c account (R.T., at 125).  When his wife
abandoned the home and stopped paying on their joint accounts, he encountered
trouble in meeting the monthly payments on this account, and stopped paying on it
(R.T., at 125-26,170-71).  When he asked creditor 1.c for payment assistance, the
creditor was not helpful.  After talking with several debt consolidation groups, he
determined to deal with the creditor directly. 
In an unsigned August 2007 letter from a debt collection attorney purporting to
represent creditor 1.b, the identified attorney offered to accept $22,613.00 in full
settlement of the debt, payable in two installments: an initial $5,000.00 payment and the
$17,613.00 balance payable a month later (see ex. Q; R.T., at 127-31).  Applicant
promptly remitted the first agreed payment of $5,000.00 to the creditor’s collection agent
with the understanding he would remit the balance in 30 days (see ex. R; R.T., at 127-
33, 172).  When he called the attorney agent’s office in September 2007 to try and work
out a more flexible payment plan on the $17,613.00 balance, he was told that the
attorney did not work there anymore, and the payment plan was no longer operative
(see ex. T; R.T., at 139-40, 172-75). 
In July 2008, Applicant was contacted by a successor collection agent for creditor
1.b, and arranged a new hardship payment plan with this new agent (see ex. T; R.T., at
175-76).  This arrangement called for Applicant’s making a $500.00 payment on another
credit card (bringing the debt down to $43,660.00) and remitting $10.00 a month until
his finances stabilized (see ex. T). Applicant never received any confirmation of this
arrangement from the creditor.  Two months later (in October 2008), he was advised
telephonically by this collection agent that the new arrangement was no longer valid
(see ex. T; R.T., at 175-76).  When he received no response from creditor’s 1.b’s
collection agent, he concluded that the creditor had determined to write off the debt, and
so informed the creditor in his follow-up letters in December 2008 and January 2009
(see exs. T and U).  
In March 2009, Applicant received a written offer from a new collection agent of
creditor 1.b (see ex. V; R.T., at 144-45).   In its March 2009 letter, creditor 1.b offered to
settle its debt for a lump sum payment of $6,541.61.  Applicant accepted the offer and
6
made prompt payment in full on his credit card (see ex. W; R.T., at 145-51).  Applicant
assures he has enough cash flow under his established budget to make the payments
on the credit card he used to pay his creditor 1.b debt.
Concerned about the absence of any payment satisfaction confirmation from
creditor 1.b,  Applicant wrote to creditor 1.b and its new collection agent in May 2009
(exs. AA and BB) seeking confirmation of his $6,541.61 payment in full settlement of the
outstanding balance (see exs. AA and  BB).  Creditor 1.b confirmed in an April 2009
letter its receipt of Applicant’s $6,541.61 payment in full settlement of the debt (see ex.
CC).  This creditor 1.b account is paid in full.  Creditor 1.b, in turn, committed to
notifying the credit reporting agencies of Applicant’s “settled” account (see ex. DD).
Since encountering debt problems following his marital separation and divorce,
Applicant has worked hard to repay his debts and restore his credit (R.T., at 159-62).  In
accordance with his separation agreement, he has full joint custody over his two young
boys and spends almost every weekend with them (R.T., at 94).  Additionally, he has
them with him two to three nights a week in his rented condominium (R.T., at 99-101).
Applicant has reduced the number of credit cards he owns to just one, adheres to a
prepared budget, and is current in all of his other accounts (see exs. 6 and I; R.T., at
99-103).  While he has never committed to a counseling program, he has talked to
divorce and tax/bankruptcy lawyers to gain a better understanding of all of the legal and
tax ramifications of his divorce (R.T., at 105). 
Applicant is highly regarded by his supervisors past and present, and by the
military commands he has served for over 15 years (see exs. A through E; R.T., at 55-
85).  The executive director of his department praises his engineering expertise and
work product, and characterizes his abilities, integrity and loyalties as of the “highest
order” (see ex. D). 
Applicant’s current program manager who has daily contact with him considers
him an excellent technical programmer (R.T., at 28-29).  Aware of Applicant’s financial
problems, this program manager is of the opinion that Applicant followed all of the rules
of financial responsibility, and is reliable and trustworthy (R.T., at 32-34).  Applicant has
received numerous awards and commendations in recognition of his many contributions
to his employer and its U.S. Air Force customer (ex. F).  
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued or
denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively in
arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
7
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E2(a) of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.” Adjudication Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
8
Analysis  
Applicant is a highly regarded deputy chief engineer for a defense contractor who
accumulated several delinquent debts following his divorce and loss of joint income from
his marriage. The three listed debts are considerable (over $91,000.00 in listed accrued
delinquent debts).  Until last year, none of these debts were resolved.  Without resolution
these debts create security significant concerns.
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially
overextended as to indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide
by rules and regulations, which can raise questions about the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information, and place the person at risk
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent debts and his past inability to pay these debts warrant the application of two
of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines¶ DC 19(a), inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts, and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to his divorce and ensuing loss of joint
marital income to cover his refinanced mortgage and consumer debts, and in the
imposition of significant monthly child support and marital alimony following his final
divorce decree and marital settlement.  He has worked earnestly these past two years to
resolve his mortgage debt (which exceeded the diminished value of his home) and his
two accrued consumer debts.  His furnished documentation corroborates his oral claims
that he has resolved his two largest debts, as he struggles to find a creditor 1.a
representative who will work with him to resolve his smaller creditor 1.a debt.  Today,
only Applicant’s $5,500.00 creditor 1.a debt remains unresolved, despite earnest
Applicant efforts to address. 
Faced with so many pressing challenges to resolve his debts, support his family,
and restore his credit, while continuing to provide high quality service to his employer,
Applicant has succeeded in not only favorably impressing his supervisors at work, but in
resolving all but one of his delinquent debts, keeping his current accounts up to date,
and providing uninterrupted support for his children and ex-wife.  
Based on his evidentiary showing, extenuating circumstances are associated with
Applicant’s inability to address his mortgage amidst a falling real estate market ro
discharge all of his consumer obligations without the joint marital income he came to rely
on during his marriage to W.  Available to Applicant is ¶ MC 20(b) of the financial
considerations guideline, “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted
responsibility.”  While some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s deed-in-lieu of
foreclosure to cure a mortgage default and the delinquent consumer debts he accrued
during difficult financial cicrumcstances, they are considerably extenuated and more
recently mitigated by his restorative efforts. 
9
Because of the limited income available to Applicant between 2007 and 2009, he
has not heretofore been in a position to address his large mortgage debt and deficiency
balances associated with creditors 1.a and 1.b.  Neither of these creditors have made
any noticeable collection efforts during the past three years, and there is no evidence
that any of his listed creditors will make any payment demands in the foreseeable future.
With the debts of creditors 1.b and1.c now clearly resolved, only creditor 1.a remains as
a potential claimant. 
True, creditor 1.a charged off its debt some time ago and shows no inclination to
reopen Applicant’s account for payment or settlement.  So, at this time, he  is essentially
free of any collectible debt.   For all practicable purposes, he is no longer at risk to
having to raise large sums of money to resolve his debts.  That the creditor may no
longer being seeking payment enforcement is not controlling, however; judgment and
reliability issues still retain their relevance in assessing Applicant’s overall reliability and
trustworthiness.
In recognition of the concerted efforts Applicant has made to resolve all of his
debts in the aftermath of his divorce, mitigation credit is generally available to him  based
on his credible proofs of his systematic good faith repayment efforts.  Age of the one still
unresolved debt (creditor 1.a) is covered by two of the mitigating conditions for financial
considerations: ¶ MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and ¶ MC 20(d), “the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Neither mitigating condition is dispositive, but both have some applicability to Applicant’
situation.  
                                                    
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases (as here).
Whole person assessment permits both extenuation and mitigation of Applicant’s
accumulated delinquent debts.  Extenuating circumstances associated with his divorce,
loss of historical spousal income to meet his mortgage and consumer obligations, and
imposed child support and alimony, and the deteriorating housing market in his area,
together created a confluence of factors that temporarily impaired his ability to meet all of
his financial obligations.  Judgment lapses do not play any material role in his debt
accumulations.  There is no evidence presented that Applicant was living beyond his
means during his marriage.  Since his separation and divorce, he has done all that could
be reasonably expected of him to pay his debts and responsibly and seasonably and
care for his children’s needs. His good judgment and trustworthiness draw reinforcement
10
from past supervisors and military commands he has served, as well as from his
program manager who works closely with him and can attest to his strong character.
Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, the isolated and aberrant circumstances associated with
his debts, and his documented steps taken to resolve them, the responsibility and
trustworthiness he is credited with in his work and personal life as a single father who
provides hands-on personal and financial support for his children, he mitigates judgment
and trustworthiness concerns related to his debts.  Favorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by the financial considerations guideline.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E 2(a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
11
