1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 08-00295
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Timothy W. Shaw, Esquire 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA) on February 16,
2007. On November 26, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under criminal
conduct (Guideline J) and excessive alcohol consumption (Guideline G). The action was
taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant provided his answer to the SOR on December 8, 2008. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on March 3, 2009, and the hearing was held on March 25, 2009. At the
hearing, 11 government exhibits (GE 1 through 11) were admitted in evidence without
objection to support the Government’s case. Applicant testified and submitted 10
exhibits (AE A through AE J) in support of his case. DOHA received a copy of the
transcript (Tr.) of the proceedings on April 9, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file,
 The date January 31, 2007 appears (1) on the first page of the offense report, on the third page under the1
case status section, on the fourth page under the offense status section, on the fifth page in section titled
probable cause affidavit, on the sixth page in the breath test operator permit affidavit, and in the refusal to
submit to a breath test form (seventh page of the exhibit). 
 Applicant testified the officer had videotape evidence that he never produced (Tr. 132).2
2
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied. 
Rulings on Procedure
Subparagraph 1.a. incorrectly identifies January 25, 2007 as the date the
alcohol-related driving offense occurred. GE 6 clearly shows the offense occurred on
January 31, 2007.  Hence, the date that appears in the subparagraph is hereby1
changed to January 31, 2007 to conform the allegation in the SOR to the evidence
presented. See, E.3.1.17. of the Directive. 
Findings of Fact
Paragraph 1 of the SOR alleges five criminal conduct allegations. In response to
each allegation, Applicant admitted he was arrested. In response to SOR 1.a., he
indicated, and the records reflect, the case was dismissed. Concerning the remaining
allegations, Applicant neither admitted nor denied the substantive offense, but stated
that the evidence shows successful rehabilitation. Under paragraph 2 of the SOR,
Applicant indicated that SOR 1.a., 1.d., and 1.e. have unusual circumstances.
Furthermore, the behavior is unlikely to recur based on the passage of time and the
infrequency of the conduct. In addition to Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the
SOR, I make the following factual findings. 
Applicant is 46 years old and married. He has two children from a previous
marriage,  and his current wife has two children from a previous marriage. Applicant
retired from the United States Air Force in 2003 with an honorable discharge after 20
years of service. 
Criminal Conduct
On January 25, 2007 (SOR 1.a.), Applicant was arrested for driving while under
the influence of alcohol (DUI), and refusal to submit to a test for alcohol. He admitted to
the arresting officer he had consumed two or three beers (GE 2). He contested the
observations of the officer about having trouble keeping his balance (Id.). Also,
Applicant requested video evidence to support the officer’s claim he crossed the yellow
line (Tr. 144; GE 3), but Applicant never saw video evidence (GE 2).  Applicant declined2
to take a breath test, “Because I thought I had a better chance by going to 12 peers and
for them to judge whether it was a legal stop or not.” (Tr. 142-143) After the case was
scheduled for hearing several times, the matter was dismissed when the police officer
 The refusal of Applicant’s wife to answer questions concerning the officer’s statement, coupled with her3
nervous demeanor while she testified (Tr. 82), reduces the believability of her testimony concerning the
domestic violence offense on September 24, 2006. 
3
did not appear for the hearing (GE 6). A no prosecution order was issued on April 23,
2007 (AE I). 
Applicant was arrested on October 11, 2006 (SOR 1.b.) for a battery domestic
violence offense that occurred on September 24, 2006 (GE 7). In GE 3, Applicant noted
he and his soon-to-be wife became involved in an argument over a business they
operated. Applicant testified he had not been drinking before the incident. (Id.; Tr. 128)
He believed his wife had been drinking, though he did not know how much (Id.). He
claimed he did not strike her. (Tr. 129). 
Applicant’s wife  testified that on September 24, 2006 (SOR 1.b.) she and
Applicant got involved in a scuffle by grabbing each other (Tr. 62). She testified she had
consumed a large amount of alcohol, but he had not consumed any alcohol before the
incident (Tr. 60). The police were called. Applicant’s wife indicated repeatedly to the
police she did not want to file charges (Tr. 59-63). 
There is information in the incident report (SOR 1.b., GE 7) that the children of
Applicant’s then-girlfriend indicated they saw Applicant punching her, and that the
arresting officer noticed marks on his wife’s neck and face (Id.). Applicant’s wife testified
she punched herself in the eye (Tr. 64), resulting in the marks that appear in her picture
on the first page of GE 7. Applicant’s wife could recall no scuffles with Applicant before
or since the encounter in September 2006 (Tr. 65).  
During cross-examination, Applicant’s wife was asked to provide information
about the police officer’s investigative statement (GE 7) concerning witnesses in the
domestic violence of September 2006 (SOR 1.b.), and the statement’s reference to a
location where Applicant might be found. After acknowledging she had read the
statement, she denied she provided the information in the statement. She stated she
would not answer the question regarding the location identified in the statement or a
location where Applicant frequented (Tr. 76-77).  3
Returning to the procedural path of SOR 1.b. through the court system, on
January 25, 2007, Applicant pled guilty to battery, domestic violence, and was
sentenced to 12 months probation, ordered to pay $502 in court fines, and required to
attend the Battery Intervention Program (BIP). 
The BIP program cost about $1,100 for 29 classes, meeting once every Tuesday
(GE 2; AE A). Applicant’s licensed mental health counselor, qualified to testify as an
expert in the field of domestic violence treatment, but not in the field of alcohol treatment
(Tr. 88-96), testified that Applicant successfully completed the BIP program (Tr. 98).
The 29 meetings consisted of three classes of initial assessment, 24 weeks of group
sessions, a feedback session half way through the program, and a final
4
assessment/critique session (Tr. 97). The mental health counselor did not believe
Applicant was likely to be involved in similar behavior in the future based on:
His participation [in the program], his insight that they have gained, just an
overall feel for how they participate and share with other people, confront
other people, on their behaviors. It’s not one specific thing. It’s just a lot of
pieces that I picked up during the 29 sessions (Tr. 100-101).
The mental health counselor also saw Applicant on March 9, and March 23,
2009. The counselor conducted an evaluation of Applicant consisting of a personal
history, records review, a clinical interview, and administration of two tests. The
counselor opined that nothing in the records precluded Applicant from holding a security
clearance (AE A). In the 29 weeks of counseling, the counselor did not become aware
of Applicant’s April 2002 domestic violence offense (Tr. 107, 109).
Applicant’s wife testified that after Applicant completed the BIP course in 2007,
she noticed a change in his behavior. According to his wife, when he gets angry to the
point of being upset, he knows how to talk about it (Tr. 71). 
On April 28, 2002, Applicant was arrested for battery domestic violence (SOR
1.c.). He was on active duty in the United States Air Force and had just returned from
extended deployment (GE 3). The supporting documents reflect statements by the
victim his former wife alleging he grabbed her and threatened her. Applicant maintains
that his former wife was startled by his hug, and began to strike him (GE 3; Tr. 119).
Applicant indicated he had not consumed any alcohol before the April 2002 domestic
violence (Tr. 156). He recalled pleading no contest to the charges. On June 7, 2002,
Applicant received pre-trial diversion. He successfully completed a four-day anger
management course and a family advocacy course on the military installation (AE G; Tr.
120). AE G also refers to completion of the BIP program on December 20, 2002,
although there is no corresponding entry earlier in the journal record directing Applicant
to enroll in the program. I consider the BIP reference an administrative error. 
On March 12, 2001, Applicant was arrested for DUI (SOR 1.d.). He had been on
a long deployment and returned home after realizing his 17-year marriage was over.
Applicant indicated he had two beers at a bar and one beer at a restaurant (Tr. 117-
118). Shortly after leaving the restaurant, he was stopped by the police for weaving
between the lines. Applicant does not believe he was weaving (GE 3). After four field
tests conducted by the arresting officer, the officer placed Applicant under arrest (GE
10). Applicant’s refusal to take the breath test resulted in his license being suspended
for 18 months because it was the second time he refused. Applicant refused the test
because it was his right to refuse, not because he was intoxicated (GE 3). He also
testified that:
I refused on that particular incident because I thought that I would have a
better chance in court of putting my evidence out and seeing what the
police officers had. There are a lot of police officers, in my opinion, in this
5
country that are overzealous and pull you over for any reason, especially if
it’s after midnight (Tr. 145-146).
The state amended the charge from DUI to reckless driving and Applicant pled
no contest. He was found guilty of reckless driving and ordered to attend DUI
awareness school. He also paid a fine of $533, and was placed on probation for 6
months. He successfully completed DUI school, along with all other conditions, and was
discharged from probation on January 18, 2002 (AE J).
Before Applicant’s July 1994 arrest for DUI, he had been on a fishing trip. He
stated in GE 3 he drank two beers on the trip, and one beer while his fishing equipment
was being unloaded. He was stopped for DUI. The arresting officer told him he was
stopped for erratic driving, but the police officer never explained to him what his erratic
driving was, nor did Applicant believe he was intoxicated (GE 3). His reasons for
refusing the breath test in 1994 were that he did not want to jeopardize his position and
security clearance in the military. He added:
. . . I would have a better chance with a jury trial than just having an officer
pull me over with his observations conducting trial and jury and convicting
me on the spot, when I believe that I wasn’t guilty for, number one, the
reason for the stop or number two, for the amount of alcohol that I
consumed (Tr. 147). 
The DUI charge was reduced to reckless driving and Applicant was found guilty
of the amended charge. He completed all conditions of his sentence that included a
fine, DUI school and probation for 6 months. His license was also suspended for 6
months for refusal to take the breath test (Tr. 142). 
Alcohol Consumption
Applicant began consuming alcohol in 1983 when he entered the service. When
he was not on deployment, he occasionally consumed a 12-pack of beer on the
weekends with friends and family (GE 3). After the alcohol-related offense in March
2001, Applicant decreased his drinking to a 6-pack of beer over a weekend on
occasion, and two or three beers on occasion. In June 2008, Applicant indicated he
consumed alcohol to relax and not to become intoxicated. He intended to drink in the
future, but would no longer drink alcohol then drive a car (GE 3). Applicant testified he
never had blackouts, has never missed work, or lied about his drinking (Tr. 152). 
Applicant’s wife believes Applicant’s drinking changed after the incident in
September 2006 (Tr. 69). In her estimation, Applicant currently consumes alcohol about
once every six months (Tr. 70). Applicant testified that from January 2007 (SOR 1.e.)
until the hearing, he consumed alcohol six months before the hearing, and also during
the professional football championship in January 2009. He believes he will probably
remain abstinent in the future because of the security investigation (Tr. 138). With 20
years of service in the military and five years employment with a defense contractor, he
6
did not think he would have to come to a hearing to explain his alcohol consumption
(Id.).
Character Evidence
Witness A, who worked the day shift before he retired in 2008, testified he has
known Applicant since 1991, and worked with him daily as senior technician on the
same shift from 2005 to 2008. In 2005, Witness A recommended that Applicant be hired
for his position, and still believes he is trustworthy (Tr. 37). Applicant has shown no sign
of alcohol use on the job. Witness A has seen Applicant at a bar (Tr. 36).
Witness B has known Applicant since June 2004. While he has no contact with
Applicant away from the job, he has never seen any sign of alcohol use by Applicant on
the job (Tr. 43-45).
Witness C, lead supervisor of the day shift, hired Applicant in July 2004. He has
never smelled alcohol on Applicant (Tr. 48-49), and recommends him for a position of
trust (Tr. 48). Witnesses A and C recalled Applicant attending battery intervention
counseling in 2007 (Tr. 56).
Applicant received recognition by the Air Force for his non-combat service
between November 1991 and December 1996 (AE B). 
Applicant’s personal record (AE C) reflects education at the non-commissioned
academy. The record also shows a Bachelors degree in astronautical engineering and
an associate degree in systems technology. 
On November 10, 1998, Applicant received recognition for spending 30
consecutive days at a location in the Middle East, in support of a military program (AE
D). AE E, which shows Applicant’s flying history, reflects that he compiled 925.2 hours
of flight time behind enemy lines. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
7
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Criminal Conduct (CC)
¶ 30. The Concern. “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”
The government has established a criminal case under the criminal conduct
guideline. Between 1994 and January 2007, Applicant engaged in four criminal offenses
by violating the traffic laws and/or breath test regulations, and the domestic violence
statute of the state. Significantly, Applicant’s explanation for the two alcohol-related
offenses in 1994 and 2001 is that he did nothing wrong. In the 2002 domestic violence
offense, he claims the only action he took toward his former wife was to hug her. In the
September 2006 domestic violence offense, his only adverse conduct was a mutual
scuffling where he and his current wife grabbed each other. CC disqualifying condition
(DC) ¶ 31.a. (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and CC DC ¶ 31.c.
(allegation of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,
formally prosecuted or convicted) apply. 
8
There are two of four mitigating conditions that potentially apply to the facts: CC
mitigating condition (MC) ¶ 32.a. (so much time has passed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and CC
MC ¶ 32.d. (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
development).
Considering the evidence as a whole, CC MC ¶ 32.a. does not apply because the
second domestic violence offense, which occurred less that four years ago, represents
a pattern of criminal conduct that began in 1994. Applicant’s explanation for each
offense demonstrates minimization and denial of the full scope of his conduct in each
crime. Even though he completed all terms of his sentence, including the completion of
the BIP program in 2007, Applicant still believes he did nothing wrong. His position
continues to cast doubt on his reliability and trustworthiness. 
The evidence of successful mitigation under CC MC ¶ 32.d. comes from
Applicant’s completion of the BIP program. Likewise, Applicant’s job performance
evidence and academic accomplishments have been recognized. But, not enough time
has passed since the September 2006 offense. Applicant has not persuaded me he
accepts full responsibility for his actions in the domestic violence behavior, and the
other alcohol-related offenses, including the refusals to take breath tests for alcohol.
The opinion of the licensed mental health counselor (qualified to testify in domestic
violence course of treatment) that he did not believe Applicant was at risk to engage in
this kind of behavior in the future, would usually be entitled to considerable weight.
However, the counselor’s opinion is assigned less weight because he did not know
Applicant had committed battery domestic violence in April 2002. Having weighed all the
evidence, particularly his refusal to take the test for alcohol on three occasions between
1994 and January 2007, the CC guideline is resolved against Applicant. 
Alcohol Consumption (AC)
21. The Concern. “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.” 
AC DC ¶ 22.a. (alcohol-related incidents away from work regardless of whether
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) applies to
Applicant’s two alcohol-related offenses in 1994 and 2001. However, Applicant indicated
that he moderated his drinking after the 2001 offense. Though Applicant continued to
consume alcohol subsequent to the 2001 offense, there is no evidence he used alcohol
in the domestic violence offenses of April 2002 and September 2006. Though he was
charged with DUI and admitted consuming two or three beers before his DUI arrest in
January 2007, the charges were dismissed when the arresting officer failed to appear
for the hearing. Accordingly, the documentation (except the documentation verifying
9
Applicant refused to take the breath test) supporting SOR 1.a. receives no weight.
Based on Applicant’s reduced use of alcohol since 2001, I employ AC MC ¶ 23.a. (so
much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) to resolve the AC
guideline in Applicant’s favor. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC) 
¶ 2. The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a
person’s life, and a careful consideration of nine variables that comprise whole person
model:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation and recurrence. ¶ 2, p.18 of
the Directive.
Having carefully weighed and balanced the adverse evidence with the favorable
evidence, I find against Applicant under the criminal conduct guideline because I am not
persuaded he accepts full responsibility for his alcohol-related behavior in 1994, 2001,
and the domestic violence offenses in 2002 and 2006. The reason for breath tests and
other field sobriety tests is a convincing public policy of keeping drunk drivers off the
road. Though an individual’s refusal to take the breath test is his right, Applicant’s
refusal is based on his claim that police officers are more inclined after midnight to stop
drivers for any reason. This position demonstrates poor judgment and a lack of respect
for regulations designed to promote public safety. 
I have carefully evaluated the commendations/awards/education Applicant has
received during his 20-year career in the Air Force. His good job performance serves as
a basis for Witnesses A, B and C to recommend him for a position of trust. Having
weighed the entire record with the testimony of Applicant and his witnesses, Applicant
has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under the CC guideline. Conversely, the
supporting evidence from his wife regarding his decreased alcohol consumption
establishes a finding in his favor under AC guideline. 
10
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Criminal Conduct, Guideline J): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Alcohol consumption, Guideline G) FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
