 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08905 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on April 2, 2008. On February 4, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On February 15, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on March 19, 2009. On March 23, 2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the 
hearing for April 7, 2009. The case was convened on that date. The administrative 
judge continued the case because Applicant did not receive the Notice of Hearing within 
15 days as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.8. The case was transferred to me on May 15, 
2009. On June 1, 2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for 
 
2 
 
 
June 16, 2009. The Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5 without objection. Applicant testified and offered three 
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – C without objection. The 
transcript was received on June 24, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the SOR allegations. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old security officer employed with a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking a security clearance. He has been employed with the 
defense contractor since March 2008. He also works another full-time job as a security 
officer at a community college. He takes college classes part-time and hopes to obtain a 
nursing degree. From December 1995 to December 1999, he served on active duty in 
the United States Marine Corps as a diesel mechanic. He received an Honorable 
Discharge. He was originally a citizen of Trinidad. He became a U.S. citizen in 2001. 
This is his first time applying for a security clearance. He is married and has four  
children, ages 16, 14, 6 and 5.  The two older children are his wife’s children from a 
prior marriage.  Applicant adopted them. (Tr at 5-8, 25-27; Gov 1) 
   
On April 2, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In response to question 27(b) which asks whether 
the applicant has had any property repossessed within the past seven years, he listed  
a mortgage foreclosure in March 2008. (Gov 1)  A subsequent background investigation 
confirmed that Applicant had two outstanding judgments entered against he and his wife 
related to home foreclosures.  On January 30, 2008, a judgment was entered against 
Applicant and his wife in favor of a bank in the amount of $301,253.77. This is the 
mortgage foreclosure Applicant listed on his e-QIP application. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2) On 
April 23, 2008, a judgment was entered against Applicant and his wife on behalf of a 
home loan company in the amount of $336,932.77. (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 3; Gov 4 at 3; Gov 
5 at 3) The second foreclosure occurred after Applicant completed the e-QIP 
application. The two foreclosures are the basis of the SOR. 
 
After Applicant separated from active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps in December 
1999, he initially drove a truck and tried to attend school. In December 2000, he got a 
job as a mail carrier with the U.S. Postal Service. He worked for the Postal Service until 
2004. In November 2004, Applicant and his family moved to the southeastern part of the 
U.S. because of his oldest son’s severe asthma. (Tr at 28; Gov 1, section 11) 
 
From November 2004 to June 2005, Applicant worked as a loan originator for a 
mortgage company.  He and his wife both obtained real estate licenses. From June 
2005 to September 2006, he worked as a sales associate (i.e. realtor) for another 
mortgage company. In September 2006, Applicant and his wife opened their own real 
estate business which they operated out of their home. (Tr at 28-30; Gov 1, section 11) 
 
3 
 
 
At some point, Applicant and his wife began to invest in real estate in the 
southeastern part of the U.S.. They started to invest in real estate during a period when 
the real estate market was booming and credit was easy to get. Things initially went 
well. They made a profit on the first home that they purchased. They used the money to 
invest in other properties. Then the economy and the real estate market in the 
southeastern part of the U.S. crashed. Applicant and his wife tried to rent the properties. 
They took out a home equity loan on their own home in order to meet payments. They 
were able to make house payments for a period of six months to a year but eventually 
had to let the mortgages go to foreclosure. Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant 
and his wife had a third investment property that recently went to foreclosure. (Tr at 29 – 
33, 38 – 39; Answer to SOR) 
 
On June 10, 2009, Applicant and his wife filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7. 
Their listed assets total $798,761. (The assets listed include the foreclosed mortgage 
properties.) Their listed liabilities total $1,128,419.06. The majority of the debts consist 
of the three properties that were foreclosed. During the past year, Applicant and his wife 
relied on credit cards to pay expenses as well. These accounts never became 
delinquent but are included in the bankruptcy. Applicant anticipates the bankruptcy will 
be completed in September 2009. (Tr at 13, 40-41, 48; AE A; AE B; and AE C) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that other than the home foreclosures, he 
and his wife were never late on any of their other debts. (Tr at 36) Credit Reports, dated 
January 6, 2009, and May 9, 2008, support this assertion. (Gov 4; Gov 5)  
 
Applicant works from 6:30am to 2:30pm on Monday through Friday at his job at 
the community college. He works from 3:00 pm to 11:00 pm at his job with the defense 
contractor. He attends class on Thursday evenings and Saturday mornings. He pays for 
his classes with the GI Bill. He and his wife still have their real estate business but 
business is minimal. His wife intends to look for employment once their youngest child 
begins school in September 2009. (Tr at 43) 
 
Applicant and his wife are required to take two financial counseling courses in 
conjunction with their bankruptcy filing. They completed the first course on-line and will 
soon complete the second course. They have had no other financial counseling. (Tr at 
46-47)  
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is $3,466. His wife’s net monthly income is 
approximately $150. Their mortgage payment is $1,800. They have two automobiles. 
One is paid for. The other, a 2007 Toyota Camry, is going to be surrendered during the 
bankruptcy. Applicant states that his finances will become more stable once the 
bankruptcy is complete. He now states that investing in real estate was a stupid 
decision. He and his wife are attempting to rebuild their finances. (Tr at 35, 37, 48-51) 
  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); and FC DC ¶ 19(e) (consistent spending beyond one’s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis) apply to Applicant’s case.  
Applicant and his wife had a high debt-to-income ratio as a result of their real estate  
investments. After the real estate market in the southeastern U.S. crashed, they were 
unable to pay the mortgages on their three investment properties.   
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005)).  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) potentially apply to Applicant’s case: FC MC ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. Applicant’s three 
mortgage foreclosures occurred within the past year. He filed for bankruptcy a few 
weeks ago. The behavior was too recent to conclude this mitigating condition applies. 
FC MC ¶ 20(a) does not apply. However, it is noted that all of Applicant’s other financial 
accounts were current prior to filing for bankruptcy. 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
 
6 
 
 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies. Applicant’s financial problems 
resulted from a downturn in the real estate market. Things were good for awhile but 
then the local real estate market collapsed. Applicant and his wife attempted to keep 
things afloat but eventually had to let three of the homes be foreclosed. Aside from the 
mortgage foreclosures, Applicant was current on his remaining financial obligations. He 
acted reasonably under the circumstances when he decided to file for bankruptcy. It 
would have been impossible for Applicant to repay the balance owed after the 
foreclosures were complete. He works two full-time jobs to support his family which 
shows an industrious work ethic.     
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) applies. Applicant is required to attend two financial counseling sessions as a 
condition of his bankruptcy. He completed one course and will soon complete the next 
course.  His financial situation will stabilize after his bankruptcy is complete in the fall 
2009.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Bankruptcy is a legitimate way to resolve 
one’s debts. Applicant filed for bankruptcy because of the losses suffered from his real 
estate investments. Aside from these foreclosed mortgages, Applicant was current on 
his other financial obligations. While Applicant did not demonstrate the best judgment by 
getting in over his head in real estate investments, the banks gave him the loans to 
purchase the property even though his income was insufficient to qualify for the loans. 
He has learned a valuable lesson and is taking the steps within his power to rectify the 
situation.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
service in the United States Marine Corps. I considered the fact that he works two full-
time jobs to support his family and attends college classes part-time. I considered the 
principal factor causing his financial problems was the downturn in the local real estate 
market. I considered that aside from his three mortgage foreclosures, Applicant was 
current on his financial accounts. By filing for bankruptcy, Applicant has taken steps 
towards resolving his financial situation. Admittedly, he did not make the best decisions 
when purchasing homes that he could not afford. However, based on the particular facts 
of this case, Applicant has presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
    Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
