                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ADP Case No. 08-03450 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant successfully mitigated security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to sensitive information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Public Trust Position Application (SF-85P), on 
September 5, 2007. On October 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns 
under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct) for Applicant.  
 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation), 
and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
1 
 
2 
 
                                                          
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 She answered the SOR in writing on November 21, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on November 26, 
2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 22, 2009, and I 
received the case assignment on February 11, 2009.  
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 4, 2009, scheduling the case for April 
7, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received without objection. The list of 
Government Exhibits was marked as Exhibit (Ex.) I. Applicant testified on her own 
behalf, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were received without 
objection.  
 
I held the record open until April 21, 2009 to afford the Applicant an opportunity 
to submit additional material. On April 17, 2009, Applicant submitted an e-mail request, 
which she resubmitted on April 21, 2009, seeking an extension of her submission 
deadline until May 5, 2009.1 The Government objected to Applicant’s extension request 
stating that Applicant “has had more than ample time to establish payment plans on her 
past due debts.” After due consideration, I granted her request for an extension until 
April 28, 2009.2 Applicant timely submitted AE E through I without objection.3 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 15, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c., 1.j., and 1.p., and denied the remaining allegations. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old production quality clerk, who has been employed by 
her defense contractor employer since September 2007. GE 1, Tr. 15. She seeks to 
retain access to sensitive information in conjunction with a public trust position, which is 
a condition of her employment. Tr. 16-17. 
 
 Applicant completed high school in February 1985, and attended one semester 
of college. Tr. 13-14. Applicant was previously married three times, and has three adult 
children. Applicant is currently not married, but was involved in a four-year relationship 
that ended in April 2006. Tr. 96. 
 
1 Applicant sent her initial e-mail request to Department Counsel using an incorrect e-mail 
address, which caused a delay in processing her request. 
 
2 The e-mails documenting Applicant’s extension request were marked Ex. II. 
 
3 The Government’s forwarding Memorandum, dated April 29, 2009, was marked Ex. III. 
3 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her September 2007 SF-85P, her July 2008 Answer to DOHA 
Interrogatories, and her September 2007 and September 2008 credit reports. GE 1 – 4. 
 
The Government alleged in the SOR and established by Applicant’s admissions 
and/or evidence presented that Applicant has/had 18 delinquent debts approximating 
$51,000.00. The debts consist of one federal tax lien, and the remaining debts consist 
of a combination of delinquent, charged off or collection accounts. 
 
The following chart summarizes debts alleged in Applicant’s SOR, status, record 
cites, and comments as appropriate. 
 
SOR DEBT STATUS RECORD COMMENTS 
1.a. Federal tax lien 
for $1,251 filed 
7/90. 
Paid/released 3/92. Tr. 17-19, 
Response to SOR,  
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
“Believes” incurred 
from small business 
owned with ex-
husband. 
1.b. Charged off 
account (medical 
provider) $50. 
Disputed/deleted 
from credit report. 
Tr. 19, 28-33, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
1.c. Collection 
account (utilities) 
$232. 
Settled for lesser 
amount. 
Paid/deleted from 
credit report. 
Tr. 30, 33-36, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
Debt incurred during 
relationship with ex-
fiancé.  
1.d. Charged off 
account (medical 
provider) $50. 
Disputed/deleted 
from credit report. 
Tr. 36-37, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
1.e. Collection 
account (medical 
provider) $1,434. 
Initially claimed not 
her debt/disputed.  
Made $15 payment 
on 4/17/09. 
Tr. 38-40, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
1.f. Collection 
account (medical 
provider) $300. 
 
 
Initially claimed not 
her debt/disputed. 
Made $100 
payment on 
4/24/09. 
Tr. 40-42, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
1.g. Collection 
account (time share 
fee) $519. 
Disputed. Claims 
former fiancé owes. 
Tr. 42-47, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
Former fiancé 
submitted notarized 
statement stating he 
is responsible for 
this debt. 
1.h. Collection 
account (medical 
provider) $30. 
Initially claimed not 
her debt/disputed. 
Paid debt in full 
4/17/09. 
Tr. 47-49, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B; AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
4 
 
1.i. Collection 
account (time 
share) $5,843. 
Disputed. Claims 
former fiancé owes. 
Tr. 49, Response to 
SOR, AE B, AE C, 
AE F, AE G. 
Former fiancé 
submitted notarized 
statement stating he 
is responsible for 
this debt. 
1.j. Collection 
account (voluntary 
repossession of 
van) $5,538. 
Made timely 
payments until 
12/07 when lost job. 
Returned van to 
dealer/dealer sold 
vehicle. Making 
payment 
arrangements. 
Tr. 49-54, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G, AE H. 
Debt reduced to 
$3,331 after dealer 
sold vehicle. Dealer 
filed suit 4/09. 
1.k. Delinquent joint 
auto debt 
(involuntary 
possession) 
$31,795. 
Disputed. Claims 
former fiancé owes 
and refinanced two 
vehicles without her 
knowledge. 
Retained counsel to 
challenge debt. 
Tr. 54-63, 97-101, 
108-110, Response 
to SOR, AE B, AE 
C, AE D, AE F, AE 
G, AE I. 
Former fiancé 
submitted notarized 
statement stating he 
is responsible for 
this debt. On day 
she separated from 
fiancé, he took car.  
1.l. Collection 
account (phone) 
$1,911.61. 
Settled for lesser 
amount. 
Tr. 63-65, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
1.m. Charged off 
(credit card) 
account $321. 
Claims account not 
hers and opened 
without her 
authorization. 
Disputing debt. 
Tr. 65-67, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
1.n. Collection 
account (insurance 
co.) $198. 
Disputed/removed 
from credit report. 
Tr. 67-68, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
1.o. Collection 
account (cable co.) 
$149. 
Made payment 
arrangements. Paid 
$30 4/17/09. 
Tr. 68-69, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
1.p. Collection 
account (utility co.) 
$223. 
Made payment 
arrangements. Paid 
$10 4/17/09. 
Tr. 69-71, 
Response to SOR, 
AE B, AE C, AE F, 
AE G. 
N/A. 
1.q. Charged off 
account (credit 
card) $393. 
Claims account not 
hers and opened 
without her 
authorization. 
Disputed/removed 
from credit report. 
Tr. 71, Response to 
SOR, AE A, AE B, 
AE C, AE F, AE G. 
N/A. 
5 
 
1.r. Collection 
account (cable co.) 
$811. 
Claims account not 
hers. 
Disputed/removed 
from credit report. 
Tr. 72-73, 
Response to SOR, 
AE A, AE B, AE C, 
AE F, AE G. 
N/A. 
 
As the above chart demonstrates, Applicant has addressed each and every debt 
alleged by a variety of means to include settlement and/or payment arrangements for 
full amount or settlement amount, or by good-faith dispute/removal from credit report. 
 
Applicant’s indebtedness is primarily attributable to several periods of 
unemployment, and the financial fallout after a long-term relationship ended with her 
fiancé. During this relationship, Applicant and her former fiancé commingled a 
significant portion of their finances and household expenses. Her periods of 
unemployment were from January 2005 to August 2006, December 2006 to February 
2007, and May 2007 to September 2007. She has been continuously employed since 
she began her current position in September 2007. GE 1. Applicant’s former fiancé had 
three small children and asked Applicant to quit her job to care for his children. Three 
and one-half months after Applicant quit her job, “he (former fiancé) decided he didn’t 
want to get married . . . .” Tr. 73-76. Applicant stated, “[i]n April of 2006 [her fiancé] 
threw me literally physically out of the house.” Tr. 96. The results of Applicant’s 
commingling of finances during her long-term relationship are reflected in the chart 
above.   
 
Applicant’s monthly take-home pay is $1,250.00 per month. She lives with her 
parents to save rent and pays them a modest amount to cover expenses. For 
transportation, she drives her aunt’s car and pays her car-related expenses. She makes 
a modest contribution to a 401k retirement account, and maintains a small savings 
account. Her net monthly remainder is $290.00. Tr. 76-81. 
 
When Applicant completed her SF-85P, and executed it on September 5, 2007, 
she failed to disclose any loan or financial obligation over 180 days delinquent. (SOR ¶ 
2.a.) Applicant explained, she “did not know about them.” Tr. 82. In response to 
Department Counsel’s questions, she stated: 
 
Q. So you’re stating now at the time that you filled out the application you were 
not aware that you had any delinquent debts at all? 
 
A. I did not know about the – 
 
Q. That were over 180 days delinquent? 
 
A. No. 
 
Q. When did you first become aware that you did have those debts? 
 
A. When I received the paperwork from you, the first set of paperwork from the 
Government, from you. Tr. 83. 
6 
 
 
As noted in the above chart, Applicant’s former fiancé has submitted a notarized 
statement acknowledging responsibility for debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g., 1.i., and 1.k. These 
debts total $38,157.00. Applicant further explained that all of her mail to include bills 
were going to her former fiancé’s house. She estimates that she did not receive mail 
“probably 18 months” until he provided her with a “yellow envelope” in “early 2008” with 
all of her mail since they separated. Tr. 103. Applicant submitted a change of address 
with the post office when she left her fiancé’s house, but claims no mail was forwarded. 
She added that many of the bills on the SOR were household related commingled 
accounts, which her fiancé had been paying, and when she left her fiancé’s home, 
presumed he would continue to pay those accounts. Tr. 103-105. She stated she paid 
her debts in a timely manner “before [her fiancé] came along, and [she is] doing that 
again.” Tr. 120. 
 
Applicant did not submit any character references or employee evaluations. She 
did emphasize that she “loves” her job, that she is “doing the best [she] can [a]nd 
without [her] job [she] can’t do that.” She added that she would rather lose her job than 
do anything illegal. Tr. 94, 121.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
7 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The Guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated 18 delinquent accounts, totaling 
$51,000.00 as noted supra. Her indebtedness began in 1990 with her tax lien and the 
other accounts have been in arrears for several years and have been ongoing. The 
8 
 
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a 
closer examination. 
 
The Guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Applicant experienced 
several periods of unemployment after a long-term failed relationship in which she and 
her former fiancé had commingled many of their household and personal accounts. 
Three potential mitigating conditions apply under this concern. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted, Applicant was 
involved in a long-term relationship that ended. During this relationship, Applicant’s 
finances became commingled with those of her fiancé. When Applicant left her fiancé’s 
home, she presumed or believed he was responsible for the majority of the debts 
incurred they had acquired together. To her fiancé’s credit, he acknowledged 
responsibility for a majority of debts alleged against Applicant. For the remaining debts, 
Applicant has struggled to address them. On a practical level, Applicant’s position is 
understandable, but legally, as she found out, creditors pursue debtors if they have a 
legal basis to do so. Additionally and after her break-up, Applicant experienced 
significant periods of unemployment, the first occurring in 2005 and the most recent 
ending in 2007. She has been continuously employed since September 2007. Given the 
facts as presented, I am able to give Applicant partial credit under this mitigating 
condition. 
 
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ I note Applicant’s 
financial problems are not recent, and she has been employed since September 2007. 
While it took some time for Applicant to address her indebtedness, I note that she did 
file a change of address after leaving her fiancé’s home and claims she did not receive 
any forwarded mail. She first became aware of the full extent of her indebtedness after 
the Government initiated these proceedings. Since these proceedings began, I note 
Applicant has become fully engaged in addressing her indebtedness. While she has 
work to do, she has made considerable progress in addressing each and every debt 
alleged. Her post-hearing submissions shored up missing or incomplete information not 
presented in her hearing. Full credit under this mitigating condition is warranted. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.” As the above chart demonstrates, Applicant has 
successfully challenged/disputed a number of her debts and had them removed from 
her credit report. She has also challenged three debts identified and acknowledged by 
her former fiancé as debts for which he is legally responsible. While Applicant is not 
totally exonerated from her legal responsibility as it pertains to these debts, her former 
fiancé’s notarized statement provides her with a reasonable basis to claim she is not 
9 
 
responsible for paying these debts. Lastly, she retained counsel to dispute the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.k. Full credit under this mitigating condition is also warranted. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), the Government’s concern is conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. AG ¶ 15. 
 
AG ¶ 16 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
 
Posing potential security concerns are Applicant’s documented omissions of her 
debts over 180 days from her SF-85P submitted in September 2007. Her omissions are 
attributable to her belief that her former fiancé had assumed responsibility for the debts 
she and he had incurred together and those debts that were commingled when they 
were sharing a household. Adding credence to Applicant’s explanation was her having 
filed a change of address, which unfortunately did not result in her mail being forwarded 
to her. 
 
Having had an opportunity to observe Applicant testify, I found her explanation 
credible in light of the rather unfortunate and unique circumstances she found herself in. 
Adding to the credibility of her explanation is the fact her state of financial responsibility 
was stable before and after her relationship with her former fiancé. I found Applicant to 
be credible and that she acted in good faith. While Applicant could reasonably have 
been expected to be more diligent and thorough when answering Question 20, her 
judgment lapses and confusion are not enough to impute knowing and willful 
falsification under Guideline E.  
 
10 
 
Applicant’s explanation of her omissions is persuasive enough to avert 
inferences of knowing and willful omission. There being no misconduct substantiated, 
discussion of Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions is not warranted.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
  
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
As a dedicated employee, Applicant has been willing to do whatever is necessary 
to achieve the state of financial responsibility. She has addressed each creditor and 
successfully mitigated the majority of her debts. She lives a modest lifestyle and does 
not spend extravagantly. She is doing her level best to recover from the financial fallout 
of a failed relationship. While Applicant’s financial state is not where it should be, it is 
clear from her actions that she takes this process very seriously and is determined to 
resolve her relatively recent adverse credit. Considering her demeanor and testimony, I 
believe Applicant has learned from her mistakes, and it is unlikely she will incur future 
debt that she is unable to pay.  
 
Also noteworthy is Applicant’s past behavior, which serves as a reliable indicator 
of future behavior. In particular, the adverse financial history alleged in her SOR arose 
during her long-term relationship with her former fiancé and was exacerbated as a result 
of the way she and her then fiancé commingled their finances. When her engagement 
ended, so did her support. She struggled to find employment for approximately 18 
months and during that time period, her debts and those debts purported to be hers fell 
behind. Applicant is living a modest lifestyle and at age 54 finds herself living with her 
parents and driving her aunt’s car to make ends meet. She enjoys her job and 
emphasized she would not do anything inappropriate to net an unlawful gain. Her 
modest income in this current economy is her lifeline to achieving and maintaining 
financial responsibility.  
 
11 
 
                                                          
I also considered the facts of the case and nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a) supra relating to Personal Conduct concerns. Falsifications are a 
core security concern. Inasmuch as Applicant’s behavior was not deliberate or willful, no 
misconduct was established precluding the necessity of further discussion under the 
Whole Person Concept. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable public trust position determination. I take this position based on the 
law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful 
consideration of the whole person factors”4 and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my 
responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is eligible 
for a public trust position.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – r.:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
  
 
4See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
