 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07592 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-
QIP) on June 26, 2007. On December 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On January 27, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on February 19, 2009. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on February 20, 
2009.  Applicant received the FORM on March 17, 2009. He had 30 days to submit a 
response to the FORM. He did not submit a response. On May 15, 2009, the FORM 
was forwarded to the hearing office. The FORM was assigned to me on May 18, 2009. 
 
2 
 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b 
and 1.d. He denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed as an engineer tech with the 
defense contractor since September 2002. He served in the Army National Guard from 
April 1995 to March 2005. He is married and has three children and two stepchildren. 
(Item 4)   
 
On December 16, 2008, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP) in order to apply for a security clearance. Applicant’s 
background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts:  a $4,750 civil 
judgment that was entered against Applicant on February 1, 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 5, 
credit report dated September 19, 2008 at 2; Item 6; Item 8 at 4); a $59 satellite  
television account placed for collection in September 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5, credit 
report dated September 19, 2008, at 7; Item 7 at 1; Item 8 at 12); a $7,053 account 
placed for collection in May 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5, credit report, dated September 19, 
2008 at 7); and a $12,918 account owed to the Department of Defense placed for 
collection in August 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 5, credit report, dated September 19, 2008, 
at 14-15; Item 7 at 2). 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he was in the process of 
negotiating a payment arrangement pertaining to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. At the 
close of the record, it is unclear whether an agreement was made. He provided proof 
that the $59 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was settled. (Item 3 at 1) He disputes the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. On January 12, 2009, he entered into a repayment agreement 
related to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He agreed to pay $250 a month towards the 
debt. He provided a bank record that showed a $250 payment was made on January 
23, 2009. He provided no proof of subsequent payments. (Item 3) 
 
In response to interrogatories dated September 30, 2008, Applicant provided 
proof that he resolved other delinquent accounts that were not alleged in the SOR, but 
were listed on the credit report obtained during his background investigation. In the 
response to interrogatories, he initially disputed the debt owed in SOR ¶ 1.a, claiming 
that it was a personal loan that was fraudulently taken out in his name. (Item 5) 
However, he admits the debt in his response to the SOR. 
 
The record does not provide information as to the status of Applicant’s current 
financial situation.  Applicant did not explain the cause of his financial problems. He did 
not provide information about his work performance.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); apply to Applicant’s case. The SOR alleges four delinquent 
accounts, an approximate total of $24,780.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Three of Applicant’s accounts became delinquent in 2007. Although not alleged in the 
SOR, Applicant had eight other delinquent accounts which were addressed in his 
response to interrogatories. Although these accounts were resolved, it is worth 
considering these additional delinquent accounts when reviewing the extent of 
Applicant’s financial problems. Of the four accounts that remain unresolved, Applicant 
resolved the $59 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  Three debts remain unresolved. FC MC ¶ 
20 (a) does not apply because Applicant has a lengthy history of financial problems. 
Questions remain as to Applicant’s ability to resolve his financial situation.     
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. The record evidence does 
not indicate the cause of Applicant’s financial problems. I cannot conclude his financial 
problems were caused by circumstances beyond Applicant’s control. I also cannot 
conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances because he did not 
provide information regarding his personal financial situation (such as net monthly 
income, monthly expenses, a budget, etc.)   
 
 
5 
 
 
     FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial 
counseling. While he has resolved several of his delinquent accounts prior to the SOR 
being issued, three delinquent accounts remain, totaling approximately $24,721. While 
he entered into a payment agreement with the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, he provided 
proof that he only made one payment. I cannot conclude he is timely making payments 
under the terms of his payment plan without proof of additional payments. It is unlikely 
that his debts will be resolved in the near future.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b, and the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. However, he has not provided proof that he has 
been making timely payments towards his repayment agreement pertaining to the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.  He has not settled or resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.c.  Some credit should be given to Applicant because he resolved several 
accounts that appeared on his credit report during his background investigation, but 
were not alleged in the SOR. However, a significant amount of unresolved delinquent 
debts remain.  
 
FC MC ¶20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) potentially applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.  Applicant 
disputes this debt. However, he provided no evidence that he is taking action to formally 
dispute this debt. There is insufficient proof to apply FC MC ¶20(e).  
 
Applicant’s failure to take steps to resolve his delinquent accounts remains a 
security concern. He has not mitigated the security concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 
 
6 
 
 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. While Applicant resolved a lot of 
debts prior the SOR being issued, he has a significant amount of unresolved delinquent 
debt.  Insufficient information was provided as to the cause of the financial problems 
and Applicant’s current financial situation. Applicant did not provide enough evidence to 
support mitigation of the financial considerations concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
