  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition to the Executive
Order and Directive, this case is also adjudicated under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December
29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1,
2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.
The Directive is pending revision or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is
dated after the effective date.  
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 08-05791
SSN: -------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order,
DoD Directive, and Revised Guidelines,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals1
(DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on November 14, 2008. The
SOR is equivalent to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the
 The government’s brief includes several attachments referred to as items. They are referred to as exhibits2
herein. 
2
action. The issues in this case fall under Guideline H for drug involvement, Guideline G
for alcohol consumption, Guideline J for criminal conduct, and Guideline E for personal
conduct. 
Applicant’s four-page response to the SOR is dated December 5, 2008, and he
elected a decision without a hearing. Accordingly, the case will be decided based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. 
On January 21, 2009, the government submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing. This so-called file
of relevant material (FORM)  was mailed to Applicant and received by him on January2
28, 2009. He did not submit a documentary response to the FORM within the allowed
30-day period. The case was assigned to me May 1, 2009. For the reasons discussed
below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from
high school in 2002 and thereafter entered college. He appears to have completed a
joint-degree program as he was awarded both a BSBA and MBA in May 2007. He
began his current employment as a cost-schedule analyst for a major defense
contractor in June 2007. He has not married and has no children. 
Applicant admitted a history of drug abuse. He used marijuana with varying
frequency during the period January 1998 to March 2007. He estimates using marijuana
approximately 100 times. He also purchased marijuana a number of times during the
same period. In addition to marijuana use, he used the following illegal drugs: (1)
ecstasy about three times during 2006–2007; (2) mushrooms about two times during
2006–2007; (3) cocaine about three times during 2004–2006; and (4)
methamphetamine once in 2001. His most recent illegal drug use was in 2007 when he
used ecstacy in about August 2007, marijuana in about March 2007, and mushrooms in
January 2007 (Exhibit 6 at 4–5). In 2003, he was stopped by the police for speeding and
was found to be in possession of marijuana. Arrested for driving under the influence of
both alcohol and drugs, he later pleaded guilty to driving while ability impaired (DWAI).
Applicant admitted a history of excessive alcohol consumption since about 1998.
His history includes two arrests and convictions for minor in possession of alcohol and
the DWAI offense mentioned above. In addition, he received treatment from a
behavioral healthcare facility during 2000–2002 for a condition diagnosed as alcohol
abuse. The treatment was not continuous, as he was enrolled twice in two different
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
3
programs for different durations. His history includes binge drinking as recently as July
2008 when he drank 12 beers and 2 mixed drinks during a 12-hour period at a daylong
party (Exhibit 6 at 2). 
Applicant admitted a history of criminal conduct. It consists mainly of his drug-
related conduct (use and possession of illegal drugs) and alcohol-related offenses
mentioned above. In addition to those matters, he was arrested for the felony offense of
burglary in 2001. He accepted a plea bargain wherein he pleaded guilty and was
sentenced to probation for two years, community service for 80 hours, house arrest for
one month, and he was required to undergo a mental-health evaluation. This incident
stemmed from Applicant’s decision to engage in self-help by entering a home and
stealing property from a person who had stolen a stereo system from his auto. 
Applicant admitted a history of rule violations. In total, he has had eight traffic
violations (e.g., speeding) during the period 2001–2008. In addition, he was fired from
his employment with Walmart when he violated a store policy by pushing too many carts
at once (the maximum was six and he had ten). 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any5
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order6
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 17–18 (setting forth the security concern as well as the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 15
4
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
The SOR here alleges four security guidelines, which are described below.
Under Guideline H for drug involvement,  the security concern is that “use of an14
illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.” The definition of drug abuse is “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal
drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.”15
 Revised Guidelines at 15–16 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating16
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 21–22 (setting forth the security concern as well as the disqualifying and mitigating17
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 10–12 (setting forth the security concern as well as the disqualifying and mitigating18
conditions). 
5
Under Guideline G for alcohol consumption,  the security concern is that16
“excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability
and trustworthiness.”
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the security concern is that “criminal17
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the security concern addresses18
“conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest
is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance
process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.”
Based on the record evidence as a whole, this case raises multiple security
concerns. For example, the disqualifying information includes the following: (1) a history
of illegal drug abuse starting in about 1998 and ending in about in 2007; (2) a history of
excessive consumption of alcohol, to include alcohol-related incidents away from work
and binge consumption; (3) a history of criminal conduct, to include a single serious
crime and multiple lessor offenses; and (4) a history of questionable personal conduct
as shown by the multiple traffic violations establishing a pattern of unwillingness to
comply with rules or regulations. Aggravating the situation is that Applicant’s use of
ecstacy in August 2007 occurred but a few months after he began working for his
employer, a major defense contractor, which presumably has a drug-free workforce
policy as all major defense contractors do. 
The various mitigating conditions under the four guidelines have been reviewed
and considered in light of the record evidence as a whole, and the evidence is not
sufficient to mitigate and overcome the security concerns. For Guideline H, the evidence
is insufficient due to the length of Applicant’s drug abuse (1998 to 2007), the frequency
of his drug abuse (using marijuana about 100 times), and the recency of his drug abuse
(as recently as August 2007). For Guideline G, the evidence is insufficient because
Applicant continues to drink alcohol to excess as evidenced by his July 2008 binge-
drinking episode when he drank 12 beers and 2 mixed drinks at a party. For Guideline
J, the evidence is insufficient because, given that Applicant  continues to drink alcohol
 Revised Guidelines at 1–2. 19
 This allegation is decided for Applicant because taking several alcohol-related classes does not raise a DC20
under the guideline. 
6
to excess, additional alcohol-related criminal conduct cannot be ruled out. In reaching
this conclusion on Guideline J, I took into account that some of his criminal conduct took
place when he as a juvenile (under the age of 18). For Guideline E, the evidence is
insufficient as well. The multiple traffic offenses, the most recent of which took place in
2008, standing alone are not too serious. But when combined with the other derogatory
evidence in the case, the evidence as a whole paints a picture of a 26-year-old man
who has demonstrated a long-term pattern of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
and unreliability. These circumstances raise questions and doubts about his suitability
for access to classified information. 
Under the whole-person concept,  an administrative judge must evaluate a19
person’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the person’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed in the Revised Guidelines as follows: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
After weighing the record evidence as a whole and giving it due consideration
under the whole-person concept, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. At this point in time, it is simply too
soon to tell if Applicant’s history of misbehavior involving drug abuse, alcohol abuse,
criminal conduct, and traffic offenses is a thing of the past or if his history is a harbinger
of things to  come. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.g: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a, c–f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant20
 This allegation is decided for Applicant because I cannot hold it against him that he pushed too many carts21
at W almart when he was 18 years old. 
7
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 3a.–3c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 4.a–4.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 4.h: For Applicant21
Subparagraphs i–j: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
