                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 08-10517
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O. O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On February 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of Applicant eligibility for a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 16, 2009, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record.  Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on April 28, 2009, and timely responded with documented letters to his
creditors, employment information and performance evaluations. The case was
assigned to me on June 3, 2009.   Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
2
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have (a) petitioned for Chapter 13,
bankruptcy in November 2001, which was dismissed in September 2002, (b) had a
federal tax lien assessed against him in October 2007 in the amount of $8,237.00, and
©) accumulated 11 delinquent debts exceeding $13,000.00. 
For his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations.  He
added no explanations. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old lab technician for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant married in May 1987.  He divorced in September 1991 (see ex. 5).  He
has one child from this marriage (see ex. 20).  
Applicant petitioned for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in November 2001.  Credit
reports reveal that his Chapter 13 petition was dismissed in September 2002.  Reasons
for the dismissal are not reported.  
Records show that the Internal Revenue Service Additionally filed a federal tax
lien against him in 1997 for $8,237.00 in reported delinquent taxes.  The circumstances
that necessitated this lien are not covered in the presented evidence.  Between 2001
and 2002, Applicant accumulated a number of debts that are reported to be delinquent
in his July 2008 credit report (see ex. 8).  His consumer debts total 10 in number and
exceed $4,000.00 in amount. Applicant attributes these accrued consumer debts to a
period of unemployment between April 2001 and April 2002, after his employer ceased
doing business. He has since returned to work and provides information covering his
current employment.  Applicant provides copies of letters he recently sent to most of his
creditors acknowledging his debts and asking for approval of his offers to begin making
$25.00 monthly payments on each of his debts. 
Applicant does nor provide any letter responses to his individual requests, or
furnish any alternative payment plans should any or all of his creditors decline his offers.
Nor does he provide any explanations or evidence of corrective steps he has taken to
resolve his outstanding federal tax lien.
Applicant provided an endorsement from his supervisor commending him on his
successful completion of his 180-day probationary period and welcoming him as a
regular employee. Applicant received solid performance evaluations from his supervisor
who credited Applicant with exceeding his expectations and demonstrating  outstanding
3
technical and supervisor skills during the 2008 rating period.  Applicant did not include
any updated 2009 performance evaluations or evidence of community contributions in
his response materials.
 
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon
a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a common sense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the judge may
draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the
4
evidence of record.  Conversely, the  judge cannot draw factual inferences that are
grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose
of establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation,
extenuation or mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a highly regarded lab technician for a defense contractor who
petitioned for Chapter 13 bankruptcy (dismissed) and accumulated a number of
delinquent debts (to include an unsatisfied federal tax lien). Most of these debts date
to a period between 2001 and 2002 when Applicant was unemployed. 
Applicant’s finances
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially
overextended as to indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, which can raise questions about the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information, and place the
person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s
accumulation of delinquent debts and his past inability and unwillingness to address
these debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines DC ¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19©) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Many of Applicant’s debts were accumulated during a period of extended
unemployment between 2001 and 2002, and were covered in his dismissed Chapter
13 petition in 2002.  Less is known about the filed tax lien in 1997, or what steps
Applicant took to address this lien or his other debts after he returned to work in April
2002.  Without more information about his past efforts in addressing his debts and
plans to resolve his listed debts, Applicant cannot be credited with any manifest
progress to date in regaining control of his finances.  Further, he provides no hard
assurances of any commitment to resolve his debts in the foreseeable future should
5
any of all of his creditors decline his recent payment offers.  Applicant’s finances still
require a good deal of effort on his part to fully stabilize them. 
Based on his furnished explanations regarding his loss of employment,,
Applicant may take some advantage of MC  ¶ 20(b) of the financial considerations
guideline, “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted
responsibility.”  The lack of more documentation of the specific circumstances
surrounding his accumulated debts precludes him from fully utilizing MC ¶ 20(b) to
his benefit. 
Mitigation credit is not available to Applicant under any of the other mitigating
conditions based on the evidence developed in this administrative record.  While he
able document recent requests to his consumer creditors to approve modest $25.00
a month payments, he provides no creditor responses or alternative plans should
any of all of the creditors decline to work with him.  And he provides no evidence of
any efforts to address his still outstanding federal tax lien.
                                                    
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in
financial cases (as here).
Whole person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his failed Chapter 13 petition and his ensuing
accumulation of still unresolved delinquent debts.  To his credit, he demonstrates
good progress with his recent employer and shows interest in resolving his debts.
To date, though, Applicant has not shown sufficient efforts to resolve his
outstanding debts to overcome security concerns about the state of his finances.  His
work recent contributions and solid performance evaluations are encouraging and
demonstrate his responsibility in the work place.  But these efforts, while important,
are not enough to surmount continuing security concerns about his finances.
Considering the record as a whole, it is still too soon to make safe predictive
judgments about Applicant’s ability to resolve his federal tax lien, repay his old
consumer debts, and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with his
holding a security clearance.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l. 
6
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2(a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in
the context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed
above, I make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):  AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.l:                 Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance
for Applicant.  Clearance is denied. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
