 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10574 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On January 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 12, 2009, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on April 17, 2009. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
 
2 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on April 25, 2009. He responded with a 
letter dated May 12, 2009, and two attachments. Department Counsel did not object to 
his response. The letter and two attachments are marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, and admitted. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Navy from 2001 through 2004. He attended college from 2004 through 
2006. He has never been married and has no children.1  
 
 Applicant incurred student loans to pay for his college education. He was 
employed by a company from May 2006 through February 2008. He maintained his 
student loan payments while he was employed. He notified his employer in February 
2008 that he would be leaving the company in about a month to work with another 
company. His company decided to immediately end his employment. His SF 86 does 
not reflect that he ever worked for the company that was going to employ him. Applicant 
did not explain why he did not work for that company. He was unemployed from 
February 2008 until he obtained a job with his current employer in July 2008.2   
 
 When Applicant became unemployed in February 2008, he contacted the holder 
of his student loans. He told the creditor that he was unemployed and could not make 
the scheduled payments at that time. The company would not provide him with an 
alternate payment plan. He did not make his student loan payments while he was 
unemployed and the loans went into a collection status. He contacted the lender after 
he obtained his current job. He agreed to pay $372 per month starting in September 
2008. He went overseas for his job. He told the collection company handling the loans 
that he would maintain the $372 monthly payments until he returned from overseas in 
February or March 2009. He would then pay the loans in full.3  
 
 The SOR alleges the two delinquent student loans, one for $6,269 and the other 
for $12,442. Applicant submitted documentation establishing that the $6,269 loan was 
settled in full and the $12,442 loan was paid in full. The record contains no other 
indications of any other financial problems.4  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
                                                          
1 Item 5. Information in this paragraph was obtained from Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) dated July 28, 2008. 
 
2 Items 4-8; AE A-C. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Id. 
 
3 
 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had two student loans that became delinquent. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant could not maintain the payments on his student loans when he 
became unemployed in February 2008. It is unclear why he did not start working with 
 
5 
 
the company where he planned to work after he gave notice to his employer. Without 
more information, I am unable to find that his unemployment was a circumstance that 
was largely beyond his control. He acted responsibly by making payment arrangements 
when he obtained his current employment. He made payments while he was overseas. 
After he returned from overseas he paid the larger loan in full and settled in full the 
smaller loan. He made a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors and his 
financial problem has been resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are applicable.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Applicant’s student loans became 
delinquent when he was unemployed. He is now employed and has paid or settled the 
student loans. There are no other issues of concern, financial or otherwise. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
