  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition to the Executive
Order and Directive, this case is adjudicated under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December
29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1,
2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.
The Directive is pending revision or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is
dated after the effective date.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------ )
SSN: ---------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-10016
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: James R. Klimaski, Esquire
 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on January 28, 2009. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline H based on Applicant’s drug involvement.
2
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR was received on March 3, 2009, and he
requested a hearing. The hearing took place as scheduled on May 7, 2009. The
transcript (Tr.) was received on May 22, 2009. For the reasons discussed below, this
case is decided for Applicant.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a. Based on the record
evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked as a
computer engineer since July 2008. His duties consist of writing software for his
customer, a federal research laboratory. He has not married and has no children. He is
seeking to obtain an industrial security clearance for the first time.  
He graduated from high school in 2002. He then relocated to another state and
enrolled at a local community college. In December 2005, he earned an associate in
arts degree. In 2006, he enrolled in a nearby state university, and he earned a B.S. in
computer science in April 2008. He then moved to the state of his current residence, he
received an offer of employment in June 2008, and he started work the following month.
He learned of the company’s drug-free workforce policy when he received the job offer,
and he was required to undergo drug testing as a condition of employment (Exhibit A).
Applicant admits a history of drug involvement from about July 2000 to April
2008, all of which occurred when he was a student and before his employment in the
defense industry. The record evidence establishes the following:
• He used marijuana about 10 to 15 times between July 2000 to August 2007;
• He used cocaine about four times between May 2004 and April 2008; and
• He misused a narcotic pain medicine one or two times during 2002–2003.  
Applicant used these substances in social settings (parties), and he never purchased
the substances as they were provided to him by others. His possession of these
substances was incidental to his use. 
He disclosed, in detail, his drug involvement when he completed a security-
clearance application in July 2008 (Exhibit 1–response to Question 24a). He also
provided the following additional comments about his drug involvement:
There were 1-2 instances of using narcotic pain killers while I was in
college, although I do not remember the dates nor the substance used. My
use of marijuana was never continuous; it was only a random social
activity among friends. I used cocaine three times between 2004 and 2005
and then decided to put it behind me. On my birthday in 2008, I had a
major lapse in judgment by deciding to partake in the use of cocaine. The
amount of times I used these drugs were relatively few, as this type of
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a2
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
3
behavior is uncharacteristic of me. Being in a college atmosphere,
experimenting with drugs seemed trivial, but looking back I recognize the
seriousness and highly regret ever doing so (Exhibit 1 at 30).  
In addition to the security-clearance application, he confirmed and provided
information about his drug involvement in his background interview of August 2008 and
in response to interrogatories in November 2008 (Exhibits 2 and 3). In both, he
expressed an intention not to abuse drugs in the future.  
In his hearing testimony, Applicant repeated his intention, as he is now a young
professional who is focused on building his career in computer science, he has no
desire to abuse drugs, and it is not something he wants in his life (Tr. 78–79). He
spends his free time indulging in several hobbies, such as reading, cooking, bicycling,
and jogging. In addition, Applicant signed an affidavit in which he declared an intent to
avoid abusing drugs and he understands any violation of his pledge is grounds for the
revocation of any clearance granted to him (Exhibit B). 
Applicant called two witnesses, both long-time employees at the federal research
laboratory, who vouched for his good character and trustworthiness. The first witness
was Applicant’s older brother who is a research scientist at the lab. Applicant lived with
the brother for several months during 2008–2009 and now lives nearby in the same
apartment complex. The brother has observed that Applicant has shed his college
attitude and is now focused on the professional workplace (Tr. 29). Both Applicant and
his brother were exposed to marijuana while attending a poker game, and both removed
themselves from the situation (Tr. 39). The brother believes that Applicant understands
that drug abuse is incompatible with holding a security clearance, and he has observed
that Applicant has expressed a good deal of regret during the past year (Tr. 43–44). 
The second witness works as the head or chief of the information technology
section of the lab and has supervisory responsibility over Applicant. He opined that
Applicant has done a “terrific job” and has exceeded his expectations (Tr. 49). He also
believes that Applicant has been very responsible and trustworthy, and he has had no
concerns about Applicant’s honesty or truthfulness (Tr. 49–50). Overall, the supervisor
has been quite pleased with Applicant’s work and supports his application for a security
clearance. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.2
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).6
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 10
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).11
4
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an3
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes4
any existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether5
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting6
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An7
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate8
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme9
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.10
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.11
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.12
 Revised Guidelines at 17–18 (setting forth the security concern as well as the disqualifying and mitigating13
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 14
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 15
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 16
 Revised Guidelines at 18. 17
5
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination12
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
1. The Drug Involvement Security Concern
Under Guideline H for drug involvement,  the security concern is that “use of an13
illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.”  The definition of drug abuse is “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal14
drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.”15
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following conditions raise a
security concern: Any drug abuse (see above definition).  I considered the other DC16
under the guideline, but none apply based on the facts and circumstances of this case. 
Applicant’s history of drug abuse raises security concerns because it calls into
question his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to obey the law. His
marijuana use (10 to 15 times) began in high school and spanned a period of years until
he ceased in 2007. Most of his cocaine use took place during 2004–2005 except for his
most recent drug abuse in April 2008. His misuse of pain killers took place several years
ago in 2002–2003. Overall, these facts and circumstances show that Applicant was an
irregular or periodic drug abuser.    
The four MC under Guideline H have been considered and one of the four
applies in Applicant’s favor. The evidence in mitigation establishes a demonstrated
intent not to abuse drugs in the future based on three main reasons.  First, he no17
longer socializes with the people he abused drugs with when he was a college student.
He graduated from college, relocated to another state, and started the next phase of his
life as a young professional who is seeking to excel in his chosen field. Second, his
misuse of pain killers took place several years ago and is dated, his abuse of marijuana
 Revised Guidelines at 1–2. 18
6
ended in 2007, and his last abuse of cocaine took place in April 2008, before he
accepted the offer of employment and before he completed the security-clearance
application. These circumstances demonstrate a period of abstinence of about 13
months. Third, he also demonstrated his intent via his affidavit wherein he agreed to the
revocation of clearance for any violation (Exhibit B). Taken together, these three
reasons or circumstances amount to substantial evidence of Applicant’s intent not to
abuse any drugs in the future. 
2. The Whole-Person Concept 
Under the Directive, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant facts and circumstances. This analysis includes nine
adjudicative factors:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  18
I considered all nine factors as well as the favorable testimony from Applicant’s
witnesses. For the first factor, I considered the circumstance that Applicant’s drug abuse
went beyond the youthful use of marijuana and extended to cocaine, which is a far more
serious drug. In this regard, I considered the reports from the National Institute on Drug
Abuse on drug abuse and addiction, cocaine, marijuana, and prescription medications
(Exhibits 4, 5, 6, and 7). For the second factor, I considered the circumstance that
Applicant’s drug abuse occurred when he was a high-school or college student and that
is no longer the case. He is now a young adult with far more responsibilities. For the
third factor, I considered the irregular or periodic nature of Applicant’s drug abuse as
well as his abuse of cocaine about 13 months ago. For the fourth factor, I considered
Applicant’s age and maturity and conclude that he was young-and-dumb when he
engaged in drug abuse. Certainly, Applicant is not the first (nor will he be the last)
person to engage in foolish misbehavior while in college and subsequently regret it.
  
In addition, I considered the circumstance that Applicant disclosed his drug
abuse when he completed his security-clearance application, during his background
interview, and in response to interrogatories. He deserves credit for reporting adverse
information, and it comes into play for the eighth and ninth factors. His disclosure
reduces the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. Likewise, his
 See ISCR Case No. 07-13082 (Jun. 27, 2008) (deciding case against a 24-year-old software engineer who19
used marijuana about 200 times over a period of years, including using it in violation of his company’s drug-
free workforce policy). 
7
disclosure, when combined with the other favorable evidence, reduces the likelihood of
continuation or recurrence of drug abuse.
This case presents both unfavorable and favorable evidence, which requires
thoughtful balancing in light of the clearly-consistent standard. I have considered the
totality of facts and circumstances and conclude that the favorable evidence is
persuasive. I am persuaded that Applicant’s drug abuse is a thing of the past and he will
not abuse drugs in the future. It is likely that I would have reached the opposite
conclusion, however, had Applicant’s drug abuse been more frequent or if he had
engaged in drug abuse in violation of his company’s drug-free workplace policy or after
submitting his security-clearance application.  Applicant would be well advised to bear19
this in mind. 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the drug involvement security concerns, and Applicant met his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
