                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10578 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On January 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 26, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 26, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 7, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on May 8, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
l review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
ake the following findings of fact. 
s also a college graduate 
nd has a degree in accounting, which she earned in 2002.2  
e was earning approximately 
$36,000 annually. Applicant’s current income is $40,000.3  
              
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through D which were admitted without objection. The record was held open until 
May 22, 2009, to allow Applicant an opportunity to provide additional exhibits which he 
did and they was marked as AE E through R. Department Counsel did not object and 
they were admitted.1 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 18, 
2
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and carefu
m
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and has worked for a federal contractor as a Design 
Engineer, since May 2008. He has been married for twelve years and has two children, 
ages seven and four. He also has a child, age 17, from a previous relationship. He pays 
child support for this child and is current in his obligation. Applicant graduated from 
college earning a bachelor’s degree in May 2008. His wife i
a
 
 Applicant worked for a company from January 1999 to August 2006, when the 
company decided to shut down the plant where he worked. Applicant lost his job and 
was given one year severance pay. He could not hold a full-time job while receiving the 
severance pay, which was half of the salary he had been earning. Applicant decided to 
go back to school as a full-time student to earn a degree. Having a college degree 
allowed him the potential of increasing his marketability and career prospects. From 
August 2006 until May 2008, Applicant attended college. Around September 2007, 
Applicant’s wife got a part-time job. During the time Applicant attended school he and 
his family lived off the severance pay he received, which was about $1,800 a month. He 
was not entitled to unemployment benefits. They also lived off of their savings and he 
worked part-time during the day and attended school at night. He was earning from his 
part-time job about $2,200 a month before taxes. He stated they were paying their bills, 
but their income was not enough to cover all of their expenses, despite their efforts to 
“make ends meet.” His severance pay expired in August 2007. They lived month to 
month until Applicant graduated in May 2008. He and his wife decided it was best for 
him to finish his degree, even though they got behind in paying some bills. Applicant’s 
wife started working full time in July 2008, earning approximately $40,000 annually. At 
the time Applicant started work with his present employer h
                                            
1 An explanation about the exhibits was provided by Department Counsel in Hearing Exhibit I. 
Applicant submitted three fax transmissions that included multiple duplicate documents. Some of the 
documents were out of order and some are difficult to decipher as to specifically their intended purpose. I 
have attempted to determine what particular debt applies to the different documents submitted.   
0, 25-26. 
 
2 Tr. 18-2
 
3 Tr. 20-32. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 When Applicant’s severance pay expired he began to default on some of his 
debts. He stated that he paid some of bills that were not listed on the SOR.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($134) and 1.(b) ($34) are medical debts that Applicant’s 
insurer did not cover. Applicant stated they are the same creditor and the debts were 
incurred about a year ago. He provided a receipt for $145.49 to a medical office. I am 
assuming that this document pertains to these two debts, but no information was 
provided to show why a lesser amount was paid or if this is the right creditor. Applicant 
failed to provide an explanation of the document he provided.4 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($12,518) is a credit card debt. Applicant stated he 
stopped making payments on the debt sometime in early March 2007. He explained that 
money was very tight at the time and they used the credit card to pay their mortgage 
and car payments. He further explained that he and his wife own their own home but 
they owe $14,000 in arrearages on the mortgage. They had received a foreclosure 
notice and are going to restructure their loan with their mortgage company. They 
defaulted on the loan in October 2007 and made partial payments for a period. They are 
now making full monthly payments at the required rate and once they have 
reestablished a consistent payment record, the mortgage company will refinance the 
loan. They have owned the house since 1999 and Applicant believes they have 
sufficient equity in it to refinance. Applicant explained it took from May 2008, when he 
began full-time employment until February 2009 to get back on track with their mortgage 
payments. Regarding the credit card debt, Applicant negotiated a repayment plan to pay 
$130 a month over five years. He has made several payments to the plan.5 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($170 past due) is for retail store purchases made by 
Applicant’s wife. He stated the debt was past due five months. Based on the additional 
documents provided by Applicant it appears that three payments of $45 were made to 
the same creditor. However, it is too difficult to decipher the documents provided by 
Applicant because he failed to annotate the specific items on his bank statement.6  
  
 The debt in SOR 1.e ($250 past due) is a credit card debt. The balance is 
approximately $14,000. Applicant has a payment arrangement with the creditor to pay 
$210 a month. He has been making payments since January 2009.7 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($149 past due) is for a home equity loan Applicant took 
out for $12,000 to allow his wife to stay home with the children and not work. He stated 
it is current as of January 2009 and provided documentation.8 
 
 N, Q, and R. 
6; AE G, I, N, Q and R. 
I, N, Q and R; GE 3 at page 2.  
 
4 Tr. 33-37; AE R. 
 
5 Tr. 38-50; AE I, L,
 
6 Tr. 53-5
 
7 Tr. 56-60; AE A, G, 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($12,514) is a loan for a motorcycle Applicant purchased 
in March 2006 prior to the time he knew he was going to be laid off from work. Applicant 
sold the motorcycle and settled the debt for $5,245.9 
 
 Applicant also owes approximately $6,000 on a car lease that expired in April 
2009, due to overage on the vehicle’s mileage. He stated they pay this creditor $160 a 
month for this debt. Applicant also has approximately $23,000 in deferred student loans 
that are owed. His wife also has student loans that are deferred, but he does not know 
how much she owes.10  
 
 Applicant provided a budget and stated he and his wife have not had any 
financial counseling. It is unclear if their budget is realistic. They do not have cable 
television, internet, or a land line phone. Their budget is tight, but they are making it. He 
stated he feels trapped because of money. His intention is to put 8% of his income into 
a 401k plan and to pay all of his debts and live debt free. They do not have any credit 
cards. He stated it took him awhile to see the problem and his wife needs to change the 
way she thinks about money. He stated they both “get it.” He believes he is making 
better financial choices.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
8 Tr. 60-63; AE K. 
 
9 Tr. 63-66; AE B, C and D.  
 
10 Tr. 66-76; GE 3 page 3. I have not considered for disqualifying purposes Applicant’s other 
debts that are not alleged. However, I have considered them when analyzing his complete financial 
picture and in my whole person analysis.  
 
11 Tr. 72-83. 
 
5 
 
 
ise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
as the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
on as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
n 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Anal sis 
 
uideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
ity concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
nded is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
nds.  
s. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likew
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant h
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolati
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Sectio
y
G
The secur
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overexte
fu
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern
 
(a
 
6 
 
 
) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
e is 
still paying and are still owed. I find both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
ll of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considering the following: 
he individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
dgment;  
eparation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
ar indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
nder control; and 
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
therwise resolve debts.  
inquent debts that he 
 working on paying. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. 
howing some of their expenditures. I find mitigating 
ondition (b) only partially applies.  
 
(c
 
Applicant has delinquent debts. He has paid some of the debts, but others h
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered a
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on t
ju
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
s
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are cle
u
 
(d) the individual initiated 
o
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because he still has some del
is
 
 Applicant made a conscious decision when his job was terminated to accept 
severance pay and go back to school. Losing his job was beyond his control. Under the 
circumstances the fact he used this opportunity to further his education and thereby 
enhance his career opportunities is a responsible response. However, considering the 
loss of income, I am not entirely convinced that he and his wife had a well thought out 
plan on how to pay their bills and live within their means during this austere period of 
time. Applicant’s wife did not start a full-time job until after Applicant went back to work 
full-time. Instead they financed their expenses by taking loans and then failing to pay 
them on time. I am not sure if the budget they presented is realistic when compared to 
the bank statements they provided s
c
 
 Applicant has not received any financial counseling. He has made an attempt to 
get a handle on his financial situation and did not totally ignore his debts while he was 
working part-time and going to school. He and his wife are now both employed full-time 
and have made consistent monthly payments to catch-up with their payments. Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
w 
cting financially responsibly. Therefore, I find mitigating conditions (c) and (d) apply. 
hole Person Concept 
trative judge should consider the nine 
djudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
xploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
t based upon careful 
onsideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
ude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations.  
 
has contacted his creditors and made payments plans that he is addressing. Applicant 
has a new appreciation for his financial mistakes and is attempting to rectify them. I find 
he is making a good-faith effort to repay his creditors and there are indicators that the 
problem is being resolved. I am concerned that without personal financial counseling 
and a realistic budget that he and his wife agree to scrupulous comply with, Applicant 
will again have difficulty paying his bills. Applicant is not required to be debt free, but he 
must show he is acting financially responsibly. I find under the circumstances he is no
a
 
W
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The adminis
a
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, e
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgmen
c
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant lost his job and accepted 
severance pay and decided to go back to school. He worked part-time during this 
period. His wife began part-time work later and is now working full-time. Applicant got 
behind in paying his bills during this period. With two incomes Applicant and his wife are 
making inroads at paying off their delinquent debts. Perhaps Applicant could have made 
a better financial plan when he went back to school, but under the circumstances I 
believe he did the best he could to stay financially afloat while he was finishing school. 
He opted for completing his education and suffering a short term financial set back, but 
reaping the rewards from his education by providing him with more and higher paying 
career opportunities. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I concl
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
et forth in the SOR, 
s required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
igibility for a security 
learance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                      
______ _____ 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations s
a
 
 
 
 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly with in the interests of national security to grant Applicant el
c
 
 
                               
__________________
Carol G. Ricciardello 
