                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-11222
SSN:------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 25, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(eQIP), on July 11, 2008 (Item 5).  On February 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guideline F concerning the Applicant.  The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by President Bush
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR which was received by DOHA on
March 9, 2009, and requested a decision without a hearing (Answer).  Department
Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM) to the Applicant on March 19,
2009.  The Applicant received the FORM on March 26, 2009, and was given 30 days to
submit any additional information.  He elected not to submit any additional
2
documentation.  The case was assigned to me on May 20, 2009.  Based upon a review
of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 51 and married.  He is employed by a defense contractor and
seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is financially
overextended and therefore at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  The
Applicant admitted the factual allegation, but denied that his conduct showed poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.
The Applicant worked for a school system for 20 years.  He was laid off from this
job in September 2007.  Until he found work with his present employer in June 2008, he
was underemployed while trying to find a permanent job.  (Item 5 at question 11.)   
Subparagraph 1.a.  The Applicant admits that he owes approximately $16,030.00
for a past-due credit card account.  The Applicant states that he was, and is, unable to
make payments on this account due to his lack of meaningful employment.  In his
Answer to the SOR, the Applicant states that he attempted to work out a payment
arrangement with this creditor, Citi Bank, but was unable to do so.  According to the
Applicant, Citi has obtained a judgment against the Applicant.  He also stated that, due
to his continued inability to pay this debt, he may have to declare bankruptcy.  (Item 4.)
There is no information that the Applicant has attempted to resolve this debt since being
employed by his current employer.
Mitigation
The Government’s credit bureau reports show that he has paid off or resolved all
of his debt other than the credit card debt.  The Applicant submits that this supports his
argument that he shows good judgment with regards to his debts.  (Items 6 and 7.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the Administrative Judge must consider
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for
each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access
to classified information.
3
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the Administrative Judge may also rely on his own
common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Section 7 of Executive Order
10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. An
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” is a concern under AG ¶ 19(a).  Under AG &
19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may also raise security concerns.
The Applicant admits that he owes the debt set forth in SOR subparagraph 1.a, and has
been unable to pay it for two years.  The evidence is sufficient to raise both of these
potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial difficulties arose in 2007, due to his layoff.  However, there is no indication that
he has taken recent action to resolve this debt since he was employed in June 2008.  It
is the Applicant’s burden to submit evidence showing that his financial situation has
improved.  He has not done so.  This mitigating condition is not applicable to this case.  
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, . . .), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances.”  The Applicant’s financial difficulties seem to be connected to his layoff.
However, once again, there is no evidence that he has made recent attempts to resolve
this situation.  I cannot find, under these particular facts, that the Applicant has acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
Finally, the Applicant is at least $16,000.00 in debt.  Under these facts I cannot
find that “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control,” as required by AG ¶ 20(c).
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
5
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  The Applicant is under financial
strain, and has been for two years.  He has not made a sufficient showing that his debt
situation is under control.  Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), the Applicant’s conduct is recent.  Based
on the state of the record, I cannot find that there have been permanent behavioral
changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6).  Accordingly, at the present time, I cannot find that there is
little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)), or that
the likelihood of recurrence is close to nil (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and/or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude the Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations at this time.  If he resolves this major debt in an acceptable, legal, way
he may be eligible for a clearance in the future.  He is not eligible now.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST  THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against the Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
