                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                     )         ISCR Case No. 08-12174  
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 26, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance required as part of her 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
On February 13, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) (Item 1), that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
the Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on February 23, 2009. She signed a notarized 
Answer on March 20, 2009, and requested a decision without a hearing. In her Answer, 
Applicant admitted to all allegations in the SOR. On April 1, 2009, DOHA Department 
Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM)2 in support of the government’s 
preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request to be granted a security clearance. 
Applicant was given 30 days from the date she received the FORM to respond. The file 
does not include a response from the Applicant. The case was assigned to me on June 
12, 2009, for an administrative decision based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 32 years old, married in February 2000 and separated in about 
January 2008. As a result, she is now the sole provider for herself and her 19-month-old 
child. She attended community college from 1997 to 1999, but did not earn a degree. 
She did receive a Phlebotomy Technician certificate from a vocational center in 2004. 
Since 2000, she has been employed by a defense contractor. On her security clearance 
application, she indicated her position title as “supply chain” (Items 4; 5).  
 
 The SOR alleges debts that amount to approximately $12,000. Ten of the 16 
SOR allegations relate to medical debts, totaling $987. These debts became delinquent 
between 2002 and 2007 (Item 6). Applicant's largest debt, $9,951, stems from 
repossession of her car. She states that this car was in her name “because of credit,” 
but that her former husband was the primary user, and “he let [it] go back on purpose.” 
As of September 2008, this account had been charged off (Item 7). The SOR also 
includes two communications accounts (cell phone and cable service), which became 
delinquent in 2004 and 2006, respectively, and three charge accounts, which became 
delinquent in 2007 and 2008 (Items 1; 4; 6; 7).  
 
 Applicant's Answer contains limited information about the cause of her 
delinquencies. She refers to a divorce “which has left me unable to afford all of the bill[s] 
which was just left on me to handle all by myself.” (Item 4). She did not provide the date 
of her divorce. In her Answer, Applicant also refers to surgery and related therapy, but 
does not explain the time frame, the cost, or the effect of this medical situation on her 
finances. She notes in her Answer that she expected these medical debts to be paid by 
her insurance company, but fails to offer any further explanation. The record is also 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight documents (Items 1 - 8) proffered 
in support of the government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
silent as to Applicant's annual income or monthly net remainder after meeting expenses 
and debts. 
. 
Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in March 2009 “to try and get from 
under some of the debts that I have incurred and left with over the past years.” (Items 4; 
8). Before filing the petition, Applicant was required to obtain credit counseling. The 
petition indicates that she received this information, as well as assistance with creating 
a budget analysis (Item 8). The document does not provide information about 
Applicant's assets or liabilities, but does list the creditors included in the petition. Four 
creditors listed in the SOR are included in the bankruptcy (allegations 1.d., 1.m., 1.o., 
and 1.p.). The petition also lists four medical creditors, but it cannot be determined 
whether or not they are the medical creditors listed in the SOR.  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and common-sense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).3 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an Applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
The evidence contained in the FORM shows that Applicant’s debts, amounting to 
approximately $12,000, started becoming delinquent in 2002, and have remained 
unpaid. There is no evidence that Applicant engaged in frivolous spending, that she 
failed to pay taxes, or that her debts are linked to gambling, drugs or alcohol. However, 
her seven-year history of failing to meet her financial obligations does support 
application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions that can potentially mitigate security 
concerns are relevant:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
6 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 As of the date the SOR was issued, Applicant had numerous debts. Although 
they started accruing in 2002, they are not in the distant past, because her debts 
remained unpaid. Although Applicant is presently attempting to resolve her debts 
through bankruptcy; however, without further information, such as her income and 
expenses, it is impossible to know whether she will be able to remain debt-free in the 
future. Moreover, the fact that Applicant did not respond to her delinquencies until she 
received the SOR casts doubt on her good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is relevant because Applicant has been separated since 2008, and 
has been going through a divorce, a condition that she could not have predicted. 
Consequently, she has been the sole support of herself and her child for more than one 
year. However, most of her debts became delinquent between 2002 and 2007, while 
she was married. Therefore, it appears that her divorce was not the primary factor that 
caused her delinquencies. To be applicable, this mitigating condition requires that the 
person act responsibly under the circumstances. The record provides no facts on which 
to base a determination that Applicant acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcy petition (Item 8) indicates that she received financial 
counseling, implicating AG ¶ 20(c). However, no information is available in the record to 
determine what type of counseling she received, if she benefited from it, if she adhered 
to any budget that she may have developed to fulfill the pre-bankruptcy requirement, or 
if she received any other counseling that would help her to avoid a similar situation in 
the future. AG ¶ 20(c) cannot be applied.  
 
 Mitigation is also unavailable under AG ¶ 20(d). The record contains no evidence 
that Applicant paid any of the debts in the SOR since they became delinquent, including 
the relatively small medical debts. Applicant seeks to resolve her debts through 
bankruptcy. Although this is a legitimate avenue for dealing with unresolved debt, it 
does not demonstrate a track record of paying and resolving legitimate financial 
obligations.7 The extent to which the SOR debt will be resolved is unclear, because only 
four of the SOR debts can be identified in the petition. In addition, the bankruptcy 
process is not complete; at this point, it is unknown whether or not it will be discharged.8 
Finally, Applicant filed the petition shortly after she received the SOR, indicating that 
she was responding to the security process, rather than a initiating a good-faith effort to 
meet her legitimate financial obligations. None of the mitigating conditions apply. I find 
against the Applicant on Guideline F. 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 02-06703 (App. Bd. Feb 25, 2004). 
 
8 See ISCR Case No. 02-21045 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2004). 
 
6 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence Applicant is 46 years old and 
presumed to be a mature, responsible adult.  
 
Applicant accrued approximately $12,000 in delinquent debt, starting in 2002. She filed 
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in March 2009, about one month after she received the 
SOR. However, between 2002 and 2009, she took no steps to resolve her 
delinquencies. A fair and common-sense assessment of the available information 
bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows she has not satisfied 
the doubts raised by her failure to respond to her legitimate financial obligations. Such 
doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.p.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
