                                                              
Corrected Decision 
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-111941 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana and cocaine while holding a security clearance. He 
failed to disclose his drug abuse on his 2008 security clearance application and to an 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. Applicant failed to mitigate 
security concerns arising from drug involvement and personal conduct. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for National Security Positions or security clearance 
application (SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On March 6, 2009, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
 
1I corrected and initialed the change to the case number listed on the statement of reasons (Tr. 4, 
16-17). This decision was corrected before it was mailed outside DOHA, and “Corrected Decision” is 
added to the footer of each page of this Decision. 
 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified. The revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, are 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and 
E (Personal Conduct) (GE 7). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On April 20, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations (GE 8). 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 1, 2009, and the case was assigned 
to another administrative judge on May 4, 2009. On June 2, 2009, the case was 
transferred to me because the other administrative judge had a family emergency 
(Transcript (Tr.) 17). At the hearing held on June 2, 2009, Department Counsel offered 
five exhibits (GE 1-5) (Tr. 22-25). There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-5 (Tr. 
25). Applicant did not provide any exhibits (Tr. 13). I also admitted the hearing notice 
(GE 6), the SOR (GE 7), and Applicant’s SOR response (GE 8). I held the record open 
until June 9, 2009, to permit Applicant to submit additional evidence. I received the 
transcript on June 10, 2009. Applicant provided one document after the hearing, which 
was admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.d, 
2.a, and 2.d (GE 8 on last page). He also made partial admissions concerning his drug 
use in relation to SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c (GE 8). He denied the allegations in SO ¶¶ 
2.b and 2.c (GE 8). He did not address the allegations in SOR ¶ 2.e (GE 8). He claimed 
that his failure to disclose some of his drug involvement on his security clearance 
application was because he forgot (GE 8). His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 27 years old and has been employed by a government contractor as 
a systems administrator since April 2008 (Tr. 6, 27, 29-30).3 He received a high school 
diploma in 2000, and he earned a bachelor’s degree in information technology in 2007 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 Applicant’s SF-86 (GE 1) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(Tr. 7, 27-29). He has begun working on his master’s degree (Tr. 28). His first defense-
related employment was in 2002 (Tr. 32). He received a Secret security clearance in 
2003 (Tr. 8, 30; GE 4). He applied for access to sensitive compartmented information 
(SCI) (Tr. 31). In the course of that application, he provided additional information about 
his history of drug use (Tr. 31).  
 
Charge for underage alcohol consumption and failure to disclose that information 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c)  
 
When Applicant was 19, he was attending a party where alcohol was being 
consumed (Tr. 34). A police officer came to the party and called some of the parents of 
the attendees, who were under the age of 21 (Tr. 34). He denied that he was arrested 
and did not believe he was issued a citation (Tr. 34). He did not remember whether he 
went to court (Tr. 35). However, municipal court records show that in 2001, the court 
charged Applicant with possession of alcoholic beverages while under the age of 21 
(GE 3). The court’s civil docket shows a “stet” entry in 2002 for disposition of the 
incident (Tr. 36; GE 3).  
 
Section 23d of Applicant’s May 23, 2008, SF-86 asked, “Have you ever been 
charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?” Applicant 
answered, “No” (SOR ¶ 2.b; GE 1). On January 29, 2009, Applicant responded to a 
DOHA interrogatory, and he denied that he had any previous alcohol-related arrests or 
charges (GE 2 at 7; Tr. 40; SOR ¶ 2.c). He said he forgot completely about the incident 
where the police interrupted the party and collected information concerning those 
attendees, who were under the age of 21 because of alcohol consumption at the party 
(Tr. 40).  
 
Information on Applicant’s security clearance application concerning previous 
drug use 
 
Applicant signed his SF-86 on May 23, 2008 (GE 1). He personally completed his 
May 23, 2008, SF-86 (Tr. 68-69, 74-75). He denied that he used illegal drugs in his 
response to Sections 24a and 24b (SOR ¶ 2.a). Section 24 provides: 
 
Section 24. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity The following 
questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or drug activity. You are 
required to answer the questions fully and truthfully, and your failure to do 
so could be grounds for an adverse employment decision or action against 
you, but neither your truthful responses nor information derived from your 
responses will be used as evidence against you in any subsequent 
criminal proceeding. 
 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Answer the following questions: 
 
a. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have 
you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, 
cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, 
heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, 
tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription 
drugs?    
 
b. Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as 
a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while 
possessing a security clearance; or while in a position directly and 
immediately affecting public safety? 
 
Information Applicant provided to an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator concerning previous drug use (SOR ¶ 2.d) 
 
On August 7, 2008, an OPM investigator interviewed Applicant (GE 2). Applicant 
denied that he had illegally used any controlled substance in the last seven years (Tr. 
56-57, 63; SOR ¶ 2.d; GE 2 at 14). He also denied that he had used controlled 
substances while holding a security clearance (Tr. 58, 63; SOR ¶ 2.d; GE 2 at 14). As 
part of his DOHA interrogatories, Applicant verified that the OPM report of investigation 
(ROI) accurately described the content of his OPM interview (GE 2 at 12). In his SOR 
response, Applicant admitted that he did not disclose his illegal drug possession and 
use while holding a security clearance to the OPM investigator (Tr. 59; GE 8). He 
described his failure to disclose his illegal drug use to the OPM investigator as “an 
embarrassment in itself” and as “pretty bad” (Tr. 59). He was very sorry about 
experimenting with drugs while holding a clearance (Tr. 67). He has changed and is 
through doing things that are not legal (Tr. 67). 
 
On December 19, 2008, Applicant completed an SF-86 when he applied for an 
SCI clearance as part of a job application with another agency (Tr. 72; AE A). He 
admitted he used marijuana once in October 2008 on the other agency’s SF-86 (Tr. 72; 
AE A at Question 23). However, he also indicated that he did not use a controlled 
substance while possessing a security clearance (AE A at Question 23b).4 On January 
30, 2009, Applicant sent an email to DOHA stating he had “Past drug usage (Personal)” 
and he sent in his response to DOHA interrogatories, admitting drug use (Tr. 72-73; GE 
2 at 2). He interpreted his email to DOHA as a correction of the information about drug 
use that he previously provided (Tr. 53; GE 2 at 2). On February 13, 2009, the other 
agency denied Applicant’s access to SCI (GE 4).      
 
                                            
4 Any misstatements in Applicant’s December 19, 2008, SF-86, concerning his illegal use of 
cocaine, marijuana and ecstasy will not be addressed in the Personal Conduct and Drug Involvement 
sections of this decision, and are only being considered with respect to his credibility and for the Whole 
Person concept. 
Illegal Drug Use (SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.d) 
 
 On May 23, 2008, Applicant completed his SF-86 to upgrade his security 
clearance from Secret to Top Secret (Tr. 30-31, 45, 48). He has held a security 
clearance since October 2003 (Tr. 46-47). He held a security clearance in 2006 or 2007 
when he used cocaine and in October 2008 when he used marijuana (Tr. 46-47, 49). He 
said when he failed to disclose his drug use on his security clearance application he 
was “incorrect” (Tr. 52-53). He explained that when he provided his responses to 
interrogatories and provided inconsistent information from his statement at his hearing 
about the extent of his drug use, he “messed up” (Tr. 50).  
 
At his hearing, Applicant claimed his first and only use of marijuana was in 2008 
(Tr. 38, 51). He claimed he used cocaine once in 2006 (Tr. 38, 51-52, 62, 66). He 
claimed he used ecstasy once in 2002 or 2003 (Tr. 39, 51).  
 
The most credible description of Applicant’s marijuana use is contained in his 
response to DOHA interrogatories (GE 2). Applicant actually used marijuana starting at 
the age of 16 and continuing on a monthly basis until October 2008 (GE 2). He used 
cocaine in 2006 or 2007, and he used ecstasy in 2002 (GE 2). 
 
Responses to DOHA’s interrogatories concerning previous drug use 
 
On January 29, 2009, Applicant responded to a DOHA interrogatory about 
previous drug use, under oath, as follows (GE 2 at 8): 
 
 
 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 At his hearing, Applicant denied that he used marijuana, cocaine or ecstasy more 
than once each. However, he could not explain why he wrote “monthly” next to 
“Marijuana” without a question mark, other than to say he “messed up.” (Tr. 61-62, 66, 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
70-71). He said the question marks in the frequency column for ecstasy pertained to 
when he used illegal drugs within that month or year (Tr. 71). He thought DOHA wanted 
more specifics about his drug use and he questioned what he was supposed to put 
down on the form (Tr. 71). He conceded, “But monthly was incorrect and seems like a 
lie. For someone outside looking in, it seems like a great big lie. It does.” (Tr. 72). 
 
As indicated above, in response to DOHA’s question, “When did you first use 
each of the drug(s) listed above? He answered, “marijuana, 16 yr; extacy (sic), 19 yr; 
cocaine, 24 yr.” (GE 2 at 8). Applicant responded to the interrogatories in his own 
handwriting (Tr. 41). He insisted that he used marijuana on one occasion in October 
2008 (Tr. 41, 63-64, 66). Applicant explained when he wrote, “16,” he was thinking 
about when he first used alcohol (Tr. 43). He only used cocaine once and that was in 
2006 (Tr. 66). When he completed the DOHA interrogatory, he swore the information he 
provided in DOHA’s interrogatory was accurate (Tr. 43-44; GE 2).    
 
 Applicant denied that he continued to associate with the persons involved in 
illegal drug use (Tr. 65; GE 2). 
     
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular 
case. AG ¶ 25(a), indicates, “any drug abuse,”5 AG ¶ 25(c) states, “illegal drug 
possession,” and AG ¶ 25(g) provides, “any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance,” could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying.  
 
AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c) and 25(g) apply. The other disqualifying conditions listed in 
AG ¶ 25 are not applicable. These disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant 
used and possessed marijuana, cocaine and ecstasy.6 He eventually disclosed his drug 
abuse in his response to DOHA interrogatories, and to a lesser extent at his hearing. He 
possessed marijuana, cocaine and ecstasy before he used these substances. 
Applicant’s Secret security clearance was approved in 2003, and he used marijuana 
and cocaine after his security clearance was granted.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
5AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
6AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana and ecstasy or 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine are Schedule (Sch.) I controlled 
substances. See Sch. I(c)(9) and I(c)(10), respectively. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) 
(discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I); United States v. Crawford, 449 F.3d 860, 861 (8th Cir. 
2006) (ecstasy). Cocaine is a Sch. II Controlled Substance. See Sch. II(a)(4) (cocaine). 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or do not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board 
determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last 
use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. 
If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”7 
 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. The Appeal Board addressed the recency 
of drug use, stating:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant used marijuana on a monthly basis beginning when he was 16 years 
old. He used marijuana until October 2008. He used cocaine in 2006 or 2007 and 
ecstasy in 2002. Applicant’s last marijuana use was recent because it was nine months 
before his hearing. He recognizes the adverse impact on his life of drug abuse. These 
actions create some certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. AG ¶ 26(a) 
partially applies to his marijuana-related offenses.8    
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. He has disassociated from his drug-using associates and 
contacts. He has broken his patterns of drug abuse, and he has changed his life with 
respect to illegal drug use. He has abstained from drug abuse for about nine months. 
However, he did not provide “a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.”9 AG ¶ 26(b) does not fully apply.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs after being prescribed those drugs for an illness or injury. Marijuna, 
cocaine and/or ecstasy were never prescribed for him. He did not satisfactorily complete 
a prescribed drug treatment program. Moreover, he cannot receive full credit because 
he did not provide “a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional, 
including rehabilitation and aftercare requirements.” 
  
In conclusion, Applicant ended his marijuana abuse in October 2008, about nine 
months ago. Aside from his marijuana use, all of his other illegal drug use ended in 2007 
or earlier.10 Applicant used marijuana and cocaine while holding a security clearance. 
 
8In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
9Even if Applicant had provided such a statement, sufficient time has not elapsed since his most 
recent illegal drug use, to warrant full mitigation of security concerns relating to his drug involvement. 
 
10The Appeal Board has reversed decisions granting a clearance because the administrative 
judge considered individual acts of misconduct one-by-one and determined the isolated acts were 
mitigated. ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006). Here, Applicant used 
ecstasy in 2002 and cocaine in 2006 or 2007, and marijuana until October 2008. His repeated abuse of 
these particular drugs is relevant in the whole person analysis, but individually, as listed in the SOR, the 
abuse of two of the three illegal drugs more than two years ago is insufficiently aggravating to cause 
denial of his clearance. In ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008), the Appeal Board 
explained it is the overall conduct that determines whether a clearance should be granted stating: 
 
The Judge's analysis of the numerous acts of misconduct in this record failed to reflect a 
reasonable interpretation of the record evidence as a whole.  By analyzing each category 
of incidents separately, the Judge failed to consider the significance of the “evidence as a 
whole” and Applicant's pattern of conduct. See, e.g., Raffone v. Adams, 468 F.2d 860, 
866 (2d Cir. 1972)(taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). Under the whole person concept, a 
Judge must consider the totality of Applicant's conduct when deciding whether it is clearly 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. He understands the adverse 
results from drug abuse.11 He has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track record of no 
drug abuse to partially, but not completely, mitigate drug involvement as a bar to his 
access to classified information.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. . . . 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant used marijuana, cocaine, and ecstasy in the previous seven years. He 
used marijuana and cocaine while holding a security clearance. He falsely denied this 
drug use in his response to section 24a and 24b on his May 23, 2008, SF-86. He falsely 
denied his drug use to an OPM investigator on August 7, 2008. His decisions to falsify 
his 2008 security clearance application and to lie to the OPM investigator were 
intentional and deliberate. The falsifications were intended to deceive his employer and 
security officials. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both apply.  
 
 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0350 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 31, 1999). The Judge’s 
piecemeal analysis of Applicant's overall conduct did not satisfy the requirements of ¶ 
E2.2 of the Directive. 
 
See also ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006), see Whole Person Concept at pages 
13-14, infra.  
 
11Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The SOR alleges in ¶ 2.e that Applicant’s drug use as detailed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 
1.d also raises a personal conduct security concern. The government cross-alleged the 
same conduct under both guidelines to ensure proper notice and full review as well as 
to address possible exigencies of proof. Clearly, his drug use raises disqualifying 
conditions under both Guideline E and H. See AG ¶ 16(e). However, I will find “For 
Applicant” with respect to SOR ¶ 2.e because his illegal drug use is more appropriately 
and fully addressed under Guideline H. Duplicative coverage of his illegal drug 
possession and use in my findings under Guideline E is not warranted in this case.    
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(b) do not apply. Applicant did not make a prompt, good-faith 
effort to correct the falsification of his May 23, 2008, SF-86 before being confronted with 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
the facts. Instead, he chose to lie to the OMP investigator on August 7, 2008, about his 
drug use. These two falsifications were not caused or significantly contributed to by 
improper or inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or 
instructing him concerning the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. His falsification of his May 23, 2008, SF-86, and his 
lie to the OPM investigator about his drug abuse are not minor offenses. The two 
falsifications are relatively recent. Because there are two offenses, the offenses are not 
“isolated.” The Appeal Board’s jurisprudence requires consideration of all such offenses 
in a non-piecemeal fashion. The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a 
whole and reach a reasonable conclusion as to the recency of his conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. 
Bd. May 26, 2004)). The two falsifications continue to cause doubt about Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment.        
 
AG ¶¶ 17(d), 17(e) and 17(g) have some application, but do not apply to a 
sufficient degree to mitigate all security concerns under Guideline E. There are some 
positive signs of Applicant’s rehabilitation. He admitted his extensive drug use in 
response to DOHA interrogatories on January 29, 2009. He said he ceased his 
associations with other drug users. No other allegations of problems at his employment 
have surfaced. He has promised not to use drugs in the future, which is an important 
step toward his rehabilitation. He received job training and has a good employment 
record. His security manager is well aware of his drug abuse problems. Disclosure of 
his drug use has reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
AG ¶ 17(f) applies to Applicant’s failure to disclose the charge of underage 
consumption of alcohol because the allegations of falsification are not substantiated. 
There is insufficient information that he knew he was charged, as opposed to being 
cited, for these offenses. I find “For Applicant” in the Findings section of this decision 
with respect to SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c.   
 
AG ¶ 17(f) does not apply to Applicant’s false descriptions denying his illegal 
drug use on his May 23, 2008, SF-86 and to his false statement in 2008 to an OPM 
investigator. These false statements were deliberate, and the allegation of falsification is 
substantiated.12 At the time he provided false information, he intended to deceive his 
 
12The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
employer and security officials. These severe lapses in judgment are too recent and 
serious to be mitigated at this time.  
 
In conclusion, Applicant falsely denied at his hearing the full extent of his 
marijuana use. He stated he only used marijuana once, when he actually used 
marijuana on a monthly basis beginning when he was 16 years old, and continuing until 
October 2008. The decision not to be candid and forthright at his hearing shows he has 
not been rehabilitated, and that personal conduct concerns are not mitigated.    
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was relatively young and immature when he used illegal drugs and falsified his May 23, 
2008, SF-86 and lied to an OPM investigator on August 7, 2008. Applicant’s December 
19, 2008, SF-86, admitted that he used marijuana once in October 2008. This 
admission of drug use is a positive sign that Applicant was coming to terms with his 
drug use and beginning to take responsibility for his marijuana use in the context of his 
security clearance. He stopped using illegal drugs in October 2008. He subsequently 
made a more accurate admission of his illegal drug use in his response to DOHA 
interrogatories on January 29, 2009. He knows the consequences of drug abuse. 
Applicant contributes to his company and the Department of Defense. There is no 
evidence of any disciplinary problems at work. For example, there is no evidence he 
used illegal drugs at work. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would 
intentionally violate national security. His character and good work performance show 
some responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. His supervisors evidently support him 
 
Corrected Decision 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
or he would not have been able to retain his employment after his security clearance 
was called into question.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant had a problem with drug abuse beginning with his marijuana use at age 16. 
He has not received drug counseling or treatment. However, if his only problem had 
been his drug abuse, security concerns under the drug involvement guideline would be 
mitigated by his continuing abstinence from drug abuse in about a year because of the 
passage of time. His falsification of his May 23, 2008, SF-86 and his lie to an OPM 
investigator denying his drug abuse cannot be mitigated at this time and for the 
foreseeable future. Applicant’s December 19, 2008, SF-86, admits one use of marijuana 
in October 2008; however, he failed to disclose his illegal use of cocaine and ecstasy. 
He failed to disclose the extent and frequency of his marijuana use.  
 
At his hearing, he chose to lie about the extent of his marijuana use. At his 
hearing, he chose to recant his description of his marijuana use that he provided in his 
response to DOHA interrogatories. He falsely claimed at his hearing that he used 
marijuana once in October 2008. Actually, I am convinced that he used marijuana on a 
monthly basis beginning at the age of 16 and continuing until October 2008. His 
decisions to provide false information were knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. 
He was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. The false statements 
show a lack of judgment in the context of security requirements. Such conduct raises a 
serious security concern, and a security clearance is not warranted. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns 
pertaining to drug involvement and personal conduct.     
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”13 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
13See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
Corrected Decision 
 
16 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.b and 2.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
