                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11542 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Spouse of Applicant 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On February 26, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 26, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 30, 2009. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 5, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on June 2, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant did not 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through E 
into evidence without objection from Department Counsel. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on June 10, 2009.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 47 years old and has been employed as a systems analyst for a 
federal contractor since January 2006. She has been married since 1981 and has two 
children, ages 24 and 17. Both live at home. Applicant graduated from college in 2003, 
earning a Bachelor of Science degree. Her husband is a realtor.1  
 
The SOR reflects two debts that are past due. The debt in SOR 1.a is a 
delinquent mortgage debt ($53,713). Applicant and her husband bought a house in 
2003 based on their two incomes. She was earning around $40,000 annually at the 
time. Due to the real estate market decline Applicant’s husband’s income was reduced 
from approximately $50,000 a year in 2005 to approximately $38,000 in 2006 and 
$23,000 in 2007. The reduction in income affected the couple’s ability to pay their 
mortgage. Their mortgage payments were approximately $3,800 a month. They 
depleted their savings while trying to make their mortgage payments. In March 2006 
they were unable to pay their mortgage payment and defaulted. They had been in 
contact with their mortgage company while their financial situation was changing and 
when they defaulted they contacted their mortgage company again, so they could work 
out a payment plan that would benefit both sides.2  
 
In January 2006 Applicant was hired by her current employer and her salary 
increased to approximately $60,000. She was promoted in January 2009 and her 
current salary is $88,000. Her husband continued to work in real estate, but his earnings 
continued to decrease. He worked from 2006 to 2009 for his realty employer, but in the 
past three months changed jobs. He also began working at a part-time retail job in 
October 2007.3  
 
Applicant’s husband filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 in April 2007 in his 
name only. The payment plan included their joint mortgage, an investment property, 
three credit card debts and his car that was repossessed. He made monthly payments 
of $2,000 into the plan for nine months until the debts were discharged.4  
1 Tr. 21-25, 100-101. 
 
2 Tr. 18-20, 25-39, 57-66, 92-100. 
 
3 Tr. 26-29, 59-65. 
 
4 Tr. 30-36. All the debts except the mortgage were in Applicant’s husband’s name. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant attempted to find a resolution to their mortgage default as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. In October 2008 she and her husband began the paperwork to modify their 
mortgage. The paperwork took 60 to 90 days to complete. In January 2009 they were 
notified by the mortgage company that they had lost their paperwork so they had to 
resubmit the information and it took another 60 to 90 days to complete the modification. 
In May 2009 their mortgage was modified and the total amount of the loan increased, 
which included all of their arrearages and costs. This new mortgage provided for a 
reduced interest rate. The modification requires monthly payments of $4,029. The first 
payment is due July 1, 2009. Applicant testified that she and her husband have 
sufficient income to make their monthly payments.5 
 
The debt in SOR 1.b is a credit card ($99) that was past due on a balance of 
($978). Applicant has two credit cards with the retailer and provided proof that she is 
paying both on time and neither is past due.6  
 
Applicant appears to have resolved the issues related to the delinquent debts in 
SOR 1.a and 1.b. She provided a budget, but it did not include the payments she is 
making toward her student loans ($148/month, total owed $23,000) and her quarterly 
life insurance payment ($160). Applicant has seven to eight credit cards that have a 
total balance of $15,000 that she is making payments on. She continues to use these 
credit cards. Most of her credit card debt appears to be over her limit or close to her 
maximum limit. In 2005, she and her husband refinanced their home and took out 
approximately $54,000 in equity to pay a federal tax lien from the mid-1980s and a 
business tax lien associated with her husband for failing to have enough money 
withheld. She stated they had paid their taxes, but they could not prove it because they 
did not retain their files. Applicant testified that their taxes are paid.7 Their investment 
property was included in the bankruptcy and in August 2009 the arrearages on that 
property will be caught up. The $1,600 payment for the property will be reduced to $600 
at that time, allowing for additional expendable income. During the period when 
Applicant’s husband was making payments into the Chapter 13 payment plan, some of 
the payment was going toward their home mortgage to prevent foreclosure. The amount 
paid was less than their mortgage payment. Applicant lists that she has $7,000 in their 
checking account and no other savings. Applicant testified she and her husband are 
trying to make changes in their lifestyle and realign their expenditures.8  
 
Applicant’s husband testified and took responsibility for his actions that affected 
the family’s finances, such as his business tax lien.  
5 Tr. 41-43; AE C. 
 
6 Tr. 44-50; GE 3 page 2; AE D and E. 
 
7 Applicant testified that they had approximately $90,000 in equity in the house. 
 
8 Tr. 50-100; GE 2 and 4. Applicant and her husband’s tax lien and her husband’s business tax 
lien were not considered for disqualifying purposes, nor was her overall credit card history. However, 
these matters were considered when analyzing Applicant’s financial practices, ability to pay her debts and 
her credibility under the whole person section. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay her mortgage and another debt that was past due. 
She and her husband earned sufficient incomes, even though his was reduced due to a 
financial market downturn. Based on the evidence, there is sufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant and her husband were living beyond their means and unable to 
pay their mortgage debt. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because she and her husband have a new 
mortgage they recently refinanced and will start making their new monthly payments 
beginning on July 1, 2009. Rolled into their new mortgage payment are their arrearages. 
I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply because the debt is still in its earliest 
stages of resolution and the first payment has not been made. Applicant and her family 
relied on two incomes when they obtained the mortgage. Applicant’s husband’s income 
as a realtor was reduced due to the economic market. This was a condition beyond her 
control. Her husband’s failure to pay his business taxes and their failure to pay their 
federal taxes on time affected their total financial situation. Earlier they were able to 
refinance their home and take $54,000 from it, but needed that money to pay their past 
taxes. This in turn affected their ability to use this money to pay their mortgage later. It 
appears Applicant’s husband was handling the finances; however, Applicant was also 
contributing to the family debt. I find under the circumstances mitigating condition (b) 
only partially applies because some of the tax problems was within Applicant’s control, 
even though the decrease in income was not. To Applicant’s credit, she and her 
husband have been working with the mortgage company throughout the period when 
his income was reduced. They have continued to work with them and have negotiated a 
new mortgage that includes paying their arrearages.  
 
 Applicant provided proof that she is current on the credit card debt that was 
alleged. There is no evidence Applicant has received any financial counseling. 
However, there is a clear indication that she is resolving her mortgage delinquency and 
initiated a good-faith effort to address the problem as it was occurring. Applicant 
provided proof that she is current on the credit card debt alleged. She provided 
sufficient evidence to show the allegation is resolved. Therefore, I find mitigating 
condition (c) and (d) apply.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant and her husband 
experienced financial problems when his income was reduced. They refinanced their 
home to pay overdue tax liens that in turn affected their ability to use this money when 
the market downturn reduced her husband’s income. Applicant has resolved the two 
debts alleged in the SOR. Her husband is working full-time and has a part-time job. 
Applicant has a significant number of credit cards that are at or close to their maximum 
limits and is meeting her monthly payments. Although Applicant did not file for 
bankruptcy, her husband did and she benefited from it. At this time, Applicant appears 
to have her finances in order and is paying her bills. She and her husband seem to have 
their finances back on tract, but obviously need to be committed to long term changes in 
their spending habits. I find the record evidence does not leave me with questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from Financial 
Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
