                                                              
 
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-10547 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana, ecstasy and cocaine. Her marijuana usage until 
February 2008 is too recent to be mitigated at this time. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 2, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF-86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On March 18, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) (GE 
8). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
On April 16, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations (GE 9). 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 14, 2009, and the case was 
assigned to me of May 15, 2009. At the hearing held on June 9, 2009, Department 
Counsel offered six exhibits (GE 1-6) (Transcripts (Tr.) 19). There were no objections, 
and I admitted GE 1-6 (Tr. 19). Applicant provided six exhibits (Tr. 44-45; AE A-F). 
Department Counsel did not object, and I admitted AE A-F (Tr. 45). I also admitted the 
hearing notice (GE 7), the SOR (GE 8), and Applicant’s SOR response (GE 9). I held 
the record open until June 9, 2009, to permit Applicant to submit additional evidence. I 
received the transcript on June 17, 2009. Applicant provided one document after the 
hearing, which was admitted as AE G.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, she admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
to 1.c (GE 9). Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor (Tr. 7). She is a high 
school graduate, and has attended college from 1999 to 2000 (Tr. 7). She has never 
held a security clearance (Tr. 8). She was working as a waitress and met several 
contractor employees (Tr. 39-40). The contractor employees advised her that an 
administrative position was available (Tr. 39-40). They suggested she apply for the job 
(Tr. 40). On April 21, 2008, she started working for the government contractor (Tr. 38). 
She married in 2000 and divorced in 2006 (GE 1). She is not married. Her children were 
born in 2000, 2003 and 2007 (GE 1). She has never served in the military (GE 1). She 
does not have a police record (GE 1). 
 
Drug involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c)  
 
Applicant used marijuana 10-15 times between 1999 and February 2008 (SOR ¶ 
1.a; Tr. 49-59; GE 1, GE 9). She used cocaine three to five times between March 2006 
and May 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b; Tr. 60, 64; GE 1, GE 9). She used ecstasy twice in October 
2005 (SOR ¶ 1.c; Tr. 61-63; GE 1, GE 9). She admitted her drug use on her May 2, 
2008, security clearance application (GE 1).  
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant first used marijuana in college (Tr. 49). Her use of illegal drugs was 
sporadic (Tr. 54). A year might pass between her uses of illegal drugs (Tr. 54). Her 
former husband introduced her to illegal drugs (Tr. 49-50). She also used illegal drugs 
with her roommate (Tr. 49-50). After five years of marriage, she told her husband that 
they needed to get illegal drugs out of their lives (Tr. 51). He told her he quit, and then 
later she found out he still used illegal drugs (Tr. 51). She finally divorced him because 
of his drug abuse (Tr. 52). She was separated from her husband in 2005, and the 
divorce was final in August 2006 (Tr. 52). Her drug use was at social functions and was 
never around her children (Tr. 52-53). Her ex-boyfriend was also a marijuana user (Tr. 
57). She had a daughter from her relationship with her ex-boyfriend (Tr. 58). Her 
relationship with her ex-boyfriend ended because he consumed too much alcohol (Tr. 
58). The last time she used marijuana was at a Super Bowl party in February 2008 (Tr. 
53). She inhaled some marijuana smoke from a pipe being passed around the room (Tr. 
57). She immediately regretted using the marijuana and did not use more marijuana 
from the pipe the next time it was passed to her (Tr. 57).  
 
Applicant has dissociated herself from known drug users (Tr. 54, 66-67). She 
primarily associates on a social basis with co-workers at her government contractor 
employment (Tr. 59). She still associates with her ex-boyfriend when he visits their 
daughter, which is every other weekend (Tr. 59). She emphasized that she wanted to 
protect her children and using drugs placed them at risk (Tr. 55, 67). She is the sole 
support for her three children, and their welfare was very important to her (Tr. 56). Her 
current employment is the best employment she has had (Tr. 55-56). She and her 
children will have a better future if she can retain her current employment (Tr. 56). 
 
The contractor informed Applicant that using illegal drugs while working for the 
contractor was not permitted (Tr. 41). Before she began her employment with the 
contractor, she received a urinalysis test, which was negative for the presence of illegal-
drug-related metabolites (Tr. 42).  
 
Applicant has never received any drug therapy or treatment (Tr. 65). She 
promised not to use illegal drugs in the future (Tr. 65-67). On July 2, 2008, an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator interviewed Applicant about her drug use 
(GE 2). Her description of her drug involvement was consistent with her statement at 
her hearing (GE 2). 
 
On June 9, 2009, Applicant provided a statement in accordance with AG ¶ 26(b) 
to demonstrate her intent not to abuse illegal drugs in the future (AE G). She provided 
“a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of [her] clearance for any 
violation” (AE G). 
 
Character evidence 
 
A retired U.S. Marine Corps field grade officer (S), who has been an intelligence 
officer for 17 years of his military service, is currently Applicant’s supervisor (Tr. 25). S 
has supervised her for about seven months (Tr. 31). S is a program manager for her 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
employer (Tr. 27). S described her as a diligent, responsible and trustworthy employee 
(Tr. 25, 34, 37). S was unsure about whether the contractor had an active urinalysis 
testing program to detect illegal drug use (Tr. 28, 33). If S’s employer has a urinalysis-
drug testing program, testing is infrequent (Tr. 28). For example, S had only been tested 
once in the last 18 months, and that was shortly before starting his employment with the 
contractor (Tr. 28, 32-33). Applicant’s current responsibility is in administration and as 
an assistance operations coordinator (Tr. 30). She is also a deputy deployment 
coordinator, which entails processing personnel to deploy to Afghanistan and Iraq (Tr. 
35). She also assists with resolving the needs of deployed individuals once they are 
deployed (Tr. 35-36). A clearance makes her job easier because it enables her to enter 
restricted areas at various locations with less escort/in-processing issues (Tr. 30). 
However, if her clearance is denied, she will not be fired (Tr. 31). S did not know the 
basis for the government’s security concern (Tr. 32). 
      
Applicant disclosed her drug abuse in general terms to the authors of three 
letters of recommendation/character references (Tr. 46; AE A-B, F). The authors of two 
letters are supervisors employed by the contractor that employs Applicant (AE A-B). 
These three letters describe her as honest, reliable, and competent. She has excellent 
attention to detail, strong integrity and is very dependable. She is trustworthy and 
performs beyond expectations. She would regard her responsibilities as a security 
clearance holder very seriously and conscientiously.  
 
The author of one letter is a former counterintelligence agent (C) (AE B). Since 
January 2008, C has known Applicant at work and socially. C describes her as a superb 
employee, who is completely trustworthy (AE B). C recommends Applicant for a position 
of trust and responsibility (AE B). 
 
Other contractor employees laud her work ethic and professionalism (AE C). 
They recommend Applicant for a security clearance (AE C). Some character witnesses 
have known Applicant for up to 20 years and compliment her for her love of her family, 
strong leadership, solid character, and superb dedication to work and family (AE D, E).  
   
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
concern is under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) with respect to the allegations set 
forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular 
case. AG ¶ 25(a), indicates, “any drug abuse,”2 and AG ¶ 25(c) states, “illegal drug 
possession,” could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s 
case.  
 
AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply. The other disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 
are not applicable. These disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant used and 
possessed marijuana, cocaine and ecstasy.3 She disclosed her drug abuse in her SF-
86, her responses to DOHA interrogatories, her SOR response, and at her hearing. She 
possessed marijuana, cocaine and ecstasy before she used these substances.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
3AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana and ecstasy or 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine are Schedule (Sch.) I controlled 
substances. See Sch. I(c)(9) and I(c)(10), respectively. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) 
(discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I); United States v. Crawford, 449 F.3d 860, 861 (8th Cir. 
2006) (ecstasy). Cocaine is a Sch. II Controlled Substance. See Sch. II(a)(4) (cocaine). 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or do not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows “a significant 
period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative 
judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”4 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. The Appeal Board addressed the recency 
of drug use, stating:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
Applicant used marijuana 10-15 times between 1999 and February 2008. She 
used cocaine three to five times between March 2006 and May 2006. She used ecstasy 
twice in October 2005. Applicant’s last marijuana use was recent because it was 17 
months before her hearing. She recognizes the adverse impact on her life of drug 
abuse. These actions create some certitude that she will continue to abstain from drug 
use. AG ¶ 26(a) partially applies to her drug-related offenses.5    
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate her intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. She has disassociated from her drug-using associates and 
contacts, except for her ex-boyfriend who visits their daughter every two weeks. She 
has broken her patterns of drug abuse, and she has changed her life with respect to 
illegal drug use. She has abstained from drug abuse for almost 17 months. Applicant 
provided “a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) fully apples.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs after being prescribed those drugs for an illness or injury. Marijuana, 
cocaine and/or ecstasy were never prescribed for her. She did not satisfactorily 
complete a prescribed drug treatment program. Moreover, she cannot receive full credit 
because she did not provide “a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional, including rehabilitation and aftercare requirements.” 
  
In conclusion, Applicant ended her drug abuse in February 2009, about 17 
months ago. Aside from her marijuana use, all of her other illegal drug use ended in May 
2006 or earlier.6 The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. She 
 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
5In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
6The Appeal Board has reversed decisions granting a clearance because the administrative judge 
considered individual acts of misconduct one-by-one and determined the isolated acts were mitigated. 
ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Dec. 
17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006). Here, Applicant used marijuana 10-
15 times and stopped using marijuana in February 2008. She used cocaine three to five times between 
March 2006 and May 2006. She used ecstasy twice in October 2005. Her repeated abuse of these 
particular drugs is relevant in the whole person analysis, but individually, as listed in the SOR, the abuse 
of two of the three illegal drugs more than three years ago is insufficiently aggravating to cause denial of 
her clearance. In ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008), the Appeal Board explained it 
is the overall conduct that determines whether a clearance should be granted stating: 
 
The Judge's analysis of the numerous acts of misconduct in this record failed to reflect a 
reasonable interpretation of the record evidence as a whole.  By analyzing each category 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
understands the adverse results from drug abuse.7 She has shown or demonstrated a 
sufficient track record of no drug abuse to partially, but not completely, mitigate drug 
involvement as a bar to her access to classified information.  If she continues to refrain 
from drug abuse and other misconduct for 12 additional months after the date of this 
decision, she would have shown a sufficient period of rehabilitation to warrant approval 
of her security clearance.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was relatively young and immature when she began using illegal drugs. Applicant 
admitted that she used illegal drugs on her SF-86. She continued to admit her drug use 
 
of incidents separately, the Judge failed to consider the significance of the “evidence as a 
whole” and Applicant's pattern of conduct. See, e.g., Raffone v. Adams, 468 F.2d 860, 
866 (2d Cir. 1972)(taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). Under the whole person concept, a 
Judge must consider the totality of Applicant's conduct when deciding whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0350 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 31, 1999). The Judge’s 
piecemeal analysis of Applicant's overall conduct did not satisfy the requirements of ¶ 
E2.2 of the Directive. 
 
See also ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006), see Whole Person Concept at pages 
9-10, infra.  
 
7Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
in her OPM interview, response to DOHA interrogatories, response to the SOR, and at 
her hearing. All of her statements were consistent. Her admissions of drug use are a 
positive sign that Applicant is taking responsibility for her drug use in the context of her 
security clearance. There were no police records describing her drug involvement. She 
stopped using illegal drugs in February 2008. She knows the consequences of drug 
abuse. Applicant contributes to her company and the Department of Defense. There is 
no evidence of any disciplinary problems at work. For example, there is no evidence 
she used illegal drugs at work. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that she would 
intentionally violate national security. Her good character and superb work performance 
are established by her character witness and the statements she provided. Her strong 
work performance shows significant responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. Her 
supervisors evidently support her or she would not have been able to retain her 
employment after her security clearance was called into question. Even more 
importantly, her employer intends to continue her employment even if her security 
clearance is not approved.    
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at this 
time. Applicant used marijuana 10-15 times between 1999 and February 2008. She 
used cocaine three to five times between March 2006 and May 2006. She used ecstasy 
twice in October 2005. She has not received drug counseling or treatment. Each time 
she used illegal drugs, she possessed the illegal drugs before she used them. Each 
time she possessed illegal drugs, she committed a state and federal crime. Most of her 
drug use involved use in a social setting with drug-using friends. Essentially she gave in 
to peer pressure and accepted and used drugs she received from other drug users. She 
knew what she was doing was wrong, and did it anyway.  Her poor judgment placed her 
family at risk and she was exposed to possible civil sanctions.   
 
In conclusion, I am impressed with Applicant’s sincerity and commitment to 
refrain from using illegal drugs. She has not used illegal drugs for 17 months. If she can 
continue to abstain from illegal drug use for a year after the date of this decision, and 
avoids any other conduct that raises a security concern, a security clearance should be 
approved for her. I conclude that if these conditions are met, by July 1, 2010, her drug 
involvement will be fully mitigated by the passage of time.   
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to drug involvement at this time.     
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”8 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not fully mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude she is not eligible for access to classified information at this time. 
 
8See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance at this time.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
