                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-00302
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
June 8, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) dated February 17, 2007.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On March 11, 2009, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
(as amended), and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January
2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 24, 2009, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on April 13, 2009.  A notice of hearing was initially issued on April
21, 2009, scheduling the hearing for May 12, 2009.  The matter was continued based
upon the fact that the Applicant failed to receive the notice of hearing.  An amended
notice of hearing was issued on May 12, 2009, scheduling the hearing for May 15,
2009.  At the hearing, the Government offered seven exhibits, referred to as
Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant
offered nine exhibits, referred to Applicant’s Exhibits A through I, that were admitted into
evidence.  She also testified on his own behalf.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was
2
received on May 27, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on the Applicant’s Answer to the SOR,
her testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 51 years old and has a Bachelors
Degree in Business.  She is employed by a defense contractor as a Purchasing
Representative and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with her
employment.  
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  After a complete and
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of the same,
the following findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the
SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because she is financially overextended
and at risk to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The Applicant has a twenty-four year work history with her employer.  She
explained that after high school, beginning in 1977, she worked for the police
department where she met her husband.  They were married in 1982.  Her husband,
who was fifteen years older, retired from the police department, did not work
consistently, and acquired a serious drinking problem.  In August 1984, the Applicant
had a baby and wanted him to stop drinking, but he would not.  The Applicant had run
out of savings and her income from her job at a bank was insufficient to support the
family, which also included paying child support for his two boys from a previous
marriage and back taxes he owed.  In an act of desperation, with only her suitcase and
their child in hand, she left the state and moved in with her sister.  She left behind all of
her possessions.  She got a job, and started sending money to her husband to help pay
the bills.  It was not long before she learned that he was not using the money to pay the
bills.  After two years of consuming alcohol to excess and running up credit card debt,
her husband lost everything they owned including their home and their cars.  He then
moved out of state and in with the Applicant.  By this time, the Applicant wanted a
divorce, but was advised by her attorney to file for bankruptcy first.  On February 9,
1987, the Applicant and her husband filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy and their debt was
discharged in July 7, 1987.  (Government Exhibit 4).  Then they filed for divorce.     
In 1990, the Applicant remarried and became accustomed to a dual income.  She
and her second husband were divorced in 1997.  
In 2005, the Applicant purchased a home on two and a half acres near her job.  It
was a fixer but she was not patient enough to wait to improve it, and started using credit
cards to pay for repairs.  She then got a second on the house and spent that money.
She broke her foot, which caused her to be out of work for seven months.  While on
3
disability she was overpaid, and so when she returned to work, her employer was
reimbursed from her paycheck.  Her weekly check was only $200.00 and she fell even
farther behind on her bills.  At the same time, unbeknownst to her, the interest rate on
her home loan adjusted to 18 percent, a payment that she could not afford.  She tried to
sell the house, but it was eventually foreclosed upon.  She moved out in November
2007.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F).    
On October 24, 2008, the Applicant filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy again.  Her
liabilities totaled approximately $51,200.00.  (Government Exhibit 3).  A letter from her
attorney dated October 31, 2008, indicates that the Applicant recently completed a
series of consumer/financial  education courses designed to teach her how to properly
handle her finances and prevent future financial issues.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A).  The
Applicant credibly testified that she now knows where she went wrong.  She overspent,
lived beyond her means and was a poor financial manager.  She claims that she has
now learned how to properly budget her money and pay her bills on time.   
Letters of recommendation from her coworkers, friends and her pastor, indicate
that the Applicant is dependable, hardworking, conscientious, honest, kind and
compassionate.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B).  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into "Disqualifying
Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors and Mitigating
Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
19(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20(b)  the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
4
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and.or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
20(d)  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
5
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, a security clearance is entrusted to civilian workers who
must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours per
day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore appropriately concerned when
available information indicates that an Applicant for such access may be involved in
instances of financial irresponsibility which demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with her security clearance eligibility.
Under the particular circumstances of this case, I find that the Applicant has
made a good faith effort to resolve her debts.  In 1987, her financial problems were
largely beyond her control.  They were caused by her dead beat husband who had no
consistent employment, consumed alcohol to excess, created excessive credit card
debt and ultimately ended in divorce.  In 2008, the situation was much different, and it
appears that she has learned from her mistakes.  It is noted that she missed seven
months of work because of her broken foot and that her mortgage payment adjusted to
an exorbitant amount, but for the most part, her financial problems were caused by a
series of poor financial decisions that spiraled out of control.  She understands that
holding a DoD security clearance is a privilege and that she must always demonstrate
financial responsibility.  To resolve her indebtedness, she hired an attorney and was
advised that her only option was bankruptcy.  In 2008, she filed for Chapter 7 again.
Once her debts are discharged, she will have a fresh start.  She recently completed
financial counseling classes and has learned how to properly budget her money and
only buy necessities.  She should no longer have any problems paying her bills on time
as she understands the importance of living within ones means.  In the event that she
has any future financial problems, her security clearance will immediately be in
jeopardy.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case.  
6
There is evidence of financial rehabilitation at this time.  Under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19(a) inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts, and 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations apply.  However,
20(b)  the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances; 20(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and.or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control, and 20(d)  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts also applies.  The Applicant had initiated a good
faith effort to repay her overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her debts.  Accordingly, I
find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing her request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.     
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
                                   
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
7
