KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E; Guideline M
DIGEST: Conduct not alleged in a SOR may be considered for several reasons, including a
credibility determination.  Applicant was not denied the due process afforded him by the
Directive.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 07-16653.a1
DATE: 05/01/2012
DATE: May 1, 2012
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-16653
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Timothy Aiken, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 16, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 1, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Marc E. Curry
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s consideration of
conduct not contained in the SOR denied Applicant due process and whether the Judge’s adverse
security clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable
findings under Guidelines F and M are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is employed in the field
of information technology.  He has worked for his current employer since March 2011.  Applicant
served in the Navy during 1997.  He did not complete basic training, receiving a general discharge
under honorable conditions after a positive urinalysis for marijuana.  
Previously Applicant worked for another Defense contractor.  During that period of
employment, Applicant was alleged to have created directory files and scripts without obtaining
permission from the system administrator.  Applicant stated that he was not aware that his conduct
was wrongful.  Although he was found to have been trying to minimize the risk of operator error
rather than to have been acting maliciously, the Government client requested that he be removed
from the contract.  Applicant submitted a resignation in lieu of dismissal due to these allegations.
However, his employer rehired him several days later.
In completing his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant denied that he had, within
the previous seven years, been fired from a job, quit, or left under unfavorable circumstances.
Moreover, in response to questions about his discharge from the Navy, he advised a security
clearance investigator that it was the result of a knee injury.  He did not disclose his failed drug test.
Applicant testified that he had told the investigator about the drug test, but that the investigator had
not included it in the summary of Applicant’s interview.  However, when the summary was
presented to Applicant as part of a series of DOHA interrogatories in 2009, Applicant certified that
the summary was accurate.  This apparent false statement was not alleged in the SOR.   
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s SCA omission was intentional.  In so
doing, the Judge considered the plain language of the question at issue, as well as the uncharged
misconduct regarding his failed drug test.  The Judge stated that he was considering this misconduct
in performing his credibility determination.  The Judge ultimately concluded that Applicant had not
mitigated the concerns arising from his omission to the SCA.
Applicant contends that the Judge erred by considering the uncharged misconduct.  He stated
that he had not been placed on notice that this evidence would be considered and that by doing so
the Judge had denied him an opportunity to prepare his case.  This evidence was contained in
Government Exhibit (GE) 2, Answers to Interrogatories, dated January 12, 2010.  Applicant did not
object to the admission of this exhibit.  Tr. at 15.  The Directive requires a Department Counsel to
provide an applicant with a copy of all documentary evidence to be submitted at a hearing (Directive
¶ E3.1.13).  The exhibit is cited several times in the transcript, and there is nothing in the record to
suggest that Department Counsel failed to provide Applicant with a copy.  See ISCR Case No. 07-
18324 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 11, 2011) (Federal agencies are entitled to a presumption of good faith
and regularity in the performance of their responsibilities).  Moreover, conduct not alleged in a SOR
may be considered for a number of reasons, including assessing an applicant’s credibility.  See, e.g.,
1Cf. Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b) provides that evidence of uncharged acts may be considered for a number
of reasons, including proof of intent, motive, and lack of mistake. 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).1  This is the context which the Judge
discussed the challenged evidence.  Accordingly, we conclude that Applicant was not denied the due
process afforded by the Directive.   
  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
