 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 10-07301 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. He owes more 
than $22,000 on eight separate, delinquent accounts, which date back to 2008. 
Although his financial situation is partially attributable to being unemployed for 10 
months, he has been with his current employer since May 2009. He failed to submit 
proof that he has addressed his delinquent debts and that his financial situation is under 
control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 19, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations).1 The SOR alleges a number of delinquent debts and a 
                                                          
1
 DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
2003 bankruptcy.2 On November 16, 2011, Applicant submitted his Answer and 
requested a decision on the administrative record. 
 
 On January 25, 2012, Department Counsel submitted its File of Relevant 
Material (FORM).3 Applicant received the FORM on February 16, 2012. He had 30 days 
within which to file a response and any objections to the FORM. He did not submit a 
response or objections. I was assigned the case on April 17, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old senior software engineer, working for a federal 
contractor. He is married and has a 13-year-old child from a prior marriage. He 
previously held a security clearance. Applicant submitted his most recent security 
clearance application in April 2010, wherein he disclosed his financial problems.4  
 
Applicant has suffered two periods of financial instability. In 2003, he was forced 
to file for bankruptcy due to his divorce from his first wife and a two-month period of 
unemployment. Applicant was then able to manage his finances until 2008, when he 
was laid off by his former employer. He was unemployed for about 10 months, during 
which he defaulted on his mortgage, fell behind on his child support obligation, and 
stopped paying his other creditors. He was able to sell his home, and the lender forgave 
the deficiency balance owed. His former wife will not seek the past-due child support, 
because Applicant relinquished his parental rights.5  
 
Applicant was able to land a job with his current employer in May 2009. He did 
not submit proof that he has attempted to resolve his other delinquent accounts. As of 
the close of the record, Applicant owed $22,772 on eight delinquent accounts, mostly 
credit cards that he stopped paying in 2008.6 
 
                                                          
2
 The SOR also alleges, under ¶ 1.i, a tax debt Applicant may incur as a result of receiving a 
1099-C following the short sale of his former home. Although Applicant’s failure pay the mortgage on his 
former home does raise a concern, a potential debt that might arise in the future is not disqualifying. 
Further, contrary to the Government’s position, as Applicant denied this allegation, it was the Government 
who bore the burden to establish that a tax debt was due and Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay the 
debt. See FORM at 5 and n. 16. In any case, Applicant established that he acted responsibly in satisfying 
his mortgage and there was no tax liability. Accordingly, I find in Applicant’s favor as to ¶ 1.i.  
 
3
 The FORM contains the Government’s summary of facts, argument, and eight documentary 
exhibits. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 are hereby admitted into the record.  
 
4
 GE 4; Answer. 
 
5
 GE 4 – GE 6. 
 
6
 GE 4; GE 5; GE 8 at 7 (proof of $584 debt in ¶ 1.g); Answer (admits ¶¶ 1.a – 1.f, which together 
total $22,188). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant states that he has been unable to make any headway in resolving 
these delinquent accounts, because: (1) his wife’s medical bills; (2) he is financially 
supporting his in-laws; and (3) his priority is paying back his father a $16,000 personal 
loan.7 In his Answer, Applicant claims that he had paid down the personal loan to 
$3,000 and, after he pays the loan, promises to use $1,500 in monthly disposable 
income to tackle his delinquent accounts. However, just two months earlier, Applicant 
claimed in a notarized interrogatory response that he had only $1,250 left to pay on the 
personal loan.8 Applicant did not submit documentation regarding this personal loan or 
his payments towards this non-SOR debt. 
 
Applicant explained his decision to pay back his father before his other creditors 
and his view that his delinquent debts do not raise a security concern as follows: 
 
Family comes first, and I will not give my father the shaft to pay off big 
corporations first. I will pay them, but he comes first, the same as my 
country comes first. If someone approached me and tried to buy 
information from me, I would call the FBI and that would be the end of it. 
Money is simply not that important to me.9  
 
 Applicant has started putting his financial house in order, primarily by cutting his 
car expense.10 However, he did not submit proof of financial counseling or a budget. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
7
 Answer; GE 6. 
 
8
 Compare, Answer at 1 (“When I moved back to [State A] I owed my father around ten thousand 
dollars. He loaned me $16,000 to refinance my house in [State B] at a lower rate. I now owe him around 
three thousand, and will be done paying him by the end of the year. At that point, I will turn the $1,500 of 
disposable income I have every month . . . to paying off these outstanding debts.), with, GE 6 at 10 (“My 
father loaned me $16,000 dollars . . . and currently I only owe him $1,250 more.”).  
 
9
 Answer.  
 
10
 GE 6.  
 
 
4 
 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.11 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
“This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money in satisfaction of his or her 
debts.”12 The concern also encompasses financial irresponsibility, which may indicate 
                                                          
11
 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
12
 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012).  
 
 
5 
 
 
that an applicant would also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in 
handling and safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of over 
$22,000 in delinquent debt, which has been outstanding since 2008, directly implicates 
this concern. It also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”13 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s financial trouble began four 
years ago and continues to the present day. Although his financial situation was 
primarily due to a period of unemployment, he failed to handle his financial obligations 
in a responsible manner.14 He has been gainfully employed since May 2009 and failed 
to submit documentation that he has addressed the delinquent debts that have been 
outstanding since 2008.15 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply. 
                                                          
13
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
14
 ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008) (“the second prong of MC 20(b) requires 
that an applicant act responsibly under the circumstances”). 
 
15
 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008) (an applicant is expected to present 
documentation to substantiate his or her claim about the debts at issue). 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant responsibly addressed his mortgage debt, but has not contacted his 
other overdue creditors to settle or otherwise resolve his long-standing debt. His 
promise to start paying his overdue creditors after he satisfies the personal loan to his 
father is insufficient to demonstrate that he is resolving his financial problem, especially 
in light of the contradictory statements in the record regarding the status of the personal 
loan.16 Applicant has not taken a financial counseling course, and failed to establish that 
his financial situation is under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) through 20(d) do not apply. In short, 
Applicant’s financial situation remains a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).17 I considered the favorable and extenuating factors in 
this case, including Applicant’s honesty in disclosing his delinquent debts on his security 
clearance application. However, he has a substantial amount of unresolved debt and 
failed to dispel the significant security concern raised by his financial situation.18 The 
favorable whole-person factors present in this case do not outweigh the security 
concern at issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the type of financial stability necessary to justify the granting of a 
security clearance. The award of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. A clearance is not recommended due to Applicant’s current 
circumstances. However, in the future, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of 
his security worthiness. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
16
 ISCR Case No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999) (“Promises to take actions in the future, 
however sincere, are not a substitute for a documented track record of remedial actions.”) 
 
17
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
18
 See generally ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (an applicant’s honesty 
and “[e]ven years of safeguarding national security information may not be sufficient to mitigate a history 
of ongoing, significant delinquent debt.”). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.j:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
