KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that Applicant had mitigated the Guideline F security concerns. 
However, he arrived at a different conclusion regarding Guideline E.  He cited to evidence that
Applicant had stolen money from his employer over the course of a year and that he had
admitted his misconduct only when he was caught.  The Judge’s conclusion that this conduct
was not mitigated is supportable on this record.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 10-08705.a1
DATE: 05/14/2012
DATE: May 14, 2012
In Re:
-----------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-08705
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 25, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  On June 14,
2011, DOHA amended the SOR to include two additional allegations under Guideline F and an
allegation under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On February 28,
2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Francisco Mendez denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s credibility
determination was in error and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline F are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge found that Applicant had significant delinquent debt.  He also found that
Applicant had been fired by a previous employer in June 2009 for misuse of a company credit card.
He had used the credit card for approximately a year for personal expenses unrelated to his job
responsibilities.  The expenses totaled about $3,000.  Applicant did not make restitution to his
employer.  The Judge stated that he appeared surprised when asked about restitution, stating that the
employer had not requested it.  He stated that he was willing to make restitution were the employer
to seek it.
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant had mitigated the Guideline F security
concerns.  However, he arrived at a different conclusion regarding Guideline E.  He cited to
evidence that Applicant had stolen money from his employer over the course of a year and that he
had admitted his misconduct only when he was caught.  The Judge stated that Applicant’s conduct
was neither minor nor of limited duration.  Although Applicant was under a financial strain at the
time, he apparently had sufficient funds to take a luxury cruise only two months after he lost his job.
The Judge observed that Applicant took this cruise rather than pay back his employer the money he
had wrongfully taken.  The Judge acknowledged evidence favorable to Applicant, such as his having
assumed the responsibility of supporting his wife’s two teenage children, his good work record, and
his expressions of remorse.  However, he concluded that this evidence was not sufficient to outweigh
the security concern arising from Applicant’s repeated misuse of the credit card.  
In his appeal brief, Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he was surprised by the
question about restitution.  He states that it has been his goal to resolve all of his debts, but that this
particular one had “fall[en] through the cracks.”  Appeal Brief at 2.  Our reading of the transcript
is consistent with the Judge’s challenged finding.  Furthermore, to the extent that he is challenging
the Judge’s credibility determination, we are required to give it deference unless it is unreasonable
or contradicted by other evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-10158 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2008)
(internal citation omitted).  We find no reason to disturb his credibility determination. 
Applicant cites to evidence which, he believes, demonstrates that he has mitigated the
security concern found against him.  He points to his clean record since this offense, and his brief
contains expressions of remorse similar to those in his hearing testimony.  A Judge is presumed to
have considered all of the record evidence. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-03402 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar.
29, 2012). The Judge concluded that, given the circumstances of Applicant’s year-long series of
thefts, his failure to make restitution, and his having taken a cruise with funds that could have been
used to repay his employer, the favorable evidence which Applicant submitted was not enough to
demonstrate mitigation.  This conclusion is supportable on this record.  Applicant has not rebutted
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record evidence.  Neither has he demonstrated
that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
