 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00948 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 16, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) issued  
interrogatories to Applicant to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information in 
her background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation, and 
Applicant’s responses to the interrogatories, DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative findings required to grant a security clearance. On August 31, 2011, DOHA 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
criminal conduct under Guideline J, and personal conduct under Guideline E. These 
actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
 
2 
 
 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 7, 2011. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 24, 2011. She admitted the 
allegation under Guideline J, but denied the two allegations under Guideline E of 
providing false information on her security clearance application and to a security 
investigator. She requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 9, 2011. The case was assigned to me 
on February 21, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 27, 2012, for a 
hearing on March 21, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government 
offered three exhibits, which I marked and admitted into the record without objections as 
Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 3. Applicant testified, and submitted five 
exhibits, which I marked and admitted into the record without objection as Applicant 
Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through E. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
March 29, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted the allegation under the criminal 
conduct guideline. Her admission is included in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old instructor for a defense contractor. She is a college 
graduate. She was married from 1984 until 1994 and has one grown child. (Tr. 10-12; 
Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated October 16, 2009) 
 
Applicant was employed as the administrative service manager for a museum 
from approximately 1990 to 1997. She was the only accountant in the organization, and 
was responsible for the museum’s accounts and financial records. Part of her duties 
involved accounting for funds for admission and gift shop cash registers. The museum 
had a process of automatic cash replacement with their bank to provide for change. A 
bank courier would bring change money to the museum, and Applicant would give the 
courier the money the museum received during the week. Applicant oversaw the 
process, and she was the only person that knew how to operate the museum’s internal 
software accounting system. 
 
When Applicant left the museum in September 1996, her successor noted 
discrepancies in the museum’s accounts. A forensic audit was performed by the 
museum’s certified public accounting firm, which revealed an embezzlement of museum 
funds of approximately $155,800 from 1994 until 1997. When questioned by police 
officers, Applicant was evasive in her responses to questions and hid or minimized her 
involvement in the loss of funds. In January 1999, Applicant pled guilty to 
embezzlement, and was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment, suspended to probation 
not to exceed 60 months, restitution to the museum of $114,800, and court cost. She 
 
3 
 
 
completed the probation in August 2004. A part of the $155,000 loss was covered by 
insurance, so Applicant only had to make restitution of $114,800. (Tr. 26-33; Gov. Ex. 3, 
Response to Interrogatory, dated April 8, 2011, at 106-119 (Summary of police 
interview), and 159-161 (Indictment Judgment, Termination of Probation)) 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator on December 22, 2009. In 
this interview, Applicant claimed that she realized there were problems with the 
museum accounts, and thought she was doing something wrong in the accounting. She 
stated she never took or received any of the missing funds. She was responsible for the 
accounts, and chose to cover up the problem. She believed a volunteer at the museum, 
who is now deceased, was involved in the loss, but she could not prove it. In her 
January 12, 2011 response to the interrogatory, she admitted that she embezzled 
money, but it was no more than $20,000 from the museum funds. She denied she told 
the investigator that she never took any funds. She believes his account of the interview 
is inaccurate. She explained she tried to convey to the investigator that she took funds 
but was unsure of the amount and believed she took no more than $20,000. There was 
a misunderstanding between them. (Tr. 35-39; Gov. Ex. 2, Answers to Interrogatory, 
dated January 12, 2011, at 178-179)  
 
Applicant explained that she pled guilty to embezzlement in June 1999 because 
she was responsible for the accounts and the missing funds. At the time, she was a 
single mother, with an abusive and drug addicted husband, and her mother was ill. She 
paid some of the restitution, but believes she still owes approximately $100,000. (Tr. 21-
26)  
 
Applicant completed her e-QIP security clearance application on October 16, 
2009. In response to question 22c, which asked whether she had “EVER” 
(Capitalization is in the e-QIP) been charged with any felony offense, Applicant 
responded “no”. As noted above, she was arrested and convicted of embezzlement in 
1999. Applicant testified that she did not realize the question pertained to “EVER” being 
charged with a felony. She completed the form on line and thought that the information 
requested was only for the last ten years. Her embezzlement conviction was slightly 
more than ten years before she completed the form. (Tr. 36-38) 
 
Applicant stated that she is not the same person she was when she committed 
the embezzlement. At that time, she was in an abusive marriage and her then-husband 
was addicted to drugs. She was a single mother raising her daughter. She tried to 
protect her daughter and help her husband recover from his addiction. She lost her 
perspective and her good sense. Since that time, she has been rehabilitated. She 
raised her daughter, who is now in her 20s, and completed school receiving her 
bachelor’s degree. She has a clean driving record. She has worked for the same 
company for over ten years, received promotions, and been transferred to different 
offices. She is proud of the work she does now in support of warfighters. She received 
an interim security clearance over two years ago and there were no violations of 
security rules. She volunteers in the community, uses her experience to mentor her 
daughter, nieces, and other people, and is an active member of her church. She has 
 
4 
 
 
learned from her experience and will never let something like the embezzlement happen 
to her again. (Tr. 14-20, 26-27; App. Ex. A, diploma, dated December 2006; App. Ex. B, 
Driving Record, dated January 13, 2012) 
 
Applicant presented character references and letters of recommendation. 
Attached to her response to the SOR was a letter from the director of the military 
command supported by Applicant. She noted the excellent and timely support provided 
by Applicant’s team. She noted the team’s willingness to put forth extra effort in support 
of the command. (Response to SOR, Letter, dated June 3, 2011) One of Applicant’s 
supervisors noted that he is a retired military officer who has known Applicant for over 
ten years. Applicant is stable, honest, has integrity, and a truthful work ethic. He 
recommends that she be granted access to classified information. (App. Ex. C, Letter, 
dated January 8, 2012) Another supervisor has known Applicant since September 2009. 
Applicant is a person of great integrity, and is dedicated to her work and her company. 
She is honest, trustworthy, respectful, and follows rules and regulations. He 
recommends she be granted access to classified information. (App. Ex. D, letter, 
undated). Applicant’s senior pastor has known Applicant for many years, and finds her 
to be a reliable person. She is hardworking, intelligent, honest, and dependable. She is 
one of the church leaders. She has high moral integrity and good values. (App. Ex. E, 
Letter, undated) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30). Appellant was arrested, pled 
guilty, and was convicted of embezzlement in 1999 for taking funds from her employer 
from 1994 until 1996. Her criminal actions raise Criminal Conduct Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses), and AG ¶ 
31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted). 
 
Applicant raised, by her testimony, Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 
32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 32(d) (there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement). These 
mitigating conditions do not apply. The incident happened over ten years ago, and is 
her only criminal activity. Applicant was a single mother in an abusive relationship. But 
these unusual circumstances do not justify or explain her actions. Her crime cast doubt 
on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Embezzlement is a crime that 
strikes at the core of trust and confidence that an employer places in an individual. The 
responsibility to safeguard the funds of a business is in the same category as the 
requirement to safeguard classified information. Applicant violated the trust and 
responsibility placed in her by embezzling funds.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has a heavy burden to show that she can be trusted to safeguard 
classified information. She presented evidence of rehabilitation. Applicant completed 
college and earned a degree. She worked for the same defense contractor for ten years 
and has been lauded for her support of the warfighters. She successfully raised her 
daughter. She is active in her community and church. She is highly regarded by her 
supervisors, coworkers, and pastor. However, this rehabilitation is not sufficient to 
overcome the negative impact her conduct of violating the trust of the employer by 
embezzling funds. Her conviction for embezzlement continues to cast doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find against Applicant under the criminal 
conduct guideline.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15) Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it addresses whether the person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person 
can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. The security clearance 
system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information.  If a 
person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot 
function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the best 
interest of the United States Government.  
 
Applicant told a security investigator that she did not take money from the 
museum, but that she was responsible for the fund and she covered up the missing 
funds. Applicant also answered “no” to the question on the security clearance 
application asking if she was ever charged with a felony offense. Applicant’s response 
to the investigator and her answer on the security clearance application raise a security 
concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities); and AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative).  
 
Applicant denies that she intentionally provided false information to the 
investigator. She said she admitted the embezzlement but told the investigator that she 
could only account for about $20,000 in missing funds. Later, in response to an 
interrogatory, she admitted she embezzled at least $20,000 of her employer’s funds. 
She claims there was a misunderstanding between her and the investigator. Applicant’s 
statements are not credible. Applicant skirted and minimized her involvement in the 
 
7 
 
 
embezzlement from the very beginning. She was not candid with the police officers that 
questioned her and she was not candid with the security investigator. She continued to 
minimize the amount she embezzled. Her statement that she was only responsible for 
the funds and covered up the loss is not totally accurate, and is misleading. She was 
responsible for the funds and intentionally covered up the loss to hide her actions in 
embezzling the funds. I find that she intentionally provided false information to the 
security investigator.  
 
Applicant states that she did not deliberately provide false information on the 
security clearance application when she did not list the embezzlement conviction as a 
felony offense. She thought she only had to report felony offenses in the last ten years 
and her conviction was just over ten years ago. The question is very clear. The word 
“EVER” is in capital letters. Even though the application was completed on line, it is very 
difficult to miss the wording of “EVER.” I find that she intentionally did not report the 
embezzlement conviction on her security clearance application.  
 
I considered Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts: AG ¶ (17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶17(d) (the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur). These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant lied to criminal 
investigators and only admitted her involvement when she answered the interrogatory. 
She acknowledged her action at the hearing but still admits to only $20,000 in 
embezzlement. The amount of the funds embezzled is less important than the act of 
embezzlement itself. Applicant intentionally provided false information to government 
investigators about her involvement in the embezzlement and then intentionally omitted 
her conviction from the security clearance application. She continued to minimize her 
involvement. Her statements lack credibility. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
8 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant embezzled funds from her 
employer which is a criminal offense that goes to the core of her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant lied to criminal investigators about her 
role in the embezzlement, and did not include the conviction on her security clearance 
application. Her violation of the trust placed in her to safeguard funds, and her lack of 
candor raises questions about her reliability, untrustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Her behavior raises questions about whether she will properly 
handle, manage, and safeguard classified information. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the criminal 
conduct and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAISNT APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
