                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-06758
 )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
May 29, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on March 29, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On October 26, 2011, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
detailing the security concerns under Guidelines G and J for Applicant.  The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
“Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD)
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
  The Applicant responded to the SOR on November 17, 2011, and he requested
a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
Administrative Judge on January 3, 2012.  A notice of hearing was issued on March 26,
2012, scheduling the hearing for April 9, 2012.  At the hearing the Government
presented four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 to 4, which were admitted
without objection.  The Applicant presented one exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s
Exhibit A, which was admitted without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.
2
The official transcript (Tr.) was received on April 17, 2012.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 50 years old and has a high school diploma.  He is employed by
a defense contractor as a Radar Technician and is applying for a security clearance in
connection with his employment.  
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants.
The Applicant denied each of the allegations set forth under this guideline,
except allegation 1(b).  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR).
The Applicant served twenty-two years in the United States Marine Corps, from
1980 to 1984, and then from 1986 until he retired in 2001, as a Gunnery Sergeant, E-7.
During his military career, he received numerous awards that include the Marine Corps
Drill Sergeant Ribbon, the National Defense Service Medal, the Marine Corps Good
Conduct Medal (six awards), the Navy Unit Commendation, Meritorious Unit
Commendation, Meritorious Mast three times among others.  (Tr. p. 38.)  Throughout
his military career, he held a Top Secret security clearance and had no security
violations.  
He began consuming alcohol during his senior year of high school in the late 70's
early 80's.  At that time he drank a few beers.  When he joined the Marines in 1980, his
drinking escalated.  Shortly after joining the Marines in 1980, the Applicant was arrested
on base by the military police for Driving Under the Influence (DUI).  (Tr. pp. 45-46.)  He
explained that as a result of his arrest, he was supposed to have received a six month
suspension but because he was scheduled to be deployed, the charges were dropped.
He suffered no other repercussions.  As time passed, his drinking continued and
increased.  It was typical for him to drink to the point of intoxication.  The Applicant
testified that in 2001, right before he was to retire, he was  purposefully late for work
and had consumed a beer.  Alcohol was detected on his breath.  He was referred to
treatment for alcohol abuse and was told at that time that he had an alcohol problem.
(Tr. p. 56.)  Despite this, he continued to consume alcohol.   
By 2009, the Applicant was drinking between one and two six packs a beer a
sitting.  At times he drank to the point of intoxication.  In 2009, the Applicant was
arrested and charged with (1) DUI, (2) No Motor Vehicle Insurance, (3) No Person to
have Open Liquor.  He pled no lo contendere and was found guilty of Count (1) and was
fined $1,262.99 and ordered to attend alcohol treatment. Counts (2) and (3) were
dismissed.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  The Applicant explained that his son was getting
ready to go away to boot camp and was visiting for a week.  The last day, on the way to
the airport, the Applicant decided to stop at a bar to have a couple of drinks, and went
3
overboard.  The Applicant stated that he consumed about twelve beers and then got
behind the wheel to drive.  (Tr. p. 43.)  He realized that he was swerving, but by the time
he pulled the car over, the police had arrived and he was being arrested.  
In 2010, in compliance with the court directed obligations, the Applicant received
a five day alcohol treatment course, a five day follow up course at the VA hospital, and
then a six month driver’s license suspension.  During the court ordered treatment, the
Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol dependence.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  Following
treatment he continued to consume alcohol.     
The Applicant testified that he does not believe that he is alcohol dependent.  (Tr.
pp. 48- 49.)  He states that he continues to drink, but not like he did while he was in the
Marine Corps.  (Tr. p. 52.)  He still drinks at times to the point of intoxication and plans
to continue.  (Tr. p. 52.)  He most recently drank to the point of intoxication on New
Years, when he consumed ten beers.  (Tr. p. 51.)  He now only drinks for leisure, mostly
at home, and limits himself to a six pack of beer.  (Tr. p. 50.)   
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in criminal conduct.    
The Applicant denied the allegation set forth under this guideline.  (Applicant’s
Answer to SOR.)  Discussed above, in 2009, the Applicant was arrested and charged
with (1) DUI, (2) No Motor Vehicle Insurance, (3) No Person to have Open Liquor.  He
pled no lo contendere and was found guilty of Count (1) and was fined $1,262.99 and
ordered to attend alcohol treatment. Counts (2) and (3) were dismissed.  He has
satisfied all of the court’s sentencing requirements concerning this offense.   
A letter from the company Facility Security Officer dated January 10, 2012,
indicates that the Applicant has completed all of the court directed obligations, to
include driver’s education, substance abuse evaluation, substance abuse classes, and
14 hours (2) mandatory DUI classes.  He is said to perform as a model employee
without incident.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
21.  The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
4
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
22.(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent;
22.(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
22. (d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g. physician, clinical
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence;
22.(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program; and
22.(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of
an alcohol rehabilitation program.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal Conduct activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
5
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in alcohol abuse and criminal conduct that demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
6
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in Alcohol Abuse (Guideline G), and Criminal Conduct
(Guideline J).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and
untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the
Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome
the Government's case under Guidelines G and J of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that the Applicant has abused alcohol over the past thirty
years.  He has been arrested for DUI on two occasions, in 1980, and most recently lin
2009.  He has also been treated for and diagnosed with alcohol dependence in 2010.
His thirty year history of alcohol abuse has not been mitigated.  Although the treatment
he received was quite limited in scale, despite his treatment program for alcohol abuse,
his two alcohol related incidents, and his diagnosis of alcohol dependence, he continues
to drink to the point of intoxication and has no intention of stopping.  In fact, he does not
believe that he is alcohol dependent, despite what the experts say.  Based upon his
past record of alcohol abuse, he is not eligible for access to classified information.  
Under Guideline G, Disqualifying Conditions 22.(a) alcohol-related incidents
away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse
abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 22.(c) habitual or
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 22.(d) diagnosis
by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g. physician, clinical psychologist, or
psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence; 22.(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse
or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a
recognized alcohol treatment program; and 22.(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol
abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program apply  There
is no evidence in the record that any of the mitigating conditions apply.  Accordingly, I
find against the Applicant under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption.
 
 In addition, the Applicant has engaged in criminal conduct by illegally drinking
and driving as evidence by his 1980 arrest for DUI, and his most recent 2009 arrest and
conviction for DUI.  Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Disqualifying Conditions
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 31.(c) allegation or
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,
7
formally prosecuted or convicted apply.  This is criminal conduct that has not been
mitigated.  Accordingly, I find against him under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is a 50 year old alcoholic
who really has no clue about the seriousness of his condition and its ramifications.
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the
guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard classified information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he clearly does
not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I
find against the Applicant under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct).     
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
8
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
