 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04452 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 20, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 6, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 14, 2012. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 2, 2012. I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled on April 18, 2012. Applicant acknowledged she received 15 days notice. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The Government requested administrative notice be taken of the facts 
contained in Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. There was no objection, and I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in HE I. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. Applicant and one witness 
testified on her behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 26, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She was born in the People’s Republic of China 
(China). She earned a bachelor’s degree in China in 1985. In 1986, because she was 
the highest rated student in her department, she was selected to study in the United 
States. She came to the United States in 1986 on a student visa. Her education was 
funded by China. She stated that after the Tiananmen Square incident in China, 
Chinese students in the United States were offered an opportunity to change the status 
of their visas so they could remain in the country. Applicant remained in the United 
States. She became a permanent resident in 1992 and a naturalized citizen in 1999. 
She earned a master’s degree in 1987 and a Ph.D. in 1991.1  
 
Applicant met her husband, who was also from China, in the United States, and 
they married in 1986. He became a permanent resident and a naturalized citizen of the 
United States at the same time as Applicant. They have two daughters, both of whom 
were born in the United States.2 
 
 Applicant returned to China in 1994. She was a permanent resident of the United 
States at the time and had to obtain a reentry permit. She had an expired Chinese 
passport that she lost when she moved in 2010.3 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of China. Her mother is a retired 
engineer. Before retiring she worked for an institution where she supervised graduate 
students. She receives a government pension. Her father is an engineer, and in the 
past, worked at a company doing government research. He retired and now works as a 
consultant for a different company. He receives a government pension. Applicant 
described her parents as well off, and she has not provided them any monetary 
support.4  
                                                          
1
 Tr. 25, 33-42, 55-59. 
 
2
 Tr. 56. 
 
3
 Tr.33-35, 42, 70-71. 
 
4
 Tr. 28-31, 59. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has one sister, who is a physician. She is a citizen and resident of 
China. She is divorced and has a 13-year-old daughter.5  
 
 Applicant’s mother lived with her in the United States in 1996 for about a year, to 
help care for her oldest daughter. Her mother also came for a short visit in 1991, for 
Applicant’s graduation from school. In 2010, Applicant’s niece visited her in the United 
States for about three weeks.6  
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of China. They both worked 
at a university. They are both retired and receive pensions from the Chinese 
government. In 1997, Applicant’s parents-in-laws came to visit them in the United States 
for about a year, to help her care for her oldest daughter. Over the years, Applicant and 
her husband have provided his parents approximately $100,000 in monetary support.7 
 
Applicant’s husband’s brother and his wife are citizens and residents of China. 
He sells furniture and his wife works with him. He has a daughter from a previous 
marriage. Her husband’s sister and her husband are citizens and residents of China. 
She works for a bank, and he works in the textile business. They have a daughter. All of 
Applicant’s and her husband’s extended family are citizens and residents of China.8  
 
Since 1991, Applicant has worked in academia, in a specialized area of 
expertise, at different universities. She does research and recruits the best qualified 
students from around the world to study and work in her area of expertise. Ninety 
percent of the students that participate in her program are foreign and about eighty 
percent of them are Chinese. Because she is familiar with China, she focuses her 
recruiting on Chinese students. She interviews them by telephone, and her selection is 
based solely on their prior accomplishments. She does not know if they are affiliated 
with the Chinese government. When the students are selected, they are funded by the 
American university, work as teaching assistants, and live off campus. Applicant does 
not sponsor the students. Her only involvement with them is to recruit the best qualified 
students. The student and the university are responsible for complying with the passport 
and visa entry requirements. Many of these students remain in the United States after 
they graduate and seek employment with American companies. Applicant recruits 
scholars and not those who may have a second agenda. Her obligation is to bring the 
best and brightest students to the university to work on projects. Once they complete 
their degree, these students are on their own to get a job or return to China. Many 
students stay in the United States, but some return to China. She stated that, through 
her recruitment, she has helped enhance the brain power of the United States.9  
                                                          
5
 Tr. 31, 59. 
 
6
 Tr. 65-67. 
 
7
 Tr. 28, 32, 60, 67-68. 
 
8
 Tr. 32-33, 60-61. 
 
9
 Tr. 26, 43-51. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant and her family returned to China in 1994, and annually from 2003 to 
2007, to visit both her husband’s and her relatives. She has not been to China since 
2007. She has a future business trip planned to Hong Kong and will visit China and her 
relatives while on this trip. She will also give a seminar at a Chinese university while 
there. One of her daughters will accompany her on the trip. Applicant’s expenses are 
being partially covered by the Chinese university. In the past, she has been invited by 
Chinese universities and professors she is acquainted with to conduct lectures in China. 
She has funded her own trips on occasion, and other trips were paid for by the 
universities.10  
 
 Applicant and her husband do not have any financial interests in China. Their 
financial interests in the United States are approximately $3 million. She does not know 
if she will receive any inheritance from her parents.11  
 
 The chairman of the department where Applicant works testified on her behalf. 
He has known Applicant since 1993, and he is her direct supervisor. He considers 
Applicant very professional and she does all the right things. He indicated that it is very 
difficult to recruit U.S. students to get their Ph.D., so they recruit foreign students. About 
half of them are from China, and most stay in the United States after completing their 
studies. Many of them are funded by the United States. The witness stated that about 
25% of the grant money they receive annually is from the Department of Defense. Most 
of their research is published, open to everyone, and not classified.12  
 
People’s Republic of China 
 
 China has an authoritarian, communist government. Chinese party committees 
work to see that party and state policy guidance is followed in all important Chinese 
government, economic, and cultural institutions.  
  
 China’s military is pursuing comprehensive transformation and modernization of 
its military forces intended to improve its capacity for power projection. China has 
designated specific missions that go beyond its coastal borders.  
 
 China is the most aggressive country conducting espionage against the United 
States. It focuses on obtaining information and technologies beneficial to China’s 
military modernization and economic development. China is actively engaged in efforts 
to acquire restricted U.S. technologies. The Chinese government encourages and 
rewards private citizens who obtain technology on its behalf. The Chinese government 
offers financial inducements to U.S. government officials in order to encourage them to 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10
 Tr. 30, 33, 61-65, 69. 
 
11
 Tr. 68-69, 71. 
 
12
 Tr. 74-81. 
 
 
5 
 
 
compromise classified material. China is ranked second as the leading destination for 
illegal exports of restricted U.S. technology. China’s enterprise-directed espionage is 
taking on a more targeted form. Commercial entities are targeting restricted 
technologies acting as surrogate collectors for the Chinese government. Chinese 
intelligence personnel target Chinese-Americans who may be sympathetic and are 
willing to act as a “friend of China.” They appeal to the person’s desire to help China in 
some way through ethnic targeting to arouse feelings of obligation.  
 
 U.S. counterintelligence officials suggest that China’s intelligence collection 
efforts are growing in scale, intensity, and sophistication, and represent a substantial 
threat to our national security.  
 
 China has a poor human rights record. It suppresses political dissent, and 
practices arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and other prisoner 
mistreatment.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or person, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” necessary to raise AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member 
living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country, as well as each individual family tie, must be 
considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.  
 
Most nations with substantial military establishments seek classified and sensitive 
information from the United States because it has the largest military industrial complex 
and most advanced military establishment in the world. Chinese officials actively 
engage in conduct to obtain restricted technologies and is the most aggressive country 
conducting espionage against the United States.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. China conducts a full range of activities 
to collect economic information and technology from U.S. targets. China targets U.S. 
citizens and Chinese-American citizens who may be sympathetic to China. China has a 
poor human rights record.  
 
These factors create a heavy burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate 
that her relationship with her parents, sister, parents-in-law, brother-in-law, and sister-in- 
law do not pose a security risk, and that she is not in a position to be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and them. With China’s poor human rights record, 
its aggressive collection efforts, and its focus on obtaining U.S. intelligence and 
conducting espionage operations, it is conceivable it would target its own citizens or a 
former citizen living in the United States in an attempt to gather valuable information 
from the United States. Applicant’s contacts and relationships with her relatives in China 
are sufficiently close to raise a possible security concern.  
 
Along with Applicant’s relatives in China, her husband’s relatives also live there. 
She and her husband provide his parents substantial financial support. These facts 
 
8 
 
 
potentially create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion, and also create a potential conflict of interest. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 
7(b), and 7(d) apply.  
 
Applicant recruits Chinese students to attend the university where she teaches. 
Some of the students remain in the United States after they complete their studies, 
others return to China. She does not sponsor their entry into the United States. I find for 
Applicant on SOR ¶ 1(e). 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following three are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, parents-in-law, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law are 
citizens and residents of China. Applicant and her husband maintain close contact with 
their relatives in China. They provide financial support to her husband’s parents. Her 
mother visited her in the United States for a year, as did her husband’s parents. None of 
these relationships can be characterized as casual and infrequent. Therefore, I cannot 
conclude that Applicant’s relationships are unlikely to create a risk for foreign influence 
of exploitation. I find AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.   
 
Due to China’s aggressive espionage tactics against the United States, their 
undeterred quest for obtaining restricted U.S. technologies, and their pursuit of 
sympathetic Chinese-American citizens, there is considerable cause for concern. Under 
the circumstances, Applicant has not established that it is unlikely she could be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United States and that of 
her family in China and the Chinese government. I find there is a conflict of interest 
even though Applicant has a commitment to the United States. Her sense of loyalty to 
her family and her husband’s family in China is not minimal. Therefore, I cannot apply 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) or 8(b). 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has been a devoted academic for many years. Her commitment to her 
profession is unquestioned. Her expertise and achievements are impressive. Her loyalty 
to the United States is also unquestioned. However, her close ties to both her family 
and her husband’s family in China create a heightened risk. Both her parents and 
parents-in-law receive pensions from the Chinese government. Her contact with her 
family in China creates a heightened risk that is not mitigated. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns raised under the Foreign Influence guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:    For Applicant 
   
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
