 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03759 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to continue a security clearance required for a 
position with a defense contractor. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) could not make the preliminary affirmative findings required to continue the 
security clearance. On September 28, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for personal conduct under Guideline E. 
These actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 12, 2011. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 26, 2011. He admitted the four 
allegations under Guideline E of providing false information to criminal investigators and 
that he was barred from the Iraqi theater of operations. He requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 
22, 2011. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on February 27, 2012, for a hearing on March 19, 2012. Applicant discussed 
the hearing date with Department Counsel before February 27, 2012, and he received 
the actual Notice of Hearing on March 5, 2012. Applicant waived the 15 days notice of 
hearing requirement. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered 
four exhibits, which I marked and admitted into the record without objections as 
Government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 4. Applicant testified. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 27, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted the four allegations under 
personal conduct guideline. His admissions are included in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old high school graduate. He married in 1998 and divorced 
in June 2005. He remarried in December 2006. He has two children from his first 
marriage, and one from his second marriage as well as a stepson. He has been a field 
service representative for a defense contractor since June 2009. He also was a field 
service manager for a different defense contractor in Iraq and at locations in the United 
States from 2005 until 2009. He served on active duty in the Army for seven years from 
April 1998 until May 2005. He received an honorable discharge.  (Tr. 9-13; Gov. Ex. 1, 
e-QIP, dated October 26-2009) 
 
In 2008, Applicant was employed by a defense contractor as a field service 
representative in Iraq. In the area where he worked, there was a power generator that 
was not working. His company received from the Army a new generator making the old 
unserviceable generator excess. The unserviceable generator was prepared for return 
to the appropriate Defense Reutilization Management Office for proper disposal. Before 
the generator was turned in, a foreign national employed at Applicant’s location by 
another company asked Applicant if he could have the generator. He told Applicant that 
some of his friends could fix the generator and make it serviceable. Applicant states that 
he asked a military supervisor if he could give the generator to the foreign national. 
Since it was not included in the property book of any government unit, Applicant states 
he was told he could give it to the foreign national. (Tr. 13-19, 26-28; Gov. Ex. 3, 
Applicant’s Affidavit, dated December 6, 2008) 
 
A few days after he gave the foreign national the generator, the foreign national 
told Applicant there was a dispute among his friends as to who owned the generator. He 
asked Applicant to sign a hand receipt to show the generator was properly transferred 
to a certain individual. Applicant filled out and signed the hand receipt to resolve the 
dispute over the ownership of the generator. Applicant stated he had the authority to 
 
3 
 
 
complete and sign the hand receipt because he was an employee of the company that 
had control of the generator. Applicant did not know or remember the name on the hand 
receipt. (Tr. 19-23; Gov. Ex. 3, Applicant’s Affidavit, dated December 6, 2008) 
 
 A few days later, the foreign national gave Applicant $350 for the generator. 
Applicant stated he had not expected to receive money for the generator, but he 
accepted it since it was excess property. When first questioned about the generator and 
money by criminal investigators, Applicant denied knowing that the generator was 
government property and denied that he received money for it from the foreign national. 
He did not think he did anything wrong since the generator did not belong to anyone. He 
maintains that the generator was not government property. In his initial interview with 
criminal investigators, Applicant denied that the generator was government property and 
that he received money for it. However in a subsequent interview with criminal 
investigators, Applicant admitted the generator was Government property and that he 
received money for it. (Gov. Ex. 3, Affidavit, dated December 6, 2008) He again 
admitted to the criminal investigators that he was not completely honest when he denied 
that he did not received money for the generator. (Gov. Ex. 4, Statement, dated 
December 11, 2008) He was then barred from serving in the Iraq theatre of operations 
because he gave the generator to the foreign national, accepted money for it, and lied 
to criminal investigators. (Tr. 23-26, 28-34) In a later affidavit, Applicant admitted 
accepting the money from the foreign national. (Gov. Ex. 2, Affidavit, dated February 8, 
2011)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG lists potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. The security 
clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information.  
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the U. S. Government.  
 
Applicant admitted he provided false information and a false statement to 
criminal investigators concerning his conduct in selling a government-owned generator 
to foreign national and accepting money for it. This raises a security concern under 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or 
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security 
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative). 
Applicant denies that he intentionally provided false information to the investigator. 
Applicant’s statements are not credible and I find that he intentionally provided false 
information to criminal investigators. I find that Applicant’s testimony at the hearing was 
not credible and that he was deliberately vague about his actions so as to minimize his 
intentional falsifications to criminal investigators. 
 
5 
 
 
I considered Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts: AG ¶ (17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶17(d) (the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur). These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant lied to criminal 
investigators about the generator and accepting money for the transfer. Later, when 
confronted again by the criminal investigators with the correct fact and information, he 
admitted receiving the money. The transfer of government equipment to foreign 
nationals, particularly in a war zone, is a serious criminal offense. The offense is recent, 
happening only three years ago. Applicant did not acknowledge his criminal action until 
confronted with the correct facts by criminal investigators. There is insufficient evidence 
to conclude that Applicant, when confronted with the same scenario, would not provide 
false and misleading information. I do find for Applicant as to SOR 1.d. The correct 
action was taken within the theater command by barring Applicant from the theater for 
his actions. This is an established fact and not a security concern. Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns for personal conduct raised in SOR 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. 
Applicant intentionally provided false information to government investigators about his 
involvement in the transfer of government equipment. He continued to minimize his 
involvement. His statements and testimony lacks credibility. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant lied to criminal 
investigators about his role in giving government equipment to a foreign national and 
receiving money for the item. He did not acknowledge his actions until confronted with 
the facts by the criminal investigators. His lack of candor raises questions about his 
reliability, untrustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. His behavior 
raises questions about whether he will properly handle, manage, and safeguard 
classified information. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
