 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02716 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 30, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Criminal Conduct security concerns that arose out of 
his criminal conduct during the period of 1998 through 2007. He has not consumed 
alcohol or committed any criminal offenses since 2007. However, he failed to mitigate 
the Personal Conduct concern that arose out of his false answers on his Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or in his adopted summary of his 
interview with an investigator for the Department of Defense. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 16, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 28, 2012, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on April 25, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one 
witness. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 8, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old high school graduate who lives with his girlfriend and 
her son. Applicant’s girlfriend is pregnant with their first child together. He can read and 
write the English language. Since 2009, Applicant has worked for a defense contractor. 
(Tr. 36, 52.) 
 
 In the SOR, the Government alleged that Applicant has been arrested seven 
times between 1998 and 2007. His arrests are as follows. 
 
 In March 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with Possession of 
Marijuana and Disturbing the Peace. Applicant testified that was not using marijuana at 
the time, but was observed by officers to be with his friend who was holding marijuana 
in his hand. Applicant was convicted of Disturbing the Peace and was ordered to pay a 
fine or perform community service. He was a senior in high school at the time of this 
arrest. Applicant performed community service and the drug possession charge was 
dismissed. (Tr. 37-39.) 
 
 In March 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with Disorderly Conduct, 
Solicit, Lewd Act, and Indecent Exposure. At the time, he worked at the airport and was 
arrested after he was observed “stroking [him]self” in the employee parking lot. He was 
convicted of Disorderly Conduct and placed on probation for one year and fined. He 
testified that he successfully completed the terms of his probation and the other charges 
were dismissed. (GE 2; Tr. 39-40.) 
  
 In December 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence (DUI) Alcohol/Drugs and DUI Alcohol .08%. Applicant was arrested after 
accelerating too quickly at a traffic signal. He pled “No Contest” to DUI Alcohol/Drugs 
and was placed on one year probation. Also, his driver’s license was suspended for 
three months, and he was ordered to attend a first offender DUI class. (GE 2; Tr. 40.) 
 
 Applicant was arrested in June 2005 and charged with DUI Alcohol/Drugs. He 
was convicted, placed on 36 months of probation, and was ordered to attend an 18-
month DUI program. Applicant testified that he has no recollection of this arrest. He 
denied this allegation in his Answer to the SOR. However, this arrest appears on 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s Federal Bureau of Investigation record. Applicant failed to produce 
documentation that would challenge the accuracy of this record. (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 41.) 
 
 In January 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI Alcohol/Drugs 
and Obstruct Public Officer. He pled No Contest to DUI. He was sentenced to one year 
probation and ordered to attend a second-offender DUI program for 18 months. (GE 2; 
Tr. 42-43.) 
 
  Applicant was again arrested for DUI in July 2006. He pled “No Contest” to DUI 
Alcohol .08%. He was sentenced to 30 days in jail, placed on two years of probation, his 
driver’s license was suspended for one year, and he was ordered to attend a second-
offender 18-month DUI program. (GE 2; Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant’s most recent arrest occurred in October 2007. He was charged with 
Driving with a Suspended License. Applicant was convicted of this charge, placed on 36 
months of probation, fined, and ordered to serve 16 days in jail or perform community 
service. Applicant testified that an emergency caused him to drive that day, but he was 
unable to recall the nature of the emergency. (Tr. 45-50.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he had a lot of stress related to his adoption as a child.  
He began consuming alcohol after he graduated high school. He would typically 
consume three beers, once a week, on weekends. He indicated that he has now 
learned from his mistakes and believes he has turned his life around. His statements 
regarding his last alcohol consumption, however, are conflicting. In his adopted 
summary of his interview with an investigator for the Department of Defense, he 
indicated that he last consumed alcohol prior to his 2007 arrest. At hearing, he testified 
that he last consumed alcohol prior to his 2006 arrest. Regardless of the date of his last 
consumption, it has been a number of years since Applicant has used alcohol. He 
successfully completed all court-ordered alcohol programs and related Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) participation. He did not continue in AA or other alcohol related 
treatment once his court ordered requirements were fulfilled. (GE 3; Tr. 44-45, 87-90.) 
 
 On December 7, 2009, Applicant completed an e-QIP. Under Section 22 of this 
form he was asked, in part: 
 
Section 22: Police Record 
 
For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from the record, or 
the charge was dismissed. You need not report convictions under the 
Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 
3607. Be sure to include all incidents whether occurring in the U.S. or 
abroad. 
 
 
4 
 
For Questions a. and b., respond for the timeframe of the last 7 years (if 
an SSBI go back 10 years). Exclude any fines of less than $300 for traffic 
offenses that do not involve alcohol or drugs. 
 
b. Have you been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, 
marshal, or any other type of law enforcement officer? 
 
e. Have you EVER been charged with any offense(s) related 
to alcohol or drugs? 
 
 Applicant answered, “No” to both sections 22.b and 22.e. In his adopted 
summary of his January 2010 interview with an investigator for the Department of 
Defense, he indicated that he thought he disclosed his three DUI arrests to his security 
office and in his “SF-86.” He stated that “he [wa]s certain he was only arrested three 
times for DUI.” Further, after discussing his 2003 through 2007 arrests with the 
investigator, he “stated that he ha[d] no other arrests . . .” At his hearing, Applicant 
testified that he misunderstood the questions about his arrests.  (GE 1; GE 3; Tr. 50-
66.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by the members of his church and his girlfriend who 
wrote letters of support on his behalf. Their letters indicate he is a responsible man who 
is doing his best to be a productive member of society. His girlfriend indicated that 
Applicant “has been doing an outstanding job with his probation without violation for his 
past arrests.” Applicant’s step-father, who testified on his behalf, indicated that Applicant 
no longer associates with friends who were a bad influence on Applicant and that he 
has not seen Applicant consume alcohol since his last arrest. (AE A; AE B; AE C; Tr. 
97-97.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
5 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant has a history of criminal offenses that occurred between 1998 and 
2007 including: Disturbing the Peace, Disorderly Conduct, four DUIs, and Driving with a 
Suspended License. These offenses give rise to concerns about Applicant’s judgment 
 
6 
 
and reliability both because of the nature of the offenses and the quantity of criminal 
offenses. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal behavior. However, his offenses occurred 
when he was young and less mature. More than four years have passed since his last 
offense. During that time, he has become “a responsible man who is doing his best to 
be a productive member of society,” as seen by members of his church. His step-father, 
girlfriend, and church family support Applicant’s application and speak highly of him. 
Due to the recent, positive changes in Applicant’s life, further criminal conduct is unlikely 
to occur. He demonstrated that he has successfully rehabilitated himself. He no longer 
consumes alcohol and is focused on his family. His past criminal behavior does not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 
32(d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
7 
 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, 
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that 
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group.  
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant has a history of criminal conduct that he 
sought to conceal. He denied relevant facts, with respect to his arrests during the 
preceding seven years and his drug and alcohol related arrests, in his answers to 
Section 22 on his December 2009 e-QIP. He also failed to disclose his March 2000 
arrest during his interview with an investigator for the Department of Defense. Applicant 
has shown himself to be untrustworthy, and could be vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. The Government has established sufficient concerns under AG 
¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), 16(c), and 16(e) to disqualify Applicant from possessing a clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
8 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to 
correct his falsifications or concealments. Although he testified that he must not have 
understood the questions, he could not point to any ambiguity in the questions. He 
provided no evidence that indicates he was ill-advised in completing his e-QIP. While 
his lack of judgment displayed in his criminal conduct last occurred over four years ago, 
Applicant continues to exercise questionable judgment by concealing his criminal 
history. He failed to take responsibility for his actions and has not demonstrated 
concrete steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. Applicant has not provided information in this record to meet his burden of proof 
for mitigation of his personal conduct. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 
9 
 
Applicant is trusted by his church friends and family. However, his deliberately 
dishonest conduct indicates a lack of judgment and trustworthiness, and raises doubts 
as to whether he understands what is required of those who hold security clearances. 
He is a mature individual who is accountable for his voluntary choices, and failed to 
demonstrate either rehabilitation or reduced potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to overcome the doubts raised about 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a~1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a~2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
