1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-02219
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows Applicant has a
longstanding history of mental-health issues, including hospitalizations, self-mutilation,
and suicide attempts. Since September 2011, she has been under the care of a board-
certified psychiatrist who has diagnosed her with anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa,
and depressive disorder, but no other psychiatric disorders. The psychiatrist disagrees
with past diagnoses of bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder. The
psychiatrist rates her prognosis as excellent. Although Applicant is making progress, her
track record of ongoing and consistent compliance with her psychiatrist’s treatment plan
is less than 12 months in duration. This relatively brief period of stability is not enough
to mitigate and overcome the security concerns stemming from her history of mental-
health issues. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Appellate Exhibit I. 2
 Appellate Exhibit II. 3
 Exhibit 15; Appellate Exhibit II. 4
 Tr. 93–95. 5
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on or about1
September 15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action
under the security guideline known as Guideline I for psychological conditions.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. A prehearing
conference with counsel was held February 8, 2012.  The hearing took place March 15,2
2012. The transcript (Tr.) was received March 27, 2012. 
The record was kept open for two things. First, to allow Applicant to submit an
additional letter of recommendation as Exhibit M. But in a post-hearing conference,
Counsel for Applicant indicated no such documentation would be forthcoming.3
Accordingly, Applicant’s Exhibits consist of A through N, excluding M. Second,
Department Counsel submitted a written summary of Applicant’s medical records under
Fed.R.Evid. 1006, to which there was no objection.  Accordingly, Department Counsel’s4
Exhibits consist of 1 through 15. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged a longstanding history of mental-health issues from 1992 to
2010, including hospitalizations, self-mutilation, and suicide attempts. In Applicant’s
reply or answer to the SOR, her responses were mixed with admissions and denials. At
the hearing, she admitted that all the SOR allegations are true and correct.  Her5
admissions are accepted and adopted and incorporated herein as findings of fact. In
addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She is seeking to
obtain a security clearance for her job as a systems engineer working in the field of
 Tr. 120–122. 6
 Exhibits 1–15. Because Applicant does not dispute the SOR allegations, it is unnecessary to go into great7
detail about the various incidents, and a summarized approach is sufficient to describe her history. In addition,
a summarized approach aids in protecting Applicant’s privacy. 
 Exhibit 1. 8
 Tr. 95–96. 9
 Tr. 98. 10
 Tr. 99. 11
 Tr. 106–107.12
3
information assurance for a large defense contractor.  Her educational background6
includes a 2004 bachelor’s degree in computer science with a minor in mathematics,
and a 2009 master’s degree in systems engineering. She completed an internship with
a technology company during 2003–2004. She then worked as a systems engineer for a
large defense contractor from June 2004 to about November 2011, when she began her
current job.  
Applicant has a longstanding history of mental-health issues.  She disclosed this7
history when she completed a security clearance application in March 2009.  In8
response to a question seeking information about her mental and emotional health, she
reported 11 incidents of treatment, counseling, or hospitalization. She has been
diagnosed with multiple psychological conditions,  including major depression, bipolar
disorder, borderline personality disorder, bulimina, anorexia, generalized anxiety
disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder. She has received treatment at eating
disorder centers. She has engaged in self-mutilation since the late 1990s. On multiple
occasions since 2003, she has been hospitalized for suicidal behaviors, including
cutting, overdosing, and swallowing razor blades. She has swallowed bleach as a way
to cleanse herself. She has not, at times, followed medical advice to take prescribed
medications. 
In addition to admitting all the SOR allegations, Applicant stated at hearing that
she feels like a different person today largely due to (1) the course of treatment from her
current psychiatrist, (2) a great job that she loves, (3) a strong support system, which
includes friends and her church, and (4) an improved relationship with her mother.  She9
states that she is in compliance with the instructions of her current psychiatrist, to
include taking the prescribed medications, which have changed under his care.  She10
has no desire to repeat any of her past behavior, and she regrets that behavior.  And11
she intends to continue following the instructions and recommendations of her
psychiatrist, whom she sees weekly. 
Applicant has had treatment for depression for about the last 20 years, although
there were periods when she was doing well and did not require treatment.  She has12
 Tr. 107. 13
 Tr. 112–114. 14
 Tr. 112–113. 15
 Exhibits J and K. 16
 Exhibit K. 17
 Although formal rules of evidence do not apply here, this psychiatrist would easily qualify as an expert under18
Fed.R.Evid. 702. 
 Exhibit J. 19
4
“always followed a therapist” during this period.  She has been under the care of her13
current psychiatrist since September 2011, after she decided that she did not agree with
the medication regimen prescribed by her previous psychiatrist as well as having a poor
patient-doctor relationship.  She was referred to her current psychiatrist, with the14
assistance of her health-insurance company, because she was seeking a psychiatrist
who would provide therapy in addition to medication, and who was a Christian.   15
Applicant’s current psychiatrist has been practicing psychiatry for more than 20
years.  He was board certified by the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology in16
1993, and he has engaged in private practice of psychiatry since 1999. His curriculum
vitae,  which is more than 20 pages in length, reflects the education, positions,17
experience, presentations, continuing medical education, and previous experience
providing expert testimony consistent with a highly experienced board-certified
psychiatrist.  Since September 2011, the psychiatrist has seen and evaluated Applicant18
on 21 occasions, with each occasion consisting of about a 50-minute session. 
The psychiatrist did not appear at hearing, but he prepared a three-page letter
describing his evaluation of Applicant.  He noted the following matters In his letter: (1)19
Applicant fits the diagnostic criteria for anorexia, bulimina, and depressive disorder; (2)
she has no other psychiatric disorders; (3) he rejected the past diagnosis of bipolar
disorder and explained why; (4) he rejected the past diagnosis of borderline personality
disorder and explained why; (5) he rejected the past diagnosis of generalized anxiety
disorder; (6) he noted that her psychiatric conditions have not caused her occupational
dysfunction and she has in fact had high occupational functioning; and (7) he noted that
her past suicidal behaviors have not affected her ability to function in the workplace at a
high level. He also assessed Applicant’s prognosis as excellent:
Given [Applicant’s] high level of functioning in the past while her conditions
were less well controlled than they are presently, and that is very
compliant with treatment, and that she is presently functioning at a higher
level than previously, her prognosis is excellent. Given the fact that
[Applicant] has always functioned very high level at work and there has
never been any question of impairment in judgement, reliability nor
 Exhibit J at 3. 20
 Exhibits A–I, and L. 21
 Tr. 72. 22
 Tr. 73–74. 23
 Tr. 79–81. 24
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to25
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.26
5
stability in her work reviews, I believe there is no risk in giving [her] a
security clearance.20
In addition to the favorable evaluation from her psychiatrist, Applicant presented
evidence of her good character in the form of six letters of recommendation, past
awards, honors, and accolades, and workplace performance reports.  All these matters21
are quite favorable. Three of the authors of the letters of recommendation appeared at
the hearing and reaffirmed opinions expressed in their letters. Uniformly, they trust and
have faith in Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Most impressive was
Applicant’s former supervisor and fellow classmate during the master’s degree program.
He described her as a highly organized employee who does exemplary work.  He22
stated that her mental-health issues did not adversely affect her performance at work,
and he was unaware of any workplace violations or infractions by her.  He is aware of23
her past mental-health issues, he described her as brutally or exceptionally honest
about those matters, and he stated that she was able to compartmentalize the medical
issues and deal with those matters away from the workplace.24
Applicant had a good appearance at the hearing, she was calm, polite, and well
spoken, she engaged in appropriate behavior, to include having eye contact with the
witnesses, counsel, and me, throughout the hearing. Although she had difficultly
recalling specific dates and events, I found her overall testimony was credible.   
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As25
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt26
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 27
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 28
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).29
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.30
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.31
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.32
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 33
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).34
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.35
6
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An27
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  28
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting29
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An30
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate31
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme32
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.33
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.34
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it35
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 27, 28, and 29 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 36
 AG ¶ 27. 37
 AG ¶¶ 28 (a)–(c).38
 AG ¶ 29 (a)–(e). 39
7
Discussion
The central issue here is whether Applicant’s suitability for access to classified
information is questioned or put into doubt due to a longstanding history of mental-
health issues. Under Guideline I,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or36
put into doubt due to an applicant’s psychological conditions. The overall concern under
the guideline is that:
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist)
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government,
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference
concerning the standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of seeking mental health counseling.37
The guideline has three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be
disqualifying.  The following conditions are most pertinent: 38
AG ¶ 28(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment,
reliability, or trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline,
including but not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible,
dysfunctional, violent, paranoid, or bizarre behavior; and 
AG ¶ 28(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take
prescribed medication.
The extensive documentary evidence, along with Applicant’s admissions, support a
conclusion that Applicant has engaged in emotionally unstable, irresponsible,
dysfunctional, and bizarre behavior. Likewise, the evidence supports a conclusion that
Applicant has, at times, not taken medicines prescribed to her. Taken together, these
matters raise concerns about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. 
The guideline also has five conditions that could mitigate security concerns.39
The following conditions are most pertinent:  
 Tr. 174–176.   40
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).41
8
AG ¶ 29(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment,
and the individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance
with the treatment plan; and
AG ¶ 29(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a
duly qualified mental health professional. 
These two mitigating conditions apply in Applicant’s favor based on her ongoing
treatment with her psychiatrist, who has been treating her since September 2011.
Although Applicant’s evidence was impressive (e.g., the favorable evaluation by
her psychiatrist), she did not meet her burden to present sufficient evidence to explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns raised by her longstanding history of
mental-health issues. She is now under the care of a board-certified psychiatrist who
has diagnosed her with anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and depressive disorder, but
no other psychiatric disorders, and he disagrees with certain past diagnoses. Although
he is entitled to his opinions, I have not rejected those diagnoses and have accepted
them as the diagnoses then made.  The psychiatrist rates her prognosis as excellent,40
and it is evident she is making progress under his care. Although she is progressing,
her track record of ongoing and consistent compliance with her psychiatrist’s treatment
plan is less than 12 months in duration. Given her longstanding history and associated
behaviors, this relatively brief period of stability is not enough to mitigate the security
concerns. With that said, this conclusion is not carved in stone. Applicant is a well-
educated, hard-working, and successful person with a bright future.  She may well be
able to mitigate the concerns and obtain a security clearance with additional time and
compliance with treatment. But it is simply too soon to make a favorable clearance
decision. 
The evidence here justifies current doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability,
or trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these
doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I gave due consideration to the whole-person
concept.  In particular, I gave Applicant credit for her academic achievements, her41
good employment record, her volunteer activity, and the substantial evidence of her
good character. I have also considered that her longstanding history of mental-health
issues is not something that she chose to undertake, and I have empathy for her and
anyone else struggling with mental-health problems. Although these matters weigh in
her favor, they are not enough to mitigate and overcome the security concerns. Based
9
on the evidence before me, Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable clearance decision.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline I: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.p: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
