 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07845 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline M, Use of 
Information Technology Systems; Guideline D, Sexual Behavior; Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems; Guideline D, Sexual Behavior; 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 11, 2011. He requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 9, 2012, with a hearing date of March 8, 
2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 
1 through 7, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant objected to one exhibit, GE 5, 
and that objection was overruled.1 Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as 
hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, and offered exhibits (AE) A through P that 
were admitted into evidence without any objections. Applicant’s exhibit list was marked 
as HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 6, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, except for SOR 
¶ 4.a. These admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He is single, but in a long-term relationship. He was 
married twice previously. He has one adult daughter. He currently works for a defense 
contractor as an engineer. He began working for his current employer in 1985. He holds 
a doctorate degree in electrical engineering. He has no military service. He has held a 
top security clearance since 1985.2   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) inappropriate use of 
computer systems such as viewing pornographic images while using a company 
computer, installing unauthorized software on his company computer against company 
policy, and failing to follow company policy (SOR ¶ 1.a); (2) soliciting the services of 
prostitutes on more than 50 times from about 1990 to August 2008 (SOR ¶ 2.a); (3) 
demonstrating excessive use of alcohol in the following manner: from 1979 to 2008, 
consuming alcohol to excess, including becoming intoxicated and passing out; in 
September 2008, being diagnosed by a qualified medical professional as alcohol 
dependent; from October 2008 to December 2009, attending an alcohol abuse 
outpatient treatment program; at various times from 1979 to 2008, routinely operating a 
vehicle while intoxicated; and from 1979 to 2008, having family members express their 
concern about his excessive alcohol use (SOR ¶¶ 3.a-3.e); (4) In November 2004, 
providing his second wife $30,000 after she threatened to expose his illicit sexual 
activities to neighbors; participating in gambling and losing up to $1,000 on a single 
occasion; in November 2008, having his SCI access revoked by another government 
agency (AGA); and frequenting topless bars and strip clubs after his SCI was revoked in 
November 2008. (SOR ¶¶ 4.a-4.d). 
  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 21-24 (It was pointed out to Applicant that he submitted as part of his Answer the same document 
to which he was now objecting). 
 
2 Tr. at 7; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant began drinking beer during his senior year of high school. He drank 
mostly at social gatherings. He continued this practice through college. Once he 
reached the age of 21, he began drinking with friends at bars and he would also drink at 
home. He drank during the week and on weekends. As he grew older, he drank more 
often. Starting about ten years ago, he regularly drank after work at bars, but mostly at 
home. His preferred drink was beer. During his thirties he would consume six to ten 
drinks three to four times a week. He would drink to intoxication and become more 
relaxed. He passed out on occasions from drinking alcohol. His excessive use of 
alcohol led to marital problems that resulted in his two divorces and led to health 
concerns. He admitted that he drove while intoxicated on numerous occasions. He also 
admitted that his mother, ex-wives, girlfriend, and daughter expressed concern over his 
drinking habits. Additionally, starting in about 1990, he solicited prostitutes 
approximately 50 times. This often occurred at massage parlors. His current girlfriend is 
unaware of his most recent solicitation of prostitutes in about October 2008. He also 
gambled, losing up to $1,000 on a single occasion.3 
  
 In September 2008, Applicant was evaluated by a clinical psychologist from 
another government agency (AGA) concerning his alcohol use. After a clinical interview, 
a review of his records, and conducting several tests, Applicant was diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent, with psychological dependence. The findings also included the 
following language: “His judgment is grossly impaired. Due to his poor insight and 
ambivalence about treatment and abstinence, the prognosis is extremely poor.” In 
October 2008, he sought treatment at an inpatient recognized alcohol treatment 
program. Upon entry, he was diagnosed by a licensed drug and alcohol abuse 
counselor as alcohol dependent. He was discharged in November 2008 after 
developing a continuing care plan. Recommendations for continuing care included 
attending 12-step meetings. His discharge prognosis was good, if he followed the 
aftercare recommendations. His discharge diagnostic impression was alcohol 
dependence.4 
 
 Applicant stated that he has been sober since October 2008. He also disagrees 
that he is alcohol dependent. He offered an earlier diagnosis by his personal 
psychologist who saw him from April to August 2007, who stated “he was never seen as 
alcohol dependent.” Applicant characterizes himself as an alcohol abuser. He does not 
attend 12-step meetings and does not have an Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) sponsor. He 
stated he practices the 12-step principles of AA.5  
 
 Applicant married his second wife in 2000, but they separated in 2002 when she 
discovered he was involved with prostitutes. During the separation, Applicant provided 
most of his wife’s support. At some point his wife told him that unless he gave her 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 51-58, 74, 86-88; GE 5. 
 
4 Tr. at 55-58; GE 5-6. 
 
5 Tr. at 56, 103; GE 5-6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
$30,000 she would tell the neighbors about his sexual activities. He would have been 
embarrassed if she told the neighbors, but he claims he did not provide her the money 
for that reason. Rather, he felt an obligation to support her because his actions caused 
the end of the marriage. He provided over $35,000 in cash payments to her during their 
separation. This money was in addition to mortgage payments and other expenses he 
paid for her.6   
 
 On November 12, 2008, AGA revoked Applicant’s SCI access based upon 
alcohol consumption and sexual behavior security concerns. Applicant also admitted 
that he continued to frequent topless bars and strip clubs after his access was revoked 
and after he stopped drinking alcohol. He stated he kept going to these places because 
that was where his friends were located. He stated he stopped going to these places 
about one year ago and has a new circle of friends.7 
 
 In May 2009, Applicant’s employer discovered that his company laptop computer 
contained pornographic material and personal software that was not authorized. The 
software included secure deletion tools and other software designed to interfere with his 
employer’s ability to monitor personal files and software created and maintained on his 
computer. Applicant admitted violating his company’s policies by uploading the 
unauthorized software and by viewing and storing pornographic material on his 
company computer. He also admitted that he placed the deletion software on the 
computer to keep his personal files from being discovered. This incident came to his 
company’s attention when his computer contracted a virus, not because he voluntarily 
disclosed the information.8 
 
 Applicant presented the statements from his human resources manager and a 
coworker. Both statements recommend him for a security clearance. He is 
characterized as dependable, reliable, hardworking, conscientious, and honest. His 
girlfriend also provided information on how their lives have changed since he stopped 
drinking alcohol in 2008.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 61, 64, 66; GE 5; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 78, 80; GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. at 49-50; GE 5, 7. 
 
9 AE M-N; Answer. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
 
6 
 
 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
 Applicant used his company computer to view pornographic images. He also 
loaded personal software onto his company computer against company policy. He 
acknowledged that he loaded this particular software to keep his company from 
monitoring his personal files. Both AG ¶ 40(e) and AG ¶ 40(f) apply. 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and considered 
the following relevant:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct was discovered in 2009, only after his computer had 
contracted a virus and it had to be sent to the company’s information technology (IT) 
section. This is when the unauthorized software and pornography were discovered. 
Applicant’s admission of intentionally placing software on his computer to cloak his files 
from company observation shows a degree of unreliability, untrustworthiness, and bad 
judgment to cause great concern over his security worthiness. AG ¶ 41(a) does not 
apply.   
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
 
7 
 
 
concerning the standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
I have considered all of the Sexual Behavior disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
13 and considered the following relevant: 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior of 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and, 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 Applicant admitted soliciting prostitutes on about 50 occasions, visiting strip 
clubs, and viewing pornography on his company computer in violation of company 
policy over an extended period (1990-2011). He engaged prostitutes when he was 
married and his current girlfriend is currently unaware of his most recent use of 
prostitutes in 2008, which was during the course of their relationship. He also deceived 
his company by placing software on his computer that would mask his personal 
pornography files. He continued to visit strip clubs after he stopped drinking because his 
friends were at those places and only stopped these visits in the last year. Applicant 
demonstrated a pattern of compulsive sexual behavior that he was unable to stop. This 
behavior puts him in a position of vulnerability to coercion. An example of this is his 
unwillingness to tell his current girlfriend the full extent of his solicitation of prostitutes, 
which places him at risk of exploitation. All of his actions regarding use of prostitutes, 
putting pornography on his company computer, and visiting strip clubs reflect a lack of 
discretion and judgment. AG ¶¶ 13(b), 13(c), and 13(d) all apply. 
I have considered all of the Sexual Behavior mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 14 
and considered the following relevant:  
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and,  
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 Although Applicant’s last admitted use of prostitutes was in 2008 and the last 
time pornography was discovered on his company computer was 2009, the number of 
 
8 
 
 
times he solicited prostitutes and the efforts he took to cloak his unauthorized use of 
pornography do not support the conclusion that the behavior is unlikely to recur. 
Moreover, his actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. 
Because his girlfriend remains unaware of his most recent use of prostitutes, his 
behavior serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress. His visits to strip clubs 
and his conduct in placing pornography on his company computer were not discreet 
actions. AG ¶¶ 14(b), (c) and (d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Four are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent;  
(d) diagnosis by a qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or dependence; and 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or dependence by a licensed clinical social 
worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Applicant’s pattern of drinking from 1979 to 2008, including his admissions about 
driving while intoxicated on numerous occasions, and his diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence, support the application of all the above disqualifying conditions. 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Alcohol Consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
9 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Although Applicant’s last admitted use of alcohol was in 2008, before he entered 
a treatment program, his past pattern of alcohol use does not convince me that his 
conduct will not recur. These incidents were not infrequent, nor did they happen under 
unusual circumstances. Moreover, because he engaged in the sexual behavior 
previously described while he was drinking alcohol, his actions cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant finally acknowledged his issues of alcohol abuse and sought treatment 
in 2008. Although he was diagnosed by two different medical providers as alcohol 
dependent, he considers himself an alcohol abuser. He claims alcohol abstinence since 
2008 and there is no record evidence to the contrary. AG ¶ 23(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant successfully completed an inpatient alcohol treatment program in 2008 
and a follow on outpatient program in 2009. Through these treatment programs he 
established a pattern of abstinence. However, he has not continued with the treatment 
recommendation of participating in 12-step meetings. This is significant because his 
prognosis of “good” was conditioned upon him following his aftercare recommendations. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 23(d) only partially applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are relevant: 
 
10 
 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information; and  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
Applicant’s reaction to his wife’s (at the time) threat to reveal his sexual activity 
with prostitutes unless he paid her money was to continue to provide her monetary 
support. He did not want to be embarrassed by this information. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
Applicant’s gambling activities, the revocation of his SCI access by AGA for alcohol 
consumption and sexual behavior concerns, and his action in frequenting strip clubs 
while appealing his SCI access revocation clearly show a whole person assessment of 
lack of judgment, untrustworthiness, and unreliability. AG ¶ 16(c) applies. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
  Applicant’s giving his wife over $30,000 after she threatened to expose his 
sexual activities to neighbors is not a minor concern. His action casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Having his SCI access revoked by AGA 
and continuing to attend strip clubs while his case was under appeal also cast doubt on 
 
11 
 
 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He stopped gambling after he 
stopped using alcohol, thereby reducing his vulnerability to exploitation. He also has 
acknowledged his behavior and obtained alcohol counseling. AG ¶ 17(c) does not 
apply. AG ¶ 17(d) partially applies. AG ¶ 17(e) applies to the gambling allegation and 
partially to the other Guideline E allegations. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 27-year 
service to his company. I also considered the seriousness of his actions. Additionally, I 
considered his alcohol treatment program and the strong recommendations he received 
from friends and coworkers concerning his honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
However, Applicant’s alcohol dependence is longstanding. Although he has been sober 
for three years, given the extent of his alcohol abuse and the related activities he 
engaged in while drinking (soliciting prostitutes, drunk driving), not enough time has 
passed to convince me that his drinking and related activities will not recur. This is 
particularly so since his computer-related transgression took place after he completed 
his alcohol treatment program. Applicant engaged in numerous types of behavior that 
raises security concerns and did not meet his burden to provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline M, 
use of information technology; Guideline D sexual behavior; Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption; and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline G    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph   4.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   4.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 4.c – 4.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
