 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-10786 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s home mortgage of about $340,000 has been delinquent for at least 
three years, resulting in a past-due amount of about $129,000. Although Applicant or his 
family or both have continued to live in their residence, they have not made any 
payments to the mortgage lender for at least three years. In addition, Applicant has a 
charged-off credit card debt in the amount of $2,979, which has been delinquent since 
2007. In 2010, he intentionally understated his culpability in some criminal offenses to 
an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Personal conduct and 
financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 3, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF-86). On June 3, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated 
by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines E (personal conduct) and F 
(financial considerations).1 The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, deny, continue, or revoke a 
security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be denied, 
granted, continued, or revoked.  
 
On August 11, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On March 9, 2012, Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On 
March 28, 2012, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On April 10, 2012, DOHA 
issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for May 9, 2012. (Tr. 7) Applicant’s hearing 
was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 10 exhibits, and 
Applicant offered 12 exhibits. (Tr. 16-19; GE 1-10; AE A-L) There were no objections, 
and I admitted GE 1-10 and AE A-L. (Tr. 18-19) On May 17, 2012, I received the 
transcript of the hearing. I held the record open until May 18, 2012, to provide Applicant 
an opportunity to provide additional documentation. (Tr. 60-61) Applicant provided eight 
post-hearing documents, which were admitted without objection. (AE M-T)   
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the conduct in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.b, 
and 2.c with explanations. He also explained why he denied the other SOR allegations. 
His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old information-technology specialist for a defense 
contractor. (Tr. 21; GE 1) He graduated from high school in 1985. (GE 1) He married in 
1991, and he was divorced in 1993. (Tr. 58; GE 1) His first spouse passed away in 
2004. (GE 1) He remarried in 1997, and he was divorced in May 2010. (Tr. 34-35; AE 
O) His divorce proceedings took two years (2008-2010) and were contentious. (Tr. 21) 
Applicant is responsible for the debts in his name, and his spouse is responsible for the 
debts in her name. (Tr. 45) He has two stepchildren and four children. (Tr. 21) His 
children are ages 13, 14, 18, and 20. (Tr. 32, 37, 58-59) His step children are ages 16 
and 20. (Tr. 33) 
 
Applicant served his country in a variety of overseas assignments from 2001 to 
2011. In 2001, he worked in Kosovo; in 2002, in Kuwait; from 2003 to 2006, in Iraq; and 
from 2008 to December 2011, in Iraq. (Tr. 22, 33-34) Typically, he was deployed for 10 
months and home for two months. (Tr. 37)  
 
                                            
1
Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR allegation 1.b. (Tr. 9) Applicant did not object, and 
I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 9-10) 
 
2
Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Personal Conduct 
 
In 1997, Applicant was married, and he was having financial problems. (Tr. 29, 
55) Applicant was a staff sergeant (E-6), and his spouse was a sergeant (E-5). (Tr. 55) 
According to the Criminal Investigation Division (CID) report of investigation (ROI), in 
July 1997, the victim of one of Applicant’s thefts of a credit card noticed three 
unauthorized withdrawals on his card. The victim of the theft went to the mailroom and 
asked Applicant for information about theft of his cards. Applicant asked for the victim’s 
phone number so that he could call him about the theft, if he found any information. 
Later, Applicant approached the victim and asked, “What if I told you I could get you[r] 
money back?” The victim reported the conversation with Applicant to the military police 
and the CID. (GE 4, CID ROI at para. 1.1) The victim introduced an undercover CID 
agent to Applicant, and Applicant said he could get the stolen money from the individual 
who stole the victim’s credit card. Applicant arranged a meeting and reimbursed the 
victim for the theft, and Applicant said he “took care of” the person that stole the credit 
card. (GE 4, CID ROI at para. 2) The CID subsequently questioned Applicant about four 
thefts from the mailroom (three credit cards and one government check), and he 
admitted the four thefts. (GE 4, CID ROI at paras. 3, 6) 
 
Applicant was convicted at a general court-martial of larceny and forgery, in 
violation of Articles 121 and 123, 10 U.S.C. §§ 921 and 923. (SOR ¶ 1.a)3 He was 
sentenced to a bad-conduct discharge, reduction to private (E-1), and a $500 fine. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a; GE 5, Commander’s Report of Disciplinary Action)  
 
In February 2006, while working as a defense contractor, Applicant entered a 
military camp with alcohol in his vehicle, in violation of General Order Number 1A, dated 
December 19, 2000. (SOR ¶ 1.c) He said he had just arrived at the airport, and the 
vehicle that picked him up had alcohol in it. (Tr. 30) Applicant was the driver of the 
vehicle when he went through the gate and his vehicle was searched. He said he was 
unaware of the alcohol in the vehicle. (Tr. 30) 
 
On November 3, 2009, Applicant disclosed on his SF-86 that he received a bad-
conduct discharge for stealing. (GE 1) However, he did not answer “Yes” when asked in 
Section 22c, “Have you EVER been charged with any felony offense? (Include those 
under Uniform Code of Military Justice).” (emphasis in original; GE 1)  
 
On June 7, 2010, an OPM investigator interviewed Applicant about his theft of 
mail; forgery of documents; use of stolen credit cards to obtain cash, goods, and 
services; and court-martial conviction.4 Applicant told the OPM investigator that he stole 
two credit cards while serving as a mail clerk; he used one of the credit cards to 
withdraw $400 from a bank ATM; and denied that he used the other credit card. (AE A 
                                            
3
The file does not contain the charge sheet, promulgating order, result of trial, and other 
documents. 
 
4
This paragraph addresses the concern raised in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant agreed that the OPM 
summary of interview was accurate. (Tr. 51-52; GE 2 at 3) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
at 3) He said he admitted the theft to one of the victims of the theft. He said that one day 
after he used the stolen credit card, the victim of the theft came to the mail room and 
asked Applicant whether he had seen the victim’s mail. (AE A at 3) Applicant told the 
victim about stealing his credit card and using it. (AE A at 3) The victim informed the unit 
commander, and his admission to the theft was passed up the chain of command. (AE 
A at 3) Applicant said the OPM investigator asked him how many credit cards he stole, 
and the amount of money he stole. (Tr. 53) He told the investigator that he did not know 
how many credit cards he stole, or the amount of the larcenies obtained with the stolen 
credit cards. (Tr. 53) Later, he said the OPM investigator did not ask him how many 
cards he stole, or how many people he stole from. (Tr. 53) The investigator’s focus was 
on the amount of money he stole. (Tr. 53) 
 
Actually, Applicant stole three credit cards from three separate victims; he 
illegally used all three credit cards, and made unauthorized purchases totaling 
$1,638.37. He admitted to the offense after being confronted by a CID agent. He initially 
attempted to conceal his role in the theft of the credit cards by indicating he knew the 
person who committed the theft and would take care of him. (Tr. 54) He insisted that he 
did reveal the theft to one of the victims. (Tr. 55) Applicant denied that he intentionally 
attempted to mislead the OPM investigator. (Tr. 31) He did not have the documentation 
about his 1998 case with him for the interview. (Tr. 31) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
In 1998 or 1999, Applicant filed for bankruptcy. (Tr. 63)5 Applicant’s SOR alleges 
eight delinquent debts, totaling $110,957 as follows: 
 
a. 2007 judgment by a window company of $6,854—PAID. Applicant paid $1,000 
per month, and he resolved this debt. (Tr. 23-24) He provided a May 10, 2012 letter 
from the creditor indicating the balance due was zero. (AE P) His May 10, 2012, credit 
report indicates this debt was paid. (AE Q at 20, 25); 
 
b. Charged-off credit card debt of $2,979—UNRESOLVED. Applicant said he is 
attempting to establish a payment plan with the creditor; however, he does not have any 
documentation about the payment plan. (Tr. 24) He had a corporate credit card that he 
                                            
5
The SOR did not allege that Applicant filed for bankruptcy in 1998 or 1999 or that he failed to 
fully disclose his court-martial charges and conviction on his 2009 SF-86. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 
4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an 
SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have decided not to consider the non-SOR-alleged misconduct for any purpose 
because the surrounding circumstances were not fully developed at his hearing.  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
was supposed to use for expenses, such as travel. (Tr. 40) He resigned from the job for 
other employment, and he expected his employer to pay the credit-card debt. (Tr. 41) 
He asked his corporate employer to pay for the credit card; however, the corporation 
declined to pay the debt, asserting it was not their responsibility. (Tr. 41); 
 
c. Home mortgage in foreclosure of $341,500 with delinquent interest of 
$72,254—DELINQUENT. The original purchase price of the home in 2004 was 
$311,000. (Tr. 47) Applicant made a $30,000 down payment. (Tr. 48) In 2007, he paid 
$45,000 in an attempt to obtain a loan modification; however, it was unsuccessful and 
his mortgage continued to be delinquent. (Tr. 63-64)6 He said the last payment was 
made on his mortgage in 2007. (Tr. 45-46, 64) While Applicant was in Iraq, his spouse 
stopped making payments on their residence, and it went into foreclosure. (Tr. 25) He 
currently lives in the home. (Tr. 45) He or his family or both have been living in his 
residence rent free since 2007. (Tr. 47, 59-60) He unsuccessfully attempted to obtain a 
loan modification. (Tr. 45) Now he is seeking a short sale of the residence. (Tr. 45, 47; 
AE N) The mortgage holder has offered to cooperate with the short sale. (AE N) The 
home has not been advertised for sale. (Tr. 48) The home is solely in Applicant’s name. 
(Tr. 49) His May 10, 2012 credit report shows the amount past due as $129,008 and 
foreclosure process started; however, his lender is stopping the foreclosure if the short 
sale process is chosen. (AE Q at 8, 16-17, 29); 
 
d. Credit card collection account of $12,265—PAID. Applicant said he paid this 
debt. (Tr. 25) This debt does is not listed on his May 10, 2012 credit report. (AE Q); 
 
e. Delinquent telecommunications debt of $311—DISPUTED. Applicant said he 
disputed this debt, and it is not listed on his May 10, 2012 credit report. (Tr. 26; AE Q); 
 
f. Child support debt to State A of $4,596—PAID. Applicant’s children living in 
State A are 18 years and 20 years old. (Tr. 26, 42-43) He stopped making his child 
support payments when he was unemployed in 2007, which caused them to become 
delinquent. (Tr. 27) Applicant provided documentation establishing this debt is paid. (Tr. 
26-27, 43-44; AE R-T)  
 
g. Bank debt of $3,662—PAID. Applicant said this debt was paid. (Tr. 28) His 
May 10, 2012, credit report indicates this debt was paid, and the balance is zero. (AE Q 
at 3); and 
 
h. Delinquent debt of $8,036—DISPUTED. Applicant disputed this debt, and it is 
not on his May 10, 2012 credit report. (Tr. 28-29, 44; AE Q).  
   
                                            
6
He testified the $45,000 was paid in $4,000 increments, and they were insufficient to bring the 
mortgage to current status. (Tr. 65) It was unclear when the most recent payment to his mortgage 
account was paid; however, it is clear it was at least three years ago. (Tr. 65) Applicant said the original 
mortgage amount was $311,000. The mortgage amount apparently was increased on his credit report to 
$341,500 at some point. The amount owed to his mortgage creditor continues to be substantial.   
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s spouse maintained their finances while he was overseas from 2001 
until his marriage deteriorated. (Tr. 22) From 2001 to 2010, Applicant averaged annual 
gross income of about $110,000. (Tr. 38) In the last year, both of Applicant’s parents 
and his brother passed away. (Tr. 56) Applicant paid about $10,000 towards the three 
funerals and burials, and $2,700 for his travel from overseas. (Tr. 56-57) Applicant is 
currently unemployed; however, he is receiving unemployment compensation of $653 
per week. (Tr. 60-61) He provided a budget; however, the income in his budget was 
based on his unemployment compensation and not on his income while employed by a 
DoD contractor. (AE C)  
 
Applicant has held a security clearance since 1985. (Tr. 62) There is no evidence 
of compromise of classified information. Applicant’s employer will reinstate him if his 
access to classified information is not revoked. (Tr. 61)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
When Applicant was on active duty, he received four awards of the Army Good 
Conduct Medal (GCM), six awards of the Army Achievement Medal (AAM), and one 
award of the Army Commendation Medal (ARCOM). (AE G, L) He completed various 
Army training courses and received several Army certificates of achievement. (AE H) 
He served in Southwest Asia during Operation Desert Shield/Storm as a sergeant in a 
combat engineer unit. (AE H) He completed the Army’s Primary Leadership 
Development Course, the Army’s Basic Noncommissioned Officer Course, and 
numerous Army correspondence courses. (AE I, J, K) He earned numerous certificates 
for logistics and communications-related courses. (AE I, J, K)      
 
Applicant received several certificates of appreciation for service in Iraq from 
2008 to 2010: an undated certificate for service in Iraq from November 2008 to March 
2009; a dated certificate December 2009 for his service in Iraq; an undated certificate 
for his service in Iraq from May 2009 to January 2010; and a dated certificate 
September 16, 2009 for his service in Iraq. (AE B at 10-12, 14) He received a citation 
from an Air Force Major General for his outstanding performance of duty in Iraq from 
July through November 2009. (AE B at 13) On November 4, 2009, Applicant received a 
$500 achievement award for his contributions towards meeting mission 
accomplishment. (AE B at 15) His performance evaluations showed excellent 
performance as a DoD contractor employee. (AE D-E) Applicant has substantial 
experience as a specialist in the area of information technology and management. (AE 
F) 
 
Applicant wants to retain his security clearance so that he can return to service in 
combat areas such as Iraq or Afghanistan on behalf of the U.S. Government. (Tr. 32) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guidelines E (personal conduct) and F (financial considerations).  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior . . . ; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) applies. On June 7, 2010, Applicant intentionally understated his 
culpability to an OPM investigator, when he described his theft of mail material (credit 
cards) and his use of those stolen credit cards to obtain goods, services, and cash. He 
understated the number of credit cards stolen, and the amount of cash, goods, and 
services stolen using the credit cards.   
 
AG ¶ 16(e)(1) applies because his intentional understatement of his culpability in 
relation to his court-martial, and the underlying criminal conduct in 1997 that resulted in 
his court-martial conviction, create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, and such conduct adversely affects Applicant’s professional standing as an 
employee of a Department of Defense contractor.  
 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. As indicated under the financial 
considerations guideline, infra, there is credible adverse information that is sufficient for 
an adverse determination under Guideline F. His misleading statement to an OPM 
investigator in 2010 is sufficient for an adverse security determination under Guideline 
E. All of his relevant security-related conduct is covered under various Guidelines. 
There is substantial evidence under Guideline F and AG ¶¶ 16(b) and 16 16(e)(1), and 
further inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply to all of the disqualifying conditions. 
However, AG ¶ 16(e)(1) is mitigated by AG ¶ 17(e) because his court-martial offenses 
are documented in his security records and there is no reason for him to continue to 
attempt to conceal the scope of his criminal conduct. The disclosure of the court-martial 
misconduct has eliminated his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. I do 
not believe that anyone could use Applicant’s history of criminal conduct or financial 
problems to coerce him into compromising classified information.   
 
The allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c that Applicant carried alcohol into a camp in Iraq is 
unsubstantiated because there is insufficient evidence that he knew of the presence of 
alcohol in the vehicle he was driving. SOR ¶ 1.c is mitigated under AG ¶ 17(f). 
 
 In conclusion, SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d are found against Applicant. His theft of mail 
and use of stolen credit cards to steal goods and services in 1997 are serious, felony-
level offenses. They would be mitigated by the passage of time, except they must be 
considered in conjunction with his misconduct in 2010. He intentionally understated the 
underlying conduct resulting in the court-martial charges to an OPM investigator in 
2010. His intentional attempt to mislead the OPM investigator in 2010 is recent, serious, 
and not mitigated. 
  
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
SF-86, credit reports, his SOR response, and his statement at his hearing.  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges eight delinquent debts, totaling $110,957. Two large 
debts remain unresolved. Applicant’s home mortgage of about $340,000 has been 
delinquent for at least three years. This home is solely in Applicant’s name. His May 10, 
2012 credit report shows the amount past due as $129,008. He has not made any 
payments to the mortgage lender for at least three years. Applicant has a charged-off 
credit card debt in the amount of $2,979, which has been delinquent since 2007. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts does not warrant full application of any 
mitigating conditions to all of his debts. However, he receives some credit under ¶¶ 
20(a), 20(b), and 20(d)7 and 20(e). He paid, settled, disputed, or satisfied six debts, and 
they are no longer listed as delinquent on his current credit report.   
 
Unemployment, three deaths in his family, divorce, and separation were 
circumstances largely beyond Applicant’s control that adversely affected his finances. 
Applicant acted responsibly and made good progress resolving six of eight delinquent 
SOR debts. He maintained contact with his creditors, established payment plans, and 
avoided additional delinquent debt.  
 
Applicant did not act responsibly in regard to two delinquent debts. He said that 
in 2007, he attempted to bring his mortgage to current status. He did not make any 
payments to the mortgage company for several years and accrued over $120,000 in 
delinquent charges. In 2007, he incurred almost $3,000 in delinquent charges on his 
corporate credit card. He left employment with that corporation and never paid his credit 
card bill. Over the last several years, he has averaged about $110,000 in gross income. 
He had the means to make some payments on his house.8 Applicant did not make any 
payments to address these two delinquent SOR debts for at least three years. Applicant 
had the burden of establishing that he acted responsibly with regard to these two debts, 
and he did not do so.  
 
Although Applicant did not receive formal financial counseling, he did generate a 
budget or personal financial statement. He understands how to establish his financial 
responsibility and eliminate delinquent debt.  
 
In sum, Applicant fell behind on his debts because of unemployment, three 
deaths in his family, divorce, and separation, and these were circumstances largely 
beyond Applicant’s control. He made progress and resolved or successfully disputed six 
of his delinquent debts. Applicant, his children, or Applicant and his children lived in his 
residence for the last three years, and they did not pay anything on their mortgage. He 
                                            
7
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8
Of course, Applicant has significant financial responsibilities, as he supports his four children, 
who are under the age of 18. 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
is now waiting for a possible short sale to resolve his mortgage debt. He has a 
corporate-sponsored credit card that has been unpaid for more than four years. It is 
likely that his financial problems will recur. His financial problem is not being resolved, 
and it is not under control. His efforts are not sufficient to fully mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns under the whole-
person concept; however, they are insufficient to fully mitigate security concerns. He is 
44 years old and sufficiently mature to comply with security requirements. He served 
honorably in the U.S. Army from 1985 to 1997, receiving four awards of the Army GCM, 
six awards of the AAM, and one award of the ARCOM. He successfully completed 
various training courses and received several certificates of achievement. He served in 
Southwest Asia during Operation Desert Shield/Storm. He earned numerous certificates 
for logistics and communications-related courses, and he received several certificates of 
appreciation lauding his service to his employer and the DoD in Iraq from 2008 to 2010. 
In 2009, he received a $500 achievement award. His performance evaluations showed 
excellent performance as a DoD contractor employee. He has substantial experience as 
a specialist in the areas of information technology and management.  
 
Applicant fell behind on his debts because of unemployment, three deaths in his 
family, divorce, and separation, and these circumstances were largely beyond 
Applicant’s control. He resolved or successfully disputed six of his delinquent debts. 
Applicant is sufficiently intelligent to understand and establish his financial responsibility. 
His personnel records, including numerous certificates and evaluations, establish that 
he is a dedicated, reliable, loyal, and trustworthy employee. He is knowledgeable, 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
patriotic, and professional, and he made substantial contributions to his employer and to 
the Army from 1985 to 1997. He wanted his clearance to be reinstated so that he could 
return to service in combat areas such as Iraq or Afghanistan. 
 
The financial circumstances and personal conduct concerns supporting 
revocation of Applicant’s security clearance are more significant than the factors 
weighing towards continuation of his access to classified information. His home 
mortgage of about $340,000 has been delinquent for at least three years. His 2012 
credit report shows the amount past due as $129,008. He has not made any payments 
to the mortgage lender for at least three years. He also has a charged-off credit card 
debt in the amount of $2,979, which has been delinquent since 2007. He did not 
establish that he was unable to do more to resolve these two debts. He failed to provide 
sufficient evidence of progress resolving these two delinquent SOR debts to establish 
his financial responsibility. In 1997, Applicant stole credit cards from three soldiers, 
which he used to steal goods, cash, and services. He was convicted at general court-
martial of larceny and forgery, which are serious, felony-level offenses. He received a 
bad-conduct discharge. In 2010, he intentionally understated to an OPM investigator the 
underlying conduct resulting in the court-martial charges. He lied to the OPM 
investigator about how the CID discovered he was the perpetrator of the larcenies and 
forgeries, and the amount of the thefts and the number of victims of theft. His intentional 
attempt to mislead the OPM investigator in 2010 is recent, serious, and not mitigated. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not fully 
mitigated the personal conduct and financial consideration concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant (Withdrawn) 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d to 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
