 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10741 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct, 
but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his personal conduct and 
financial considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 11, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of financial interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on February 22, 2010.2 On another unspecified date, DOHA issued him 
a set of interrogatories. He responded to those interrogatories on May 10, 2011.3 On 
                                                          
1
 Government Exhibit 1 (2010 SF 86), dated February 11, 2010. 
 
2
 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated February 22, 2010).  
 
 
2 
                                      
 
another unspecified date, DOHA issued him a set of drug interrogatories. He responded 
to those interrogatories on May 10, 2011.4 On another unspecified date, DOHA issued 
him a set of mental health interrogatories. He responded to those interrogatories on 
May 10, 2011.5 On December 1, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) for all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged 
security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct), and Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA 
was unable find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 19, 2011. In a sworn 
written statement, dated January 10, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated 
the Government was prepared to proceed on February 28, 2012, and the case was 
assigned to me on March 2, 2012. A Notice of Hearing was issued on March 14, 2012, 
and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on April 3, 2012. 
 
 During the hearing, 14 Government exhibits (GE 1-14) and 4 Applicant exhibits 
(AE A-D) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and four other 
witnesses testified. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on April 10, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to criminal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.) and financial considerations (¶¶ 3.a. 
through 3.f.) of the SOR. Applicant's admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. He denied all of the factual allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 2.a. 
through 2.j.) of the SOR. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a quality assurance technician.6 He was previously granted a secret security clearance 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
3
 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated May 10, 2011).  
 
4
 Government Exhibit 4 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated May 10, 2011).  
 
5
 Government Exhibit 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated May 10, 2011).  
 
6
 Tr. at 94. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
in October 2007,7 but does not currently hold any security clearance.8 Following his high 
school graduation, he attended a university for four years and a technical school for 
eight months, but did not receive a degree or diploma from either institution.9 Applicant 
entered the Army National Guard in an enlisted capacity in October 1985, and served 
honorably until October 1993 when he separated as a staff sergeant serving as a 
combat engineer sapper leader.10 Very little is known about his employment activities 
between 1993 and 2002. Over the ensuing years, he has held a variety of positions with 
different organizations. He was a technical support engineer from November 2002 until 
November 2003; a clerk/information systems technician (IT) from sometime in 2003 until 
September 2004; a technical support engineer from September 2004 until November 
2005; a desktop support engineer from November 2005 until July 2006; an IT support 
specialist from August 2006 until October 2009; and a computer specialist from 
September 2011 until December 2011.11 He joined his current employer in January 
2012, and serves as a quality assurance technician.12 Applicant also went through a 
lengthy period of unemployment (November 2009 to September 2011).13 Applicant has 
never been married.14  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): In February 2003, while operating his motor vehicle at about 83 
miles per hour, Applicant was stopped by police and charged with reckless driving, a 
misdemeanor. In April 2003, he was found guilty as charged. He was fined 
approximately $65, and his operator’s license was suspended for 15 days.15   
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): Four months later, in August 2003, he was charged with (1) 
possession of a controlled substance, a felony; (2) possession of a controlled 
substance, a felony; (3) possession of a controlled substance, a felony; and (4) 
possession of marijuana, a misdemeanor. In January 2005, the first three counts were 
each amended to possession of a Schedule III drug, a misdemeanor. Applicant was 
subsequently found guilty of the three amended charges and charge (4), and fined $500 
for each of the first three charges and $200 for charge (4).16  
                                                          
7
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 40-41. 
 
8
 Tr. at 7. 
 
9
 Tr. at 6; Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 14-15. 
 
10
 Government Exhibit 1, at 25-26; Tr. at 95. 
 
11
 Government Exhibit 1, at 17-23; Tr. at 93-94. 
 
12
 Tr. at 94. 
 
13
 Tr. at 92-93. 
 
14
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 29. 
 
15
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 10, 2012, at 1. 
 
16
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 10, 2012, at 1. The documentary evidence in support of 
the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.b. is somewhat meager and inconsistent. There are no court records to support the 
 
4 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): In January 2004, Applicant was charged with (1) breaking and 
entering, a felony; (2) attempted malicious wounding, a felony; (3) grand larceny, a 
felony; (4) trespassing, a misdemeanor; (5) assault and battery, a misdemeanor; and (6) 
assault and battery, a misdemeanor. In April 2004, charges (2) through (4) and (6) were 
nolle prossed. He was convicted of charges (1), as amended to statutory burglary with 
intent to commit a felony, and (5), and was sentenced to ten years in prison (nine years 
suspended) on charge (1), one year in prison (one year suspended) on charge (5), 
placed on probation for two years, and ordered to complete both drug treatment and 
mental health treatment. Applicant spent ten months in the city detention facility, with 
eight of those months in a work-release program.17  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): In June 2006, Applicant was charged with assault and battery – 
family member. Applicant contended he was “falsely accused of assault by [his] ex-
girlfriend and her ex-boyfriend.” The charges were dismissed, but he was required to 
attend an 18-session Violence Intervention Program from March 2006 until July 2006.18 
He successfully completed the program.19 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): In May 2008, while operating his motor vehicle on an interstate 
highway, Applicant was stopped by police and charged with reckless driving, a 
misdemeanor. In July 2008, he was found guilty as charged. He was fined 
approximately $150.20   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant has a lengthy history of illegal substance abuse and prescription drug 
abuse. He has acknowledged that his illegal substance of choice was marijuana, and 
his abused prescription of choice was the opiate pain medication Vicodin.21 There is 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
allegations. The FBI Identification Record (Government Exhibit 11, dated February 21, 2010), at 2, indicates only 
three charges, with the first two being possession of controlled substances, and the third charge being possession of 
marijuana. The police report attached to Government Exhibit 10 (Police File, various dates) indicates there were only 
three charges. Moreover, Applicant contended in his Answer to the SOR, at 1, that the fourth charge was for failure to 
comply with the court mandated ASAP probationary period. 
 
17
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 10, 2012, at 1-2; Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 
38. The documentary evidence in support of the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.c. is both meager and inconsistent. There are 
no police or court records to support the allegations. The FBI Identification Record at 2, indicates six charges (with 
minor variations as to the titles of some of the charges), and Applicant contended in his Answer to the SOR that the 
court mandate for mental health treatment was vacated in December 2004. It was vacated. See Letter to Applicant, 
dated December 3, 2004, attached to his Answer to the SOR at Item A. Applicant also claimed that the judge felt he 
was not “remorseful enough” so the lengthy sentence was adjudged to hold over him. See Tr. at 74-75. 
 
18
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 10, 2012, at 2. The documentary evidence in support of 
the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.d. is extremely limited. There are no police or court records to support the allegations. The 
FBI Identification Record at 2, indicates the charge, and Applicant contended in his Answer to the SOR that the court 
found the accusers to be falsifying evidence in court and ordered not to have any contact with Applicant for two years.  
 
19
 Government Exhibit 8 (Letter, dated January 25, 2011) and Certificate of Completion, dated July 13, 
2006). 
 
20
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 2. There are no police records or court records to 
support the allegations. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
also some evidence that he may have possessed and used cocaine and the 
hallucinogenic mushroom psilocin, but he has denied using either substance and 
contended they belonged to his roommates.22 Upon being admitted to the hospital for a 
possible overdose on June 1, 2003, a toxicology screen was run and it was positive for 
the presence of opiates and marijuana.23  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.d.): On November 21, 2005, when Applicant completed and submitted 
his 2005 e-QIP, he responded to a question about his drug involvement set forth 
therein. The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete information 
in response to § 24.a: Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity – (Since the age of 16 
or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled 
substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, 
morphine, codeine, heroin, etc), amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, 
methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc), or prescription 
drugs?), to which he answered “yes,” and listed marijuana use of about 20 times during 
the estimated period of November 1993 to December 1995.24 He added:25 
 
I was on heavy pain killers after separation from the Army. I quit smoking 
when I decided that I did not like what it did to me. I wanted to go to 
technical school. For a time I allowed others to use around me . . . which I 
no longer tolerate this behavior. Yet it took from me more than I could ever 
believe. To be set up by drug users and convicted of crimes I did not 
commit. 
 
He did not list his subsequently admitted use of marijuana on multiple occasions 
(two times per month) between April and June 2003.26 Applicant denied intentionally 
omitting the true extent as to frequency and period of his marijuana abuse.27  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.e.): The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete 
information in response to § 23d: Your Police Record – (Have you ever been charged 
with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?), to which he answered 
“yes,” and listed “3 counts possession” occurring in May 2003.28 He added:29 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
21
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 4, at 5-7. 
 
22
 Government Exhibit 10 (Police Records, various dates, related to an incident occurring on June 1, 2003); 
Tr. at 81. 
 
23
 Government Exhibit 6 (Hospital Records, various dates, related to an incident occurring on June 1, 2003). 
 
24
 Government Exhibit 14 (2005 SF 86, dated November 21, 2005), at 30-31. 
 
25
 Government Exhibit 14 (2005 SF 86, dated November 21, 2005), at 30-31. 
 
26
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
27
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 4. 
 
28
 Government Exhibit 14, supra note 24, at 29-30. 
 
29
 Government Exhibit 14, supra note 24, at 30. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
 
I was in the hospital at the time & my roommates threw a party and hid 
their illegal substances in my locked room where they were found by 
police. I sought to move out of the residence after this occurred. 
 
He did not list that in August 2003, he was charged with (1) possession of a 
controlled substance, a felony; (2) possession of a controlled substance, a felony; (3) 
possession of a controlled substance, a felony; and (4) possession of marijuana, a 
misdemeanor; or that in January 2005, the first three counts were each amended to 
possession of a schedule III drug, a misdemeanor. He also conveyed the false 
impression that he was already in the hospital when the incident took place. Applicant 
denied intentionally omitting any of the charges and contended charge (4) was not drug-
related and was dismissed in court.30 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.f.): The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete 
information in response to § 23f: Your Police Record – (In the last 7 years, have you 
been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to 
a, b, c, d, or e above? (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150 unless the violation was 
alcohol or drug related), to which he answered “no.” He added that in about November 
2003, he was charged with “statutory burglary (being in a dwelling or residence past the 
hour of 9:30 PM without owner/resident permission).”31 
 
While he did not specifically list that in January 2004, he was charged with (1) 
breaking and entering, a felony; (2) attempted malicious wounding, a felony; (3) grand 
larceny, a felony; (4) trespassing, a misdemeanor; (5) assault and battery, a 
misdemeanor; and (6) assault and battery, a misdemeanor; or that in April 2004, 
charges (2) through (4) and (6) were nolle prossed, he did furnish substantial details to 
indicate the general nature of the charges. Applicant denied intentionally omitting any of 
the charges and contended he answered yes to an earlier version of the question, and 
must have mistakenly mixed up his dates and left out several details.32 The SOR also 
alleged that Applicant had deliberately omitted the offenses referred to in SOR ¶¶ 1.d. 
(the assault and battery – family member charge of June 2006) and 1.e. (the reckless 
driving charge of May 2008). Neither of those two incidents had yet occurred in 
November 2005, so Applicant could not have deliberately omitted them.  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.a.): On February 11, 2010, when Applicant completed and submitted 
his 2010 SF 86, he responded to a question about his police record set forth therein. 
The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete information in 
response to §22a: Police Record – (Have you been issued a summons, citation, or 
ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against you; are you on trial or awaiting 
a trial on criminal charges; or are you currently awaiting sentencing for a criminal 
offense?), to which he answered “yes,” and listed two such incidents: the statutory 
                                                          
30
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 4. 
 
31
 Government Exhibit 14, supra note 24, at 29-30. 
 
32
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 5. 
 
7 
                                      
 
burglary charge of approximately November 2003 and the “3 counts possession” of May 
2003.33 
 
He did not specifically list the details of the January 2004 charges set forth in 
SOR ¶ 1.c., and the offenses referred to in SOR ¶¶ 1.d. (the assault and battery – family 
member charge of June 2006) and 1.e. (the reckless driving charge of May 2008). 
Applicant denied intentionally omitting those charges and claimed he misunderstood 
that the reckless driving charge was a civil or traffic violation and not a criminal offense, 
and that he simply miscounted the period between the January 2004 charges and the 
date he completed the SF 86.34  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.): The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete 
information on his February 11, 2010 SF 86 in response to § 22e: Police Record – 
(Have you EVER been charged with any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?), to 
which he answered “yes,” and furnished the same response, including his commentary 
regarding being in the hospital, he gave in response to the inquiry in §22a:  the statutory 
burglary charge of approximately November 2003 and the “3 counts possession” of May 
2003.35  
  
He did not specifically list that in August 2003, he was charged with (1) 
possession of a controlled substance, a felony; (2) possession of a controlled 
substance, a felony; (3) possession of a controlled substance, a felony; and (4) 
possession of marijuana, a misdemeanor; or that in January 2005, the first three counts 
were each amended to possession of a schedule III drug, a misdemeanor. He also 
conveyed the false impression that he was already in the hospital when the incident 
took place. Applicant denied intentionally omitting any of the charges and contended 
charge (4) was not drug-related and was dismissed in court.36 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.c.): The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete 
information complete information on his February 11, 2010 SF 86 in response to § 23a: 
Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity – (In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any 
controlled substance, for example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, 
etc.), narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants (amphetamines, 
speed, crystal methamphetamine, Ecstacy, ketamine, etc.), depressants (barbiturates, 
methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants 
(toluene, amyl nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs(including painkillers)? Use of a 
controlled substance includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experimenting 
with or otherwise consuming any controlled substance.) Applicant answered “no,” but 
                                                          
33
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 37-38. 
 
34
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 2-3. 
 
35
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 37-38. 
 
36
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 4. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
listed marijuana use of about 20 times during the estimated period of November 1993 to 
December 1995.37 He added:38 
 
I was on heavy pain killers after separation from the Army. I quit smoking 
when I decided that I did not like what it did to me. I wanted to go to 
technical school. For a time I allowed others to use around me . . . which I 
no longer tolerate this behavior. Yet it took from me more than I could ever 
believe. To be set up by drug users and convicted of crimes I did not 
commit. I have completed several treatment programs including ASAP 
and ADS programs and have not involved myself in these activities any 
further since separating myself from such individuals. 
 
He did not list his subsequently admitted use of marijuana on multiple occasions (two 
times per month) between April and June 2003.39 Applicant denied intentionally omitting 
the true extent as to frequency and period of his marijuana abuse, and opined that he 
must have mixed up his dates and times “due to the time constraints and a lack of 
understanding of the information [he] was attempting to provide.”40  
 
Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in March 2010.41 The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately provided 
false information pertaining to his substance abuse: that he stated he had no problems 
with prescription drugs since 1992 , whereas in truth, he had overdosed on prescription 
medication in June 2003, leading to a hospitalization (SOR ¶ 2.g); that he stated he had 
been on an out-of-state business trip when police searched his room and found illegal 
drugs placed there by his roommates without his knowledge, whereas in truth, the 
police discovered the drugs in his room upon arriving at the scene while responding to 
his overdose (SOR ¶ 2.h); and that he stated he had stopped using marijuana in the 
early 1990’s, whereas in truth, he had continued to use marijuana until at least June 
2003 (SOR ¶ 2.i).  
 
Applicant denied intentionally providing false information during his OPM 
interview, and attributed his responses in part to a dispute of the developed facts 
regarding the actions and statements of his roommates, the timeline of the police 
search of his room, and “just another mistake in the presentation of the information [he] 
submitted.”42 
 
                                                          
37
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 39. 
 
38
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 39. 
 
39
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 4, at 6. 
 
40
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 4. 
 
41
 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 1, 2010), attached to Applicant’s Answers 
to Interrogatories, supra note 3. 
 
42
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 15, at 5-6. 
 
9 
                                      
 
Upon being admitted to the hospital in June 2003, Applicant was interviewed and 
treated over a two-day period. The attending physician noted that Applicant “was 
extremely vague and did not give any straight answers to any of a number of very 
straightforward questions. His story made no sense and it did not hang together.”43 It 
was also noted that Applicant “was very evasive and did not answer most of the 
questions directly. He was also very circumstantial.”44 Applicant denied any suicide 
attempt (despite the presence of several notes to his mother and friends in which he 
said “good-bye”),45 and indicated (SOR ¶ 2.j.) that he had simply taken too many 
Tylenol No. 3 (acetaminophen and codeine) during the day because of nervous tension 
and a headache.46 He denied to the attending emergency room registered nurse taking 
any other drugs.47 He later acknowledged periodically taking Vicodin which was 
prescribed for him in 1992 for injuries sustained while in the Army in the Gulf War.48 In 
reality, he was in the Army National Guard during the Gulf War and had never served 
overseas: the injuries were sustained during training exercises in Arkansas and North 
Carolina.49  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
As noted above, very little is known about Applicant’s employment activities 
between 1993 and 2002. He subsequently held a variety of positions with different 
organizations, and also went through a lengthy period of unemployment. It appears 
there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about November 2009, when 
he first became unemployed. He finally found a job in September 2011. He assumed his 
present position in January 2012. With no steady income other than periodic temporary 
assignments, Applicant’s financial situation deteriorated. Accounts became delinquent 
and were placed for collection, charged off, or became judgments against him.50 
 
The SOR identified six delinquent accounts in collection, charged off, or in a 
judgment status, in the total amount of approximately $16,696, as reflected by two credit 
reports. Those accounts listed in the SOR, and their respective current status, 
according to the evidence, are properly consolidated and categorized, as follows: those 
which are not resolved, and those which have been resolved. 
                                                          
 
43
 Government Exhibit 6, supra note 23, at 19. 
 
44
 Government Exhibit 6, supra note 23, at 24. 
 
45
 Government Exhibit 6, supra note 23, at 19. 
 
46
 Government Exhibit 6, supra note 23, at 19. During his admission to the emergency room, Applicant also 
stated he had taken 14 Tylenol tablets. See id. at 27. 
 
47
 Government Exhibit 6, supra note 23, at 9. 
 
48
 Government Exhibit 6, supra note 23, at 20. 
 
49
 Tr. at 94-95. 
 
50
 Government Exhibit 13 (Equifax credit report, dated August 12, 2011); Government Exhibit 12 (Equifax 
credit report, dated November 25, 2011). 
 
10 
                                      
 
 
Among those accounts which have not been resolved are the following: There is 
a mobile telephone account, in the amount of $260 (SOR ¶ 3.a.), that was placed for 
collection and, as of this date, remains unpaid; there is a cable TV account, in the 
amount of $193 (SOR ¶ 3.b.), that was placed for collection, and as of this date, 
remains unpaid; there is a medical account, in the amount of $708 (SOR ¶ 3.c.), that 
was placed for collection, and as of this date, remains unpaid; there is a judgment with 
an unspecified creditor, in the amount of $6,646 (SOR ¶ 3.d.), that, as of this date, 
remains unpaid; there is a bank credit card account, in the amount of $8,652 (SOR ¶ 
3.e.), that was placed for collection, and as of this date, remains unpaid; and there is an 
unspecified type of account, in the amount of $237 (SOR ¶ 3.f.), that was placed for 
collection, and as of this date, remains unpaid. Although Applicant contended he 
contacted each of the creditors to make them aware of his situation, promised to start 
making payments as soon as he found gainful employment,51 and made payment 
arrangements with them,52 he had not made any payments to his creditors as of the 
date of the hearing because he was unable to do so because of insufficient funds.53  He 
has offered no documentary evidence to support his claim that he had contacted his 
creditors. None of the accounts have been resolved.  
 
It is unclear what Applicant’s net monthly income might be. His monthly 
expenses are unspecified, and the record is silent as to whether or not he has a monthly 
remainder available for discretionary spending. Likewise, there is no indication that 
Applicant has ever received any financial or debt management counseling. 
 
Character References 
 
Applicant has been described by friends as honest, trustworthy, faithful, 
kindhearted, and loyal.54 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”55 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
                                                          
51
 Tr. at 84, 86. 
 
52
 Tr. at 86. 
 
53
 Tr. at 86-87. 
 
54
 Tr. at 48-64. 
 
55
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”56   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”57 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.58  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”59 
                                                          
56
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
57
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
58
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
59
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
12 
                                      
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”60 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 
30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. As noted above, Applicant was convicted of a variety of criminal counts in 
2003, 2004, 2005, and 2008, and in 2004 was sentenced to ten years in prison (nine 
years suspended) on charge (1), one year in prison (one year suspended) on charge 
(5), and placed on probation for two years. AG ¶¶ 31(a) has been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Aso much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Similarly, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply where “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation: including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. Applicant’s criminal history is both varied and 
frequent, with four overall convictions during a five-year period. However, his most 
recent serious conviction occurred in 2004 when he was convicted of statutory burglary 
with intent to commit a felony and assault and battery, and was sentenced to ten years 
in prison (nine years suspended) on one charge and one year in prison (one year 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
60
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
suspended) on the other charge. Applicant spent ten months in the city detention 
facility, with eight of those months in a work-release program. He successfully 
completed his two year period of probation as well as drug treatment. A 2006 assault 
and battery – family member charge was dismissed. His most recent scrape with the 
authorities occurred in 2008, when he was charged with reckless driving, a 
misdemeanor. He has avoided any subsequent participation in any criminal activity. 
Because his former relationships with his substance-abusing roommates and former 
girlfriends have ceased, and he is now in a lengthy committed positive relationship, his 
former criminal behavior is unlikely to recur and no longer casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. The 
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” may raise security concerns under AG ¶ 16(a). Similarly, under AG ¶ 
16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts 
to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other 
official government representative,” may raise security concerns. Also, under AG ¶ 
16(e), “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in 
activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community 
standing . . .” may raise security concerns.  
 
Applicant’s omissions in his responses to inquiries during his emergency 
hospitalization in 2003, in the 2005 SF 86, the 2010 SF 86, and during his 2010 OPM 
interview, of information pertaining to his criminal conduct, substance abuse, and police 
record, provide sufficient evidence to examine if Applicant’s answers and comments 
were deliberate falsifications pertaining to critical information, as alleged in the SOR, or 
were the result of confusion or misunderstanding on his part. I had ample opportunity to 
evaluate the demeanor of Applicant, observe his manner and deportment, appraise the 
way in which he responded to questions, assess his candor or evasiveness, read his 
statements, and listen to his testimony. Applicant’s explanations regarding those 
answers and comments brought to mind the observations made by his attending 
 
14 
                                      
 
hospital physician: Applicant was extremely vague and did not give any straight 
answers to several very straightforward questions; his story made no sense and it did 
not hang together; and he was evasive and did not answer many questions directly. 
Furthermore, his explanations are, in several instances, inconsistent. While some of 
Applicant’s responses furnished meaningful information, in several instances the 
responses were incomplete. Nevertheless, where he has done so, I have given him 
credit for supplying the truthful, though incomplete, information, as he is not trained in 
the specifics of the legal terminology used in identifying each charge against him. AG ¶¶ 
16(a), 16(b), and 16(e) have been established.61  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. Under AG ¶ 17(c), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment.” Also, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if “the individual has acknowledged the 
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps 
to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” In 
addition, when “association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations,” AG ¶ 
17(g) may apply. 
 
Applicant’s initial less-than-full and complete responses as well as his 
subsequent and continuing inconsistencies with regard to his criminal history and 
substance abuse history are troubling. Despite his explanations used to describe his 
earlier statements and comments, the full truth has yet to emerge. Applicant has 
acknowledged some of his criminal behavior and some of his substance abuse. He has 
completed some court-mandated counseling to change his behavior and taken other 
positive steps to alleviate some of the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
his untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior. He has ceased his 
association with his substance-abusing roommates, and entered into a long-term 
positive relationship. Nevertheless, because of Applicant’s inability to be more forthright 
about his past, and until the passage of a longer period of positive activity, such 
behavior is likely to recur. Despite the length of the period since he completed his 
security clearance applications and his interviews, in light of some continuing 
                                                          
61
 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally 
permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case 
under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
15 
                                      
 
inconsistencies, there is some doubt as to Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(g) partially apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. As noted above, it appears there was nothing unusual about 
Applicant’s finances until about November 2009, when he first became unemployed, 
and remained unemployed until September 2011. With no steady income, his financial 
situation deteriorated. Accounts became delinquent and were placed for collection, 
charged off, or became judgments against him. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@62 Also, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply where “the individual has a reasonable 
                                                          
62
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
 
16 
                                      
 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. Applicant’s initial financial 
problems commenced in 2009, and continue unchanged as of this day.  He joined his 
current employer in January 2012. While he has attributed his financial difficulties in 
general terms to insufficient funds, he never fully described why he could not maintain 
his monthly payments or commence them once he obtained new employment. In the 
absence of more specific explanations, and considering his minimal attention to his 
accounts, his financial problems are likely to continue and recur. The combination of 
factors casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.63 
Applicant has not received any financial counseling and there are no indications that his 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. Other than purportedly 
contacting his creditors, he has not initiated a good-faith effort to repay his creditors or 
otherwise resolve his debts. Also, there has been no showing that Applicant has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of any of his past-due debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because there was one condition beyond Applicant’s 
control that may have had a negative impact on his financial situation. He was 
unemployed from November 2009 until September 2011. The basic question is whether 
or not Applicant eventually acted responsibly to address the debts that resulted. Based 
on the evidence supported by documentation, the answer is no. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
63
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
17 
                                      
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His most 
recent criminal conduct occurred in 2008 when he was convicted of reckless driving. 
There has been no recurrence of such conduct since that time. He stopped his 
substance abuse in 2003, and has abstained since then. He is now in a committed 
positive long-term relationship. He has complied with the court-imposed sentences. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant was convicted of a variety of criminal counts in 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2008, 
and in 2004 was sentenced to ten years in prison (nine years suspended) on charge (1), 
one year in prison (one year suspended) on charge (5), and placed on probation for two 
years. When afforded the opportunity to describe his criminal conduct and substance 
abuse history to hospital personnel, an OPM investigator, and on two security clearance 
applications, he was less than candid or truthful. In too many instances, both before and 
during his hearing, Applicant was vague and failed to provide clear answers to a 
number of very straightforward questions; and he was evasive and did not answer the 
questions accurately, honestly, fully, or directly. His explanations are frequently 
inconsistent. Applicant has failed to make meaningful efforts towards resolving his 
delinquent debts.  I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality 
of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.64 See AG 
¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
Applicant has not shown a meaningful track record of debt repayment. The 
Appeal Board has addressed this key element in the whole-person analysis in financial 
cases stating:65 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “ . . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
                                                          
64
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
65
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
18 
                                      
 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant did not make any payments to his SOR creditors, even though three of 
his SOR debts are less than $300 each. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his criminal conduct, but failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from his personal conduct and financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.j:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 3.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 
19 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
