 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10677 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 26, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 7, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 14, 2012. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 22, 2012. I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled on April 24, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, and 
they were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through G, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held 
open until May 1, 2012, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. 
They were marked as AE H and I.1 Department Counsel indicated he had no objection. 
His memorandum is marked as Hearing Exhibit II. The exhibits were admitted into 
evidence and the record closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 2, 
2012.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel withdrew SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l. Department Counsel 
submitted Hearing Exhibit I at the hearing to show he had forwarded GE 1 through 5 to 
Applicant. Applicant remembered receiving some exhibits, but could not specifically 
remember if he received GE 4 and 5. He did not object to Department Counsel offering 
them into evidence.2  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations except ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.g and 1.m. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He has an associate’s degree. He served in the Navy 
from 1986 to 2009, and retired honorably in the pay grade E-7.3 He has six biological 
children ranging in age from 27 to 6. He married in 1995, separated in 1997, and 
divorced in 2002. He has two children from the marriage, ages 20 and 11. He remarried 
in 2003. His wife has two children. The oldest is 19 years old and in the military. The 
other is 16 years old and lives with Applicant and his wife. Applicant has twin sons from 
his current marriage who are six years old. He also has a son who is 18 years old from 
a previous relationship and a daughter who is 27 years old from a previous relationship. 
He has held a Top Secret security clearance for 24 years.4  
 
 Applicant receives approximately $2,340 a month in military retirement pay. He 
earns approximately $3,500 a month from his job. His wife did not work for several 
years when their twins were younger, but went back to work about two to three years 
ago. She earns about $2,200 a month.5  
 
                                                          
1
 AE H consists of 14 pages. AE I consists of one page.  
 
2
 Tr. 10-14, 22-25, 100. 
 
3
 AE I. 
 
4
 Tr. 8, 46-49. 
 
5
 Tr. 32; 43, 73, 77; Answer to SOR; GE 3; AE E. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s wages are being garnished for child support from State A in the 
amount of $735 for his children with his first wife. State B is garnishing his wages in the 
amount of $563 for his son from a previous relationship. He has a third child support 
garnishment for $111, but thinks this is a reserve fund in the event his account goes in 
arrears. He indicated he is investigating this garnishment. Applicant stated the only time 
he failed to meet the garnishment amounts was when he retired from the Navy and his 
pay was in transition. Applicant provided documentation to show he is in good standing 
with his child support payments with States A and B (SOR ¶ 1.d ($709)). He plans to 
continue to pay child support until his children have completed college.6 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to his child support payments and his 
difficulty in selling his condominium (condo) when he received orders to transfer with the 
Navy. In 2003, Applicant purchased a condo. Part of the purchase agreement was the 
requirement that he pay homeowner association dues. He deployed at different times 
after he purchased the condo. In 2006, he received orders to transfer. He could not sell 
the condo. His nephew lived in the condo in 2007 for about eight or nine months and 
paid rent. Applicant was still responsible for paying the homeowner association dues. 
He failed to pay them from approximately 2006 on. His nephew moved out of the condo 
and failed to pay the final electric bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e ($256). Applicant stated his 
nephew is going to pay the bill soon, but it has not yet been resolved. Applicant owes 
approximately $29,000 (SOR ¶ 1.c) on a defaulted second mortgage loan on the condo. 
In 2006, after he transferred, he purchased another house. Applicant stated he intends 
to pay these debts in the future, but is unable to do so presently. He also owes a 
judgment for the homeowner association dues (SOR ¶ 1.j ($7,053)). That debt is not 
paid.7 
 
 The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a ($17,056) is being paid through a garnishment that 
withdraws 25% of Applicant’s pay each paycheck. He believes the garnishment started 
in September 2011. He pays approximately $360 twice a month. This judgment is for 
two credit card debts that were consolidated. Included in the judgment are attorney’s 
fees incurred by the creditor. Applicant made inconsistent payments toward the debts 
prior to leaving the military. After the judgment was entered, Applicant stated that he 
missed a couple of payments, and the court ordered the garnishment. The balance of 
the judgment has been reduced through the garnishment payments.8 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($2,113) is for a loan on a car Applicant’s wife purchased 
and he cosigned in 2004 or 2005. She drove the car to another state, and it broke down. 
He sent her money to have it fixed and to pay the note on the car. She did not pay the 
note. Applicant stated his wife said she would pay it. The debt is not resolved.9 
                                                          
6
 Tr. 29-30, 49-52, 64-65; AE B, C, H. 
 
7
 Tr. 28, 30-31, 33-34, 62, 65-66, 70. 
 
8
 Tr. 52-60; Answer to SOR; AE G. 
 
9
 Tr. 28, 60-62. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($466) is a tax lien. Applicant believes it is for property tax 
on the condo. He stated he paid the tax through his mortgage. No supporting 
documents were provided. The debt is unresolved.10  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($725) is for a telephone account. Applicant did not 
recognize the account and stated it could be that a family member opened the account. 
He thought he had sent the creditor a letter when he purchased his house in 2006. The 
debt is unresolved.11 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($166) is for a mail order compact disk subscription. 
Applicant stated he never received the disks, but acknowledged they could have been 
received while he was deployed. He stated he is willing to resolve this debt, but has not 
done so.12  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($5,700) is a federal tax debt for tax year 2010. Applicant 
failed to pay his federal taxes. The amount owed was deducted from his 2011 tax 
refund. Applicant explained that he refinanced his current home so he could pay this 
debt. The debt is resolved.13 
 
 Applicant disputes the telephone debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($1,205). He thinks his 
daughter used his name to open an account with the creditor. He reported to the 
creditor that the account was not his. He believes the account is ten years old and he 
has told his daughter to pay it, but she has not. He did not provide supporting 
documents. The debt is unresolved.14 
 
 Applicant stated he does not qualify to file for bankruptcy because he earns too 
much money. He took a loan against his 401k pension account in the amount of 
approximately $2,200. He believes he has about $1,800 left to repay. He contacted a 
law firm that addresses debts. He had the law firm dispute two debts. One debt was the 
electric bill that his nephew failed to pay, and the other was a credit card debt. The latter 
was one of the allegations withdrawn by the Government. Applicant stated he has not 
received financial counseling. He and his wife keep their money separate and have 
separate budgets. Applicant is current on his monthly bills. He owes approximately 
$3,500 to $4,500 on a credit card and makes monthly payments of $140. He also has 
another credit card with a balance of approximately $1,700 that he pays $100 monthly. 
                                                          
10
 Tr. 31, 66-69. 
 
11
 Tr. 31, 69-70. 
 
12
 Tr. 31, 71. 
 
13
 Tr. 32; 71-73; GE 3; AE F. 
 
14
 Tr. 40-43. 
 
 
5 
 
 
He has approximately $20 in savings and about $3,000 to $4,000 in his 401k pension 
account.15 
 
 Applicant intends to pay his debts but does not have the money. He intends to 
pay the small bills first. He stated he has a budget that he abides by. He indicated that 
his twin sons are now in school so their day care expenses have decreased, although 
they will have to spend extra money for care during the summer vacation months. He 
stated once his children graduate from college, he will have more money to pay his 
debts.16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
15
 Tr. 74-76, 80-88, 91-92. 
 
16
 Tr. 45, 74, 85. 
 
6 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has eight debts totaling approximately $40,984 that are delinquent and 
unresolved. He has a judgment that is being paid through garnishment. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
7 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of action to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant is paying a judgment through garnishment. His income tax refund was 
diverted to pay for a past year’s owed taxes. He has not paid or resolved the remaining 
debts. His behavior is recent and the facts do not support that the circumstances are 
unlikely to recur. I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because his conduct was frequent 
and casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to a time when he was in the Navy and 
received orders to transfer. He could not sell his condo. This was a circumstance 
beyond his control. He also attributes his financial problems to his child support 
obligations. His obligations to support his children are within his control. Applicant 
transferred in 2006. He purchased another house. It has been six years since he 
moved. He has not provided evidence to show he has acted responsibly in resolving 
this debt or his other delinquent debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. He is paying a judgment through 
garnishment. His income tax refund was diverted to pay for a past delinquent tax debt. 
These actions are not good-faith efforts to pay his debts. He has not made 
arrangements to pay or otherwise resolve his other delinquent debts. There are no clear 
indications his financial problems are being resolved. He is hoping he will be able to 
resolve his financial issues when his children graduate from college. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) do not apply. 
 
 Applicant disputes he owes certain debts. He stated different family members 
owe accounts that were opened in his name. Through the law firm he hired, he disputed 
the electric bill. However, he admitted that the debt belonged to him, and he is waiting 
for his nephew to pay it. He did not provide evidence to substantiate his dispute. I find 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
retired from the Navy. He served honorably for 23 years. In 2006, his military duties 
required he transfer duty stations. He was unable to sell his condo at the time and this 
caused financial problems. However, he was able to purchase a new home at his new 
duty station. Applicant is now retired from the military and receiving retired pay. He has 
a civilian job. His wife is now working. He has a second mortgage loan that he has not 
paid. He failed to pay other obligations associated with the condo and has failed to pay 
other bills that are delinquent. His wages are being garnished for child support 
obligations and a judgment. He did not pay his income taxes in 2010 and his 2011 
refund was diverted and applied to the debt. Applicant has shown minimal initiative in 
addressing his delinquent debts. He stated he intends to pay his delinquent debts in the 
future. He anticipated having more expendable income after his children graduate from 
college. The only debt being paid is the judgment through garnishment. He indicated he 
does not have the money to pay the other delinquent debts at this time.  
 
I am not convinced that Applicant is proactively addressing his financial 
problems. It has been six years since he moved. He may have limited resources to pay 
all of his delinquent debts at this time. He is not required to resolve each and every debt 
alleged in the SOR. However, he must establish that he has a realistic plan to resolve 
his financial problems and has taken significant actions to implement the plan. I am not 
convinced Applicant has such a plan. I find he has failed to meet his burden of 
persuasion, thereby raising questions about his judgment and reliability. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
 
9 
 
 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the Financial Considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph   1.m:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
