 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case: 11-06811 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns raised under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On February 24, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 3, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the guideline for Financial Considerations. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 13, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing. On February 14, 2012, DOHA assigned the case to me. On March 23, 
 
2 
 
 
2012, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for April 19, 2012. The case 
proceeded as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through C into evidence without objection. The record remained open until May 14, 
2012, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript on April 26, 2012. Applicant timely submitted a document that I 
marked as AE D and admitted into the record without objection.                                                        
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegation contained in the SOR. 
His admission is incorporated into the findings of fact herein.  
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and married. He and his wife have two children, ages 
eight and ten. In 1994 he earned a bachelor’s degree in marketing and sales. After 
graduating from college, he worked in sales for private companies. In 2005 he began 
working as a sales manager for a mid-market region with his current employer. (Tr. 19.)   
 
 In 2008 or 2009, Applicant and his wife purchased a piece of property in another 
state, intending to build a home and eventually move there. (Tr. 21.) The house was 
completed about a year and a half later. His mortgage was $579,000. (Tr. 23.) Due to 
changes in the location of his employment, he decided to sell the house. He placed it on 
the market with a purchase price of $640,000. After months of being on the market 
without a response, he lowered the price and received an offer for $525,000 sometime 
in 2010. (Tr. 24.) He submitted the offer to his mortgagor and requested a short sale. 
The bank denied the request and performed an appraisal. It determined that the house 
was worth more money. (Tr. 25.) He again listed the house for $640,000. After six 
months without an acceptable offer, the price was lowered to $500,000. (Tr. 26.) In 
December 2011 he received another offer. On May 7, 2012, the house sold for 
$425,000 via a short sale. (Exs. C, D.)   
 
 Applicant stopped making mortgage payments in 2010 after the mortgagor 
rejected the first offer of $525,000 because a representative from his mortgagor told him 
they could not help him until he was deficient on his mortgage. (Tr. 25, 31.) His 
deficiency was $65,607 when the SOR issued. He noted that the depressed real estate  
market affected his ability to sell his home. (Tr. 24.) ] 
 
 Applicant understands that there may be taxes due as a result of the short sale. 
He earned about $130,000 last year, and his wife earned over $100,000. He has money 
available to pay any taxes due as a consequence of the sale. (Tr. 29-30, 32, 36.) He 
stated that the house is the only delinquency on his financial record. (Tr. 20.) Credit 
bureau reports (CBR) from March 2011 and January 2012 confirm that. (GE 2 and 3.)  
   
  Applicant testified candidly and credibly. He and his wife own the home that they 
reside in. He is current on his mortgage payments. (Tr. 31.) He submitted his most 
recent performance evaluation. His supervisor complimented him for his productivity. 
 
3 
 
 
His supervisor stated that Applicant is a “positive professional who works with integrity.” 
(Ex. A.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
The security concerns pertaining to Financial Considerations are set out in AG ¶ 
18: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
Applicant was unable to resolve a delinquent mortgage debt until May 2012 when 
he sold his house. The evidence raised the above disqualification. 
After the Government raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concern under 
this guideline. AG ¶ 20 includes two conditions that could mitigate the security concern 
arising under this guideline: 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
AG ¶ 20 (b) applies. When Applicant placed his house on the market in 2010, the 
housing market was depressed. As a consequence, he had difficulty selling his house. 
That situation and a change in his employment situation were unforeseen 
circumstances, beyond his control. He followed his mortgagor’s direction for managing 
the sale, demonstrating responsible behavior. On May 7, 2012, the house sold, 
indicating that the problem is resolved.  AG ¶ 20 (c) has some application.   
 
 
5 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent and 
responsible 41-year-old man, who encountered difficulties selling his home in the 
current real estate market. The initial offer on his property for $525,000 did not satisfy 
his mortgagor, which eventually resulted in its recent short sale for $425,000. 
Applicant’s income and savings will allow him to pay any outstanding taxes related to 
his mortgage. There is no other derogatory information in the file.  The likelihood of a 
recurrence is minimal, given his experience with the real estate market. He has 
removed any potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress, and is no longer at 
any risk for having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
  
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
