 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02543 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. DOHA took that action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 28, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and initially requested a 
decision without a hearing. On January 20, 2012, she requested a hearing. The case 
was assigned to me on February 28, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 
8, 2012, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on March 29, 2012. Department 
 
2 
 
Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) 1. 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through F that were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was left open until May 10, 2012, for Applicant to 
submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted AE G through N that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum 
forwarding the post-hearing exhibits was marked as HE 2. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on April 6, 2012.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
At the hearing, Applicant indicated that she was ready to proceed and 
affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer for about 13 years. She graduated from high school in 1991 and 
earned an associate’s degree in business in 2011. She expects to earn her bachelor’s 
degree in about 10 months. She has been married twice. Her first marriage was from 
June 1991 to August 2004 and ended by divorce. She married her current husband in 
August 2005. She has two daughters; ages 2 and 19. Her oldest daughter is attending 
college. Applicant has held a security clearance since about 2008 without incident.2  
 
 The SOR alleged three delinquent debts totaling about $24,207. Two of those 
debts are past-due mortgage loans with balances totaling $165,000. In her answer, 
Applicant denied a medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) and admitted the two past-due mortgage 
loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c). Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
Substantial evidence of the alleged debts is contained in credit reports dated January 
19, 2011, and January 17, 2012.3 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial difficulties to a combination of factors. These 
include raising costs of an insurance premium, added expenses resulting from the birth 
of her youngest child, failure to receive an anticipated pay raise at work, and 
fluctuations in her husband’s income. Her youngest child was born in March 2010. At 
that time, she was living just within her means and, when her insurance premiums went 
up approximately $200 per month, she was unable to keep up with the payments. 
Additionally, while she was on maternity leave in April 2010, her company issued pay 
raises and she did not receive one. She used up her savings paying the mortgage. In 
early 2010, she asked the mortgage holder for a loan modification. Eventually, she 
decided to stop paying the mortgages because she was short “a couple of hundred 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6, 13-14. 
2 Tr. 7-9, 31-35, 70; GE 1, 5. 
 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 4, 5, 6.  
 
 
3 
 
dollars.” She stated that she was unaware of the impact that the delinquent debts would 
have on her security clearance. At that time, she did not know how to resolve this 
situation and testified, “So I just stood by and waited for a long time.” In late 2011, she 
learned that she could file Chapter 13 bankruptcy.4 
 
 Applicant stated that her husband worked at a manufacturing plant. Work 
slowdowns would occur whenever the plant did not receive enough work orders. During 
the plant slowdowns, the employees were not paid for hours they did not work even 
though they were not laid off. She noted that, on occasion, her husband would work 
only 24 or 32 hours per week for several months. For example, his working hours were 
reduced from November 2007 to March 2008. These work slowdowns happened on 
several occasions and resulted in a reduction of their income. She also noted her 
husband has clinical depression and has been on antidepressants. When asked if her 
husband tried to obtain a second part-time job, she stated that he had not done so and 
indicated that he has a difficult time stepping out of his “comfort zone.”5 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a medical debt for $207 that was placed for collection in 
November 2006. Applicant stated that she never received a bill from a hospital or 
medical facility for this debt. When she received calls from the collection agency, they 
could not identify the original creditor. In the absence of further information verifying this 
debt was hers, she refused to pay it. She stated that she has disputed this debt on the 
telephone and through her attorney’s office. She has not had any contact with the 
collection agency in four or five years. The credit reports admitted into evidence do not 
reflect that she disputed this debt. Moreover, she did not provide any documentation 
showing that she has a legitimate basis for disputing this debt.6 
 
 Applicant purchased a home with her first husband in 1991. She obtained the 
home in their divorce. In about 2006, the home was refinanced and placed solely in her 
name. During the refinancing, approximately $25,000 in equity was taken out of the 
home to purchase orthodontics for her daughter and pay off her current husband’s 
vehicle and a credit card debt that he had before their marriage. As a result of the 
refinancing, the home had two mortgages. She stated that she missed her first 
mortgage payments in April 2010. As of January 2012, the primary mortgage (SOR ¶ 
1.b) had a balance of $105,883 and was $21,000 past due. This was a 30-year 
conventional mortgage with a monthly payment of $1,095. A credit report indicated this 
mortgage was in a foreclosure status. The second mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.c) had a balance 
of $60,300 and was $7,000 past due. It was a 10-year conventional mortgage with a 
monthly payment of $376. She stated the second mortgage was an interest-only 
                                                          
4 Tr. 16, 27-31, 40-43, 46-57; GE 5; AE B, C, D. In about 2007 or 2008, Applicant encountered 
financial difficulties and began withdrawing money from her 401k account to make mortgage payments. 
She withdrew about $1,500 from that account for those payments. She is still making payments to 
reimburse her 401k account and owes about $800. She also stopped receiving child support ($400 per 
month) about one year ago when her oldest daughter turned 18.  
 
5 Tr. 29-31, 47-48, 53-54; AE D, G. 
 
6 Tr. 35-37; GE 1, 4, 5, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
mortgage. At the time of the hearing, she was still residing in the home. The home was 
recently appraised to be worth about a third of what she owes on the mortgages.7 
 
 During an interview with an Office of Personnel Management investigator on 
February 1, 2011, Applicant stated that she quit making the mortgage payment to 
qualify for a loan modification. In December 2010, she was notified that the loan 
modification for her first mortgage was approved. Under the loan modification, the new 
payment on the first mortgage would be $777. The first payment under the loan 
modification was due in February 2011. In that interview, she also stated that she had 
not decided whether to accept the loan modification or just “walk away” from the home 
and begin renting. At the hearing, she indicated that she decided not to accept the loan 
modification because it did not apply to the second mortgage. Under the loan 
modification, she would have been paying $1,153 per month for both mortgages, which 
was about $300 less than her previous monthly payments. In the interview, she 
reportedly acknowledged that she could make credit card payment adjustments that 
would permit her to have $1,300 available for either mortgage payments or rent. In 
responding to interrogatories, she apparently contends that she did not have sufficient 
money to make the mortgage payments. She provided a budget that did not include 
mortgage payments and reflected she had only $695 remaining after deducting other 
expenses and debt payments. When asked at the hearing whether she could have 
afforded the modified mortgage payments of $1,153, she stated, “Maybe when my next 
raise came around in 2011 I guess.”8 
 
 At the time of the hearing, Applicant had not made mortgage payments for about 
two years. When asked how that extra money was used, she indicated that she was 
paying down credit card balances. Upon further questioning, she acknowledged that the 
balances on the credit cards had not gone down during this time period. She also 
stated,  
 
Some of it is probably spent a little frivolously, you know, going out to eat. 
Certainly, buying things for the baby. She has greatly increased our 
amount that goes out for sure. My oldest daughter, she’s going to college 
and I bought her things for her birthday and Christmas and -- there’s not 
any one thing I could really spot. It’s just, you know, the price of groceries 
have gone up.9 
 
Her latest credit report reflected that she had two credit cards with balances totaling 
$8,515. 10 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 33, 37-46, 55-60, 65; GE 2, 4, 5, 6. 
 
8 Tr. 33, 37-46, 56-59; GE 5; AE B, C, D, F. 
 
9 Tr. 63. 
 
10 Tr. 58, 61-63; GE 5, 6. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant testified that she hired an attorney to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy. She 
made the first payment to the attorney in December 2011. At the time of the hearing, the 
bankruptcy petition had not yet been filed. She was still collecting paperwork for the 
petition. In her post-hearing submission, she provided a Chapter 13 Plan. Although it 
was signed, the plan did not contain a court case number and was not dated. The plan 
reflected that Applicant will pay $1,675 per month for 60 months. Those payments will 
start in June 2012. No proof was provided that that plan had been approved by the 
court.11 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as a prerequisite to filing bankruptcy. She 
also completed an online financial literacy program that included sections on budgeting 
and saving. At the hearing, Applicant indicated that she currently has a balance of about 
$13,000 in her 401k account. She also has about $57,000 in student loans that are 
currently deferred. The deferment will end six months after she graduates or drops 
below being a halftime student.12 
 
 Applicant’s latest work performance appraisal reflected that she is very 
professional and competent. Her dedication to the company and its mission was 
described as “absolutely invaluable.” She has consistently received high marks on her 
performance appraisals. A co-worker stated that she is totally committed to the highest 
ethical standards and her integrity is unquestionable. Another indicated that she was 
dependable, reliable, resourceful, and trustworthy. She is actively involved in community 
service activities.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
11 Tr. 63-69; AE E, L. 
 
12 Tr. 42, 63-64, 69-74; AE I, M, N. At the hearing, Applicant provided a monthly budget that 
reflected she and her husband had a monthly income of $4,680 and monthly expenses and debt 
payments of $4,447, which left them a remainder of $233. This budget included a mortgage payment of 
$700 and Chapter 13 payment of $400. See AE F. In light of the Chapter 13 Plan that was submitted, this 
budget appears to no longer be accurate.  
 
13 Tr. AE A, H, J, K. 
 
 
6 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
7 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated three delinquent debts totaling over $24,000. She was 
unable or unwilling to satisfy them for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and unresolved. Based on the 
evidence presented, I cannot find that her delinquent debts are unlikely to recur or that 
they do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable. 
 
Applicant’s rise in insurance premiums, her company’s decision to not give her a 
pay raise, and her husband’s pay fluctuations were conditions beyond her control that 
caused her financial problems. When these events occurred, she was apparently living 
just within her means. While an increase in insurance premiums is a foreseeable 
occurrence, she was not prepared to adjust to such a change. Additionally, to receive 
full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), the individual must also act responsibly under the 
circumstances. When she began incurring financial problems, she negotiated a loan 
modification for her first mortgage. Under the loan modification, the decrease in her 
mortgage payments was apparently greater than the increase in her insurance 
 
8 
 
premiums. Nevertheless, she declined the loan modification. She stated that she did not 
know how to resolve her financial situation and “just stood by and waited a long time.” 
For two years, she did not make her mortgage payments, but continued to reside in the 
home. She also admitted that, during this time, she “probably spent a little frivolously.” 
She could not account for how she expended the money that was not used for making 
the mortgage payments. In short, she has not established that she acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG 20(b) partially applies. 
 
Applicant has received financial counseling. In December 2011, she hired an 
attorney to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy. At the time of the hearing, the bankruptcy 
petition had not been filed. In her post-hearing submission, she provided a signed 
Chapter 13 Plan, but it did not contain a court case number and was not dated. 
Insufficient evidence has been presented to establish that the Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
has been filed. Even if it has been filed, insufficient evidence has been presented to 
mitigate the financial security concerns arising in this case. Specifically, Applicant has 
not shown that she is now able or willing to make the $1,675 monthly payments under 
the bankruptcy or will be after her student loans become due. Sufficient proof has not 
been provided to show her delinquent debts are being resolved or are under control. AG 
¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply. 
 
Applicant claims she disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. However, she did not 
supply documented proof to substantiate her claim. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
9 
 
Applicant is a hard-working employee who is well thought of by her supervisors 
and coworkers. Despite some mitigation, her financial problems remain a security 
concern. At this point, it is unknown whether her bankruptcy proceeding will resolve her 
financial problems. She has not satisfied all of her financial obligations during any 
month in the past two years. In the absence of an established track record of meeting 
her financial obligations, insufficient evidence exists to conclude that her financial 
problems are behind her. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
