1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06400 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had three collection accounts which totaled approximately $55,000. 
She has paid one account, is making payments on another, and is waiting a payoff 
amount on the third so it can be paid. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 18, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
  
 On October 14, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
March 15, 2012, I was assigned the case. On April 5, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on April 25, 2012.  
 
 At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and 
submitted exhibits A through D, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. On May 2, 
2012, additional material was received and admitted into the record, without objection, 
as Ex. E. On May 4, 2012, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted all of the factual allegations in 
the SOR with explanation. Her admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old director of an improvement team who has worked for a 
defense contractor since 2010, and seeks to maintain a security clearance. (Tr. 26) She 
has worked almost 30 years for government contractors. (Tr. 27) In her current job, she 
travels to overseas locations for periods of two weeks to three months. (Tr. 29) Last 
year, she was assigned overseas for six months. She has come under hostile fire while 
assigned overseas. (Tr. 29) During a rocket attack, a rocket exploded 15 feet from her. 
(Tr. 30)  
 
 Applicant’s co-workers, supervisors, and friends state: Applicant is a trusted 
member of the leadership team, performs her duties in an extraordinary manner, and is 
trustworthy. (Ex. A)  
 
 In 2003, Applicant separated from her husband and in March 2004, their 23-year 
marriage ended. (Ex. 2) She was unemployed for approximately a year while separated 
prior to the divorce and following the divorce. She left the marriage with those items that 
fit into her car. She moved to another state and started rebuilding her life. Her living 
expenses were met with the help of credit cards and her intermittent work. (Tr. 31)  
 
 Since obtaining employment, she has worked hard at repaying her debts and 
rebuilding her credit. Her FICO2 score has increased from 500 to 672. (Ex. D) Prior to 
her divorce, her FICO score was 720 or greater. (SOR Answer) Her credit improved 
sufficiently that she was able to purchase a $268,000 home in January 2010. (Ex. 2) 
She is current on her $3,200 monthly mortgage payments. (Ex. 3) The home’s fair 
market value is approximately $310,000 and her equity in the home is approximately 
$60,000. (Tr. 39) At the time she obtained her home loan, she was current on all of her 
                                                          
2
 FICO stands for Fair Isaac Corporation and is the best-known and most widely used credit score model 
in the United States. 
3 
 
accounts. (Tr. 32) She has paid one creditor $25,000 and settled another $8,000 debt, 
neither of which were SOR debts. (Ex. 2) 
 
 Until 2007, Applicant was making payment on three accounts, but stopped when 
she could no longer reduce the balance owed on the accounts due to over limit fees and 
29.9% interest on the accounts. (SOR Answer, Tr. 32) As of July 2011, she had been 
unsuccessful in her efforts to renegotiate the accounts. The creditors were unwilling to 
work with her. She was continuing in her efforts to reach settlement on these accounts. 
(Ex. 3)  
 
 As of July 2011, Applicant’s monthly net income was more than $11,000, her 
monthly expenses approximately $9,000, and the monthly net remainder was 
approximately $2,400. Since that time, she received a $4,000 annual salary increase. 
(Tr. 36) Her base salary is $163,000. (Tr. 35) She is current on her two vehicle loans 
and has approximately $14,000 in her company’s 401(k) retirement fund. (Ex. E, Tr. 39) 
She uses her credit card “sparingly.” (Tr. 38)  
 
 In March 2012, Applicant reached a post-judgment settlement agreement related 
to the collection account listed in SOR 1.a. (Ex. B) In March 2012, she made a $3,000 
payment. In April 2012, she made a $2,000 payment, which leaves a balance of 
approximately $6,700 on which she makes monthly payments. (Ex. B, Tr. 37) In April 
2012, she reached a settlement on the $18,194 collection account (SOR 1.c). (Tr. 33) 
The account has now been paid and will be marked as “Settled-In-Full.” (Ex. C)  
 
 Applicant has yet to pay the final collection account (SOR 1.b, $28,339). She is 
hoping to negotiate a settlement with the creditor. (Tr. 34) Once she locates the holder 
of the account, she believes a settlement in the matter can be achieved. (Tr. 34)  
 
 In 2005 and 2006, Applicant spoke with credit counselors. (Tr. 38) She is not 
currently receiving calls or letters from creditors demanding payment. (Tr. 39) Other 
than the remaining collection account, she is current on all of her obligations. (Tr. 40) In 
December 2010, when she completed her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), she listed her financial problems. (Ex. 1)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
4 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
5 
 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had three collection 
accounts, which totaled approximately $55,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Following Applicant’s 2004 divorce, she was unemployed. Once she obtained 
employment, she contacted her creditors and arranged settlements or repayment 
agreements with those willing to work with her. Under AG ¶ 20(a), her financial 
problems were contributed to by her divorce. Since becoming employed, she has acted 
reasonably in contacting her creditors and paying her debts. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
6 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced both separation and divorce along with 
the financial burden associated with each. She has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Applicant has received financial counseling and her financial obligations are 
under control. She has paid one debt, is making monthly payments on another, and is 
attempting to reach a settlement on the third collection account. AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) 
apply. 
 
The sole remaining debt does not raise concerns about her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. After she obtained employment, following her 
divorce, she paid $25,000 to a non-SOR creditor and settled an additional $8,000 non-
SOR obligation. Having paid one SOR debt and making payments on another, it is likely 
she will pay the remaining debt once settlement is reached. Her salary is sufficient to 
pay this account. Additionally, she has approximately $75,000 equity in her home and 
401(k) retirement fund.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Good-faith requires a showing that a 
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to 
duty or obligation. Her financial problems arose due to her separation and divorce. Even 
if her financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his or her control, it must still be considered whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties. She has acted in good 
faith. 
 
7 
 
Applicant has performed duty in overseas locations and has come under hostile 
fire while performing her duties. The debts incurred do not show a lack of judgment or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Money was used for living expenses 
during the one-year of unemployment during her separation, divorce, and shortly after 
the divorce. She acted responsibly moving to different locations for employment. When 
employed, she contacted her creditors and starting addressing her debts. She never 
attempted to hide her financial problems on her e-QIP.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all her debts are paid—it is whether her financial 
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) Of the three SOR debts, one has been paid, one is being paid, and one has yet 
to be addressed. I believe she will address the remaining collection account. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
 
