1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01818 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on June 21, 
2010. On December 7, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be decided on the written 
record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 
29, 2012. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on March 1, 2012.  Applicant received 
the FORM on March 8, 2012. He had 30 days to submit a response to the FORM. He 
did not submit a response. On May 8, 2012, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing 
Office and was assigned to me on that same date. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations in the SOR. 
(Item 4)  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor who 
has been employed with the contractor since March 2009. From April 1988 to 
November 2008, he served as an active duty officer in the United States Navy. He 
received an honorable discharge and was medically retired after over 20 years of 
service. He previously held a security clearance while on active duty to include TOP 
SECRET/Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI). He currently holds a 
SECRET clearance. His highest level of education is a master’s degree. His first 
marriage ended in divorce in July 2006. Four children were born during the marriage. 
Applicant has 22-year-old twins, a boy and a girl, a 17-year-old son, and a 15-year-old 
daughter. He remarried in November 2006. His second marriage ended in divorce in 
2010. (Item 5; Item 7; Item 10)   
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
In response to section 26 of the e-QIP application, Applicant admitted that he had 
several delinquent accounts. A subsequent background investigation revealed eight 
delinquent accounts, a total approximate balance of $30,967. The debts include: a $683 
debt owed to an apartment placed for collection in September 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 8 
at 1); a $55 medical account placed for collection in January 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 8 at 
1; Item 9 at 1); a $64 medical account placed for collection in June 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.c: 
Item 8 at 1; Item 9 at 1); a $260 medical account placed for collection in October 2009 
(SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 8 at 1; Item 9 at 1); a $1,025 cable account placed for collection in 
August 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 8 at 1; Item 9 at 1); a $13,307 account that was charged 
off in August 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 8 at 2; Item 9 at 2); a $14,914 account placed for 
collection in December 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 8 at 2; Item 9 at 2); and a $659 
department store credit card account placed for collection in December 2007. (SOR ¶ 
1.h: Item 8 at 2; Item 9 at 2)  
 
In his May 12, 2011 response to interrogatories, Applicant admits that he has 
been unable to address his finances in a timely fashion. He states that his financial 
problems are the result of being responsible for the debts of his two marriages, and 
substantial alimony awarded to his first wife. He is the sole provider for his four children. 
After he separated from the Navy, he was unemployed from November 2008 to March 
2009. He intends on meeting his financial obligations. He indicated that he was 
negotiating payment plans with his creditors. (Item 7 at 6-8, 11) 
 
Applicant did not provide any additional information or documents related to his 
efforts to resolve his delinquent accounts in response to the SOR. He also did not 
respond to the FORM. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement 
 
Applicant admits to using marijuana on one occasion in May 2010. He 
discovered his daughter and her friend smoking marijuana at his home. He was upset 
over his pending divorce and decided to try it. He took two hits and fell asleep. Applicant 
admits that he held a security clearance when this occurred. He also knew it was wrong. 
He later realized he made a terrible mistake and told his children about the incident and 
said they were never to bring drugs into his home again. Applicant claims it was an 
isolated incident. He had never used marijuana before the incident and does not intend 
to use marijuana in the future. (Item 6; Item 7 at 5)  
 
 Applicant states that his illegal drug use was an “exceptionally stupid 
indiscretion.” He told the truth when questioned by the investigator. He states he does 
not have a pattern of illegal drug use as evidenced by his 20 years of active service and 
countless negative urinalysis samples.  He states it will never happen again.  He states 
his marijuana use cannot be used to embarrass or blackmail him. He is dedicated to the 
service of his country and is willing to undergo increased drug screening of any type or 
frequency. He requests that the milestones and achievement in his Navy career be 
considered.  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated he was on long-term disability 
and was not expected to return to work in the foreseeable future.  The Government 
checked Applicant’s status and his FSO confirmed that he is working full-time. The FSO 
did not know why Applicant would say he was on long-term disability. (Item 4; Item 11)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c), (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts 
that he has been unable or unwilling to pay over the past seven years. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
5 
 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Although Applicant intends to resolve all of his delinquent accounts, he has not provided 
evidence to show that he is making payments or paid any of his delinquent debts. All of 
his delinquent debts remain unresolved. Applicant’s extensive unresolved debt indicates 
irresponsible behavior and continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies because of Applicant’s two 
divorces and his five-month period of unemployment after he separated from the 
military. I cannot conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances 
because he has been employed full-time since March 2009, but has not begun to 
resolve his delinquent debt other than contacting his creditors. No payments have been 
made even towards the debts with low balances.   
 
     AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. There is no evidence in the record, that Applicant received financial 
counseling. In fact, the case file does not have evidence of Applicant’s current budget 
so it is impossible to determine whether he is capable of paying his debts. Considering 
Applicant has not taken steps to resolve any of his delinquent accounts, his financial 
situation is unlikely to be resolved in the near future.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant provided no proof that he has 
resolved any of the delinquent debts in the SOR. While Applicant intends to pay all of 
his debts in the future, the DOHA Appeal Board has held that statements of future intent 
to pay debts, without corroborating evidence such as consistent steps already taken, 
are entitled to little weight. (ISCR 07-08049 at 4 (App. Bd. July 22, 2008) An expressed 
intention to pay one’s delinquent debts in the future, without actions, is not a good-faith 
effort to resolve one’s debts. The financial considerations concern is not mitigated.   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG &24:       
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (E.g., marijuana or 
6 
 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG &25(a) (any drug abuse); 
 
AG &25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia); and 
 
AG &25(g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance). 
 
Applicant used marijuana on one occasion in May 2010. AG &25(a) applies. AG 
&25(c) also applies because Applicant possessed the drug on that occasion. AG &25(g) 
applies because Applicant used illegal drugs after being granted a security clearance. 
He possessed a SECRET security clearance at the time. 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to the Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment); and 
  
AG & 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation).  
   
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply because 
Applicant’s decision to use marijuana raised questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant was entrusted with a security clearance 
7 
 
during his 20 years of active duty military service. He was an employee of a DoD 
contractor and held a SECRET clearance at the time he chose to use marijuana. He 
was fully aware that illegal drug use was not compatible with possessing a security 
clearance, but chose to use it anyway. While Applicant was honest about his illegal drug 
use during his background investigation, questions about his judgment remain.  
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. Applicant’s illegal drug use was recent. He did not 
provide a signed statement of intent to refrain from illegal drug use with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. Even if he had done so, it would be given 
minimal weight because of his decision to use marijuana while holding a security 
clearance. Applicant held a security clearance during his career in the Navy. He was 
fully aware of the security concerns with illegal drug use. His decision to use marijuana 
raises questions about his overall judgment. Applicant has not met his burden to 
mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s over 20 
years of active military service in the U.S. Navy. I considered his work as a contractor 
for the Department of Defense since March 2009. I considered Applicant’s decision to 
use marijuana while possessing a security clearance. His conduct, although it appears 
to be a one-time use, raises serious questions about his judgment and reliability. 
Security concerns also remain pertaining to Applicant’s extensive unresolved debts. 
Applicant has not met his burden to overcome the concerns under financial 
considerations or drug involvement.   
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
