 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00003 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
In September 2010, Applicant provided false and misleading information by 
stating he had used marijuana two times in 1985 when in fact he had used it 10 times. 
Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 8, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
  On November 17, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On April 10, 2012, I was assigned the case. On April 2, 2012, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on April 12, 2012.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. On April 20, 2012, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegations in the SOR, 
and his admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old security officer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since February 2010, but has been working in the same position since 
December 2005. (Tr. 29) He seeks to maintain a security clearance. In June 2005, 
Applicant was honorably retired from the Navy after 20 years of service. He retired as a 
communications specialist in the grade of E-6. (Ex. A, C, 5) 
 
 A co-worker stated Applicant is professional in his work ethic, skill level, and 
attitude. His co-worker trusts him because the co-worker had witnessed Applicant 
perform his duties under extreme pressure. (Ex. B) Applicant’s supervisor, who has 
known Applicant since 2005, stated Applicant has outstanding character. (Tr. 31) 
Applicant is a fine, upstanding gentleman who does his job well, is fair, and has never 
given his supervisor a reason to doubt him. (Tr. 36) It would be out of character for 
Applicant to intentionally make a false statement. (Tr. 39)  
 
 Applicant applied for a job with the FBI. In September 2010, he had a polygraph 
examination. During the pre-test interview, he stated that 25 years earlier, while in high 
school in 1985, he had used marijuana two times. In the post-test interview, Applicant 
admitted he had actually smoked marijuana ten times in 1985. (Ex. 3) At the time of the 
examination, Applicant believed the FBI would not hire anyone who had smoked 
marijuana more than three or four times, no matter how long ago the usage occurred. 
(Ex. 4) He was afraid that he would not get the job if he admitted he had used it ten 
times. (Tr. 23) He was nervous and scared and minimized his usage. (Tr. 23, 27) In the 
post-test interview he told the examiner he had lied during the examination when 
questioned about the use of illegal drugs. (Ex. 3) He told the examiner that in 1985, 
while he was a senior in high school, he and his friends used marijuana ten times during 
the period of January 1985 through May 1985. He was not hired for the job. 
 
 Applicant admits he made a mistake when he intentionally lied about his usage, 
understands the importance of being honest, and it will not happen again. (Tr. 27-28) 
His lie had a sizable impact on his life.    
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 provides one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in regard to falsification of Appellant’s security clearance application: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
In September 2010, during a pre-polygraph interview, Applicant lied about his 
high school use of marijuana. He said he used it twice when a senior in high school, 
when in fact he had used it ten times between January 1985 and May 1985. He did this 
knowingly, believing that he would not get the job if he provided the correct information. 
The disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(b) applies. 
 
The mitigating condition outlined in AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so 
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” applies. The falsification 
related to a single question during an interview more than a year and a half ago. The 
behavior was infrequent and sufficient time has passed since the interview. Applicant 
realizes his mistake. It was out of character for him and it will not recur. The mitigating 
condition in AG ¶ 17(c) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
5 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served 20 years 
in the U.S. Navy. A year and a half ago, he failed to disclose he had used marijuana ten 
times 25 years previous and chose to state it was only two uses.  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor stated that it would be out of character for Applicant to 
intentionally make a false statement. Applicant does an outstanding job at work and has 
never given his supervisor any reason to doubt him. Applicant’s answer to the single 
question does not appear to be in keeping with Applicant’s character and past military 
service.  
 
I had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant, observe his 
manner and deportment, appraise the way in which he responded to questions, assess 
his candor or evasiveness, read his statements, and listen to his testimony. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising from the personal conduct concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
