                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
----------------------------------                   )       ISCR Case No. 11-01099
 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case
On December 22, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether his clearance should be granted, continued,
denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of
defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security clearance review
Program (January 2, 1962), as amended (directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(Ags) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 4, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on December 22, 2011, and was scheduled for hearing on
March 29, 2012. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the
Government's case consisted of five  exhibits (GEs 1 through 5); Applicant relied on four
witnesses (including himself) and five exhibits (AEs A-E). The transcript (Tr.) was
received on April 6, 2012. 
Procedural Issues
Before the taking of evidence at the hearing, Department Counsel requested
leave to withdraw from consideration the allegations covered by subparagraph 1.e of the
SOR. (Tr. 45-46) There being no objections from Applicant, and for good cause shown,
Department Counsel’s request was granted. This amendment has no effect on the
Guideline E allegations, which was not amended.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested and charged on
multiple occasions (nine in all) between June 2004 and June 2008. for assorted alcohol -
related and traffic-related offenses, including recurrent alcohol-related incidents and
incidents of driving on a suspended license. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified material facts in his
security clearance applications completed in February 2006 and August 2010,
respectively, by omitting all but two of his arrests (i.e., his 2006 arrests), charges, and
conviction history when asked to reply to questions 22 and 26 (police record) of the
respective applications.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted some of the allegations covering
his arrests, charges, and convictions. He denied any knowledge of the exact fines or
failure to appear charge in connection with the May 2005 speeding offense. He also
denied falsifying his security clearance applications. He provided brief explanations in his
answers.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31-year-old field service engineer for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant earned college credits from an accredited institution and was awarded a
bachelor’s degree in information technology management in February 2012. (GE 1; Tr.
3
20, 60) He enlisted in the Navy in August 1998 and served six years of active duty. He
received an honorable discharge in June 2004. (GE 1; Tr. 51) While in the Navy, he had
a security clearance and was never cited for a security violation. (Tr. 51)
Applicant married in 2012 and has two children, ages two and three. (GE 1) They
are a close-knit family whose primary focus is on raising their young children and saving
for their schooling. (Tr. 18-19) Applicant joined his current employer in July 2010 as a
field service engineer. (GE 1; Tr. 54)
Appellant’s arrest history
Between June 2004 and June 2008, Applicant was cited on eight separate
occasions for traffic-related and alcohol-related offenses. He admitted all of the
underlying allegations. Applicant’s first three cited offenses are traffic-related. In June
2004, he was cited for speeding, speeding over 100 miles per hour, unlicensed driver,
and no insurance. He pleaded guilty to the no insurance charge and was fined an
indeterminate amount. The court suspended imposition of sentence for three years,
awarded him summary probation for three years, and dismissed the remaining charges.
(GEs 3 and 5) The following year (in May 2005), he was arrested again for speeding and
failure to appear on the previous offense. His unpaid fine (exact amount unproven) was
referred by the court in July 2005 to collection and subsequently paid in full. In
September 2005, Applicant was cited for a third traffic-related offense: for speeding and
failure to appear. And in November 2005, his unpaid fine (exact amount unproven) was
referred to collection. Appellant paid this fine in full.
Three of the cited offenses listed in the SOR involved alcohol-related incidents. In
the first incident (in January 2006), Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence
(DUI) with a blood-alcohol content (BAC) of .08 % or more. (GEs 3 through 5; Tr. 62-63)
The following day he alerted his supervisor of the arrest. (Tr. 62) Upon appearing in
court, he pleaded guilty of DUI and was sentenced to 180 days in jail (suspended for five
years pending completion of probation), fined $1,760, ordered to attend and complete
the first conviction program and the MADD program. (GEs 3 and 5) When he failed to
appear in court to provide proof of his completion of his MADD program, the court
revoked his probation and issued a warrant for his arrest. He later appeared in court and
secured the reinstatement of his probation. (Exs 3 and 5)
Six months later (in July 2006), Applicant was arrested and charged in an another
alcohol-related incident with hit and run with injury, false report to officer, and failure to
appear. The false report charge emanated from his making a police report falsely
claiming his motorcycle was stolen. (GE 3) When he appeared in court in August 2008,
he pleaded guilty to the hit and run charge and was fined, ordered to complete 14 days
community service, and was placed on summary probation for three years. (GEs 3
through 5) Counts two and three were dismissed. (GE 3) The hit and run offense was
considered an alcohol-related incident, and a warrant was later issued in November
2008, citing Applicant’s failure to complete court-ordered community service. When he
appeared in court in August 2010, the court reinstated his probation. (GEs 3 and 5)
4
In August 2007, Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct-alcohol. Arresting
officers transported him to jail and impounded his motorcycle. Applicant acknowledges
paying a fine of an undetermined amount. (GE 3)  Whether this offense qualifies as a
traffic-related offense is unclear from the developed evidence.
Applicant was involved in two additional incidents. In March 2008, he was cited for
no proof of insurance, driving under a suspended or revoked license, and failure to
appear. (GEs 3 and 5) The court dismissed these charges when he appeared in court in
August 2008. (GEs 3 and 5) Applicant’s last incident occurred in June 2008.  He was
arrested and charged with driving on a suspended or revoked license, no proof of
insurance, and unlicensed driver. (GEs 3 and 5; Tr. 56) He pleaded no contest to being
an unlicensed driver, and was fined (deferred) and given a suspended sentence for three
years. He was also awarded summary probation for three years. The remaining charges
were dismissed.  
Applicant completed his court-ordered MADD classes in August 2010 and assures
he has completed his probation conditions. (Tr. 57-58) His furnished driver’s license
reports a September 2010 issuance date and is consistent with his satisfying the court’s
probation conditions. (AE B) Since completing his probation conditions, Applicant has not
been involved in any additional incidents (Tr. 57) and disposed of his motorcycle (in
2008). (Tr. 61)  He rarely consumes alcohol anymore. (Tr. 58)
Applicant’s SF-86 and e-QIP omissions
Asked to complete a security clearance application (SF-86) in February 2006,
following his reporting of a 2006 DUI arrest. Applicant answered “no” to question 26.
This question inquired about his arrests, charges, and  convictions. (GE 1; Tr. 63)
Question 26 specifically asked him to list any arrests, charges, and convictions within the
previous seven years (save for offenses that involved traffic fines of less than $150). By
answering “no,”  he omitted his three traffic-related offenses that occurred in 2004 and
2005. These omitted arrests resulted in imposed fines of undetermined amounts. Absent
evidence of the amounts of the imposed fines, inferences cannot be reliably drawn as to
the amounts or Applicant’s state of mind. (GEs 4 and 5) 
In August 2010, Applicant was asked to complete an e-QIP. (GE 1) In this
application, he answered “no” to question 22, which similarly inquired about his police
and conviction record. This question also specifically asked him to list any arrests,
charges, and convictions within the previous seven years (save for offenses that involved
traffic fines of less than $150). After listing his most serious offenses (his 2006 DUI and
hit and run offenses), Applicant omitted his 2004 and 2005 speeding citations, his 2007
disorderly conduct-alcohol arrest, and his 2008 driving under a suspended license
charges. Applicant attributed these omissions to confusion and memory problems.
These omitted arrests resulted in imposed fines of undetermined amounts. Based on the
evidence presented, the proofs are too inconclusive to warrant any drawn inferences of
the amounts of the imposed fines, or whether Applicant could have reasonably believed
they exceeded the $150 reporting threshold. (GEs 4 and 5) Whether or not Applicant’s
5
2007 disorderly conduct incident can be characterized as a traffic-related incident or not
is also unclear. Without more, no independent findings can be made as to whether this
offense was a reportable incident. 
With both security clearance applications, Applicant attributed his omissions to
confusion and memory problems, and cited his listing of his most serious offenses (his
January 2006 DUI arrest and conviction in both applications and his hit and run arrest in
his 2010 E-QIP) as proof of his good intentions and lack of any falsification intent. (Tr.
64-66) Although he has some track record of making false theft charges to police in
connection with his 2006 hit and run incident, his explanations are reconcilable with his
claims of uncertainty over whether the omitted traffic offenses were excepted from
reporting requirements by virtue of their resulting in imposed fines less than $150.
Applicant was interviewed by agents from the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in connection with both of his clearance applications. When interviewed in August
2006, he explained in considerable detail the circumstances associated with his January
2006 DUI. (GE 3) He was never asked about his 2004 and 2005 traffic-related incidents
and volunteered no information. When interviewed following his 2010 clearance
application, the OPM agent indicated at the outset that she was there to discuss
Applicant’s criminal issues. (GE 3) In this interview, the agent raised the 2008 no
insurance and driving with a suspended license arrests with Applicant, which he
acknowledged. However, the interview summaries contain no reported information on
the amounts of the imposed fines.
Endorsements 
Applicant is well regarded by his supervisor of two years, his friends, and his
coworkers (past and present). (AE A; Tr. 20-21) Uniformly, they characterize him as
honest, reliable, and possessed of good judgment (AE A; Tr. 21, 26, 37-39) His
supervisor credited him with having exemplary judgment and integrity. (AEs D and E; Tr.
26) 
Applicant presents excellent performance evaluations. In his 2010-2011
evaluation, he was consistently credited with exceeding objectives in completing training
courses, ship installations, and in some of his performance ratings he was assigned
frequently and far exceeds expectations. (AE E) In his 2011-2012 evaluation, he was
assigned equally impressive performance ratings and was assigned an overall rating of
frequently exceeds expectations. (AE D) Applicant documents an equally impressive
performance evaluation from his previous employer for the 2009 appraisal period. (AE C)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
6
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  AG, ¶ 30.
7
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis
Applicant is a dependable technician for his defense contractor who presents with
a considerable history of assorted arrests and convictions (some alcohol-related but
mostly traffic-related) over a five-year period. Principal security issues raised in this case
8
center on Applicant’s arrest history and his omissions of his arrests in the SF-86 and e-
QIP he completed in 2006 and 2010, respectively 
Criminal arrest issues
Applicant’s arrests and convictions, while mostly traffic-related, involve numerous
offenses of driving on a suspended driver’s license. Summarized, Applicant was arrested
on eight occasions between 2004 and 2008, and was found guilty on six occasions. 
Applicable disqualifying conditions under the criminal conduct guideline include
DC ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and DC ¶ 31(c),
“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecute or convicted.” This disqualifying condition embraces
traffic-related offenses that resulted in fines exceeding $150.  
Without any evidence to challenge Applicant’s explanations of the underlying
events and circumstances surrounding his various arrests and convictions, his
demonstrated restorative progress since his last arrest in 2008 is entitled to considerable
weight.  In turn, the criminal conduct concerns that are based on his history of recurrent
arrests between 2004 and 2008 are entitled to  mitigation credit. Applicant has avoided
any incidents with law enforcement since his last reported arrest of July 2008, and
demonstrates added growth and maturity in his professional and personal relationships
with his friends and family. 
Applicant may rely on MC ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal
behavior happened, or it happened under unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.” Applicant’s prior arrests and convictions are currently aged and are
outweighed by his substantial showing of good judgment and trust demonstrated with his
current employer, and strengthened family relationship with his spouse over the past four
years of their marriage and courtship. Applicant has also established himself to be a
responsible parent of his children.  
 Based on his own rehabilitative efforts to date that include encouraging
contributions to his employer and changes in his family environment, the chances of any
recurrent arrests are unlikely. Applicant may take advantage of MC ¶ 32(d) of the
criminal conduct guideline, “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement.”
Both from a consideration of the applicable guidelines, and from a whole-person
perspective, Applicant demonstrates he  possesses the strength of overall character,
rehabilitation, and maturity to meet all of the minimum requirements under the criminal
conduct guideline for continued eligibility to hold a security clearance. Based on the
confluence of corrective steps he has taken to date, he persuasively demonstrates that
9
he has learned important lessons from his unfortunate lapses in judgment and will work
earnestly to avoid any recurrence. Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances
developed in the record, favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i of the criminal conduct guideline.  
Personal conduct concerns
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his omissions of some of his arrests and
convictions in the SF-86 and e-QIP he completed in February 2006 and August 2010,
respectively. By omitting these arrests and charges (regardless of disposition), Applicant
failed to furnish potentially material background information about his arrest history that
was needed for the Government to properly process and evaluate his security clearance
application. DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts to any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” has some potential application to Applicant’s situation. Because of the
absence of evidence of the amounts of the imposed fines associated with the covered
arrests, it is not clear whether the omitted arrests qualify as reportable ones.
Given the absence of any evidence of the amounts of the imposed fines
associated with his reported arrests, and whether Applicant could reasonably believe the
amounts exceeded the $150 reporting threshold, Applicant’s explanations of his
omissions are fully reconcilable with tenets of truthfulness and consistent with his claims
of uncertainty over whether the listed traffic-related arrests and convictions were
reportable ones.  While the arrests and convictions themselves might have resulted in
fines exceeding $150, this is by no means clear from the documentation in evidence and
Applicant’s explanations.
Because Applicant’s answers to his completed SF-86 and E-QIP are considered
truthful ones when made, there is no need to consider any good-faith corrections in his
ensuing OPM interviews. Summarized, Applicant’s answers to questions posed by the
OPM agent who interviewed him in 2008 and 2010 were sufficiently reconcilable with his
SF-86 and e-QIP answers to questions inquiring about his prior arrests and convictions
to enable him to avoid any need to make prompt, good faith corrections. 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s SF-86 and e-QIP
omissions, his explanations, and whole-person considerations, his disclosures are
sufficient to enable him to convincingly refute or mitigate the deliberate falsification
allegations. Questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, are each core policy concerns of the personal conduct
guideline (AG ¶ 15). Overall, Applicant’s explanations are persuasive enough to warrant
conclusions that the falsification allegations relative to his completed 2006 SF-86 and
2010 e-QIP covering his past traffic-related arrests and convictions are mitigated. 
10
Also covered under the personal conduct guideline are Applicant’s arrests and
convictions associated with his traffic-related and alcohol-related arrests. While mitigated
under the criminal conduct guideline, these arrests and convictions reflect pattern rule
violations covered by DC ¶ 16 (a)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.”  His
actions are aged, though, and have not been repeated. Mitigation credit is available to
him under MC ¶ 17 (c), “ the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment.” Evaluating all of the facts and circumstances developed in the record,
Applicant mitigates security concerns associated with the allegations covered by
subparagraph 2.a of the personal conduct guideline. Considered together, his past
traffic-related arrests and convictions are mitigated under Guideline E.
Formal Findings
   
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT):  FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1d and 1.f.
       through 1.i:  For Applicant                        
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):           FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a through 2.c:             For Applicant 
                     
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
11
