 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02344 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Bradley P. Moss, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence and 
personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued her a set of interrogatories. She responded to the 
interrogatories on August 12, 2011.2 DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
her on January 5, 2012,3 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
                                                          
1
 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86, dated May 21, 2009). 
 
2
 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated August 12, 2011). 
 
3
 The SOR was inadvertently dated January 5, 2011. The error was identified and rectified, and Department 
Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR by deleting the year “2011” and substituting the year “2012”, was granted 
without objection. See Transcript (Tr.) at 9. 
 
2 
                                      
 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines B (Foreign Influence) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why 
DOHA was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 14, 2012. In a sworn 
statement, dated February 3, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on March 13, 2012, and the case was assigned 
to me on March 16, 2012. A Notice of Hearing was issued on March 21, 2012, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on April 17, 2012. 
 
 During the hearing, five Government exhibits (GE 1 through 5) and five Applicant 
exhibits (AE A through E) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and 
two witnesses testified. The Tr. was received on April 25, 2012. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Republic of Sudan (Sudan), appearing in 12 written 
submissions. Facts are proper for administrative notice when they are verifiable by an 
authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the 
Government relied on source information regarding Sudan in publications of the White 
House,4 U.S. Department of State,5 and the Congressional Research Service.6 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
  
4
 The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Press Release, Statement by the President on the Intent 
to Recognize Southern Sudan, dated February 7, 2011; Exec. Or. 13412, Blocking Property of and Prohibiting 
Transactions With the Government of Sudan, dated October 13, 2006; Exec. Or. 13067, Blocking Sudanese 
Government Property and Prohibiting Transactions With Sudan, dated November 3, 1997.  
 
5
 U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: Sudan, dated November 10, 2011; Bureau of 
African Affairs, Background Note: Sudan, dated January 10, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Office of the 
Coordinator for Counterterrorism, State Sponsors of Terrorism, dated August 18, 2011; U.S. Department of State, 
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2010 Human Rights Report: Sudan, dated April 8, 2011; U.S. 
Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Sudan, dated January 11, 2012; U.S. Department 
of State, Press Release, Congratulating Sudan on the Results of the Southern Sudan Referendum, dated February 7, 
2011; U.S. Department of State, Fact Sheet – African Affairs, U.S. Sanctions on Sudan, dated April 23, 2008; U.S. 
Department of State, Fact Sheet – African Affairs, Overview of Treasury and Commerce Regulations Affecting U.S. 
Exports to Sudan, dated March 23, 2007.  
 
6
 Congressional Research Service, Report for Congress, Sudan: The Crisis in Darfur and Status of the 
North-South Peace Agreement, dated June 15, 2011. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,7 as set 
forth below under the Sudan subsection.  
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to 
the evidence. He sought to amend SOR ¶ 1.c. by deleting the word “China” and 
substituting the word “Taiwan.” There being no objection, the motion was granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, nearly all of the 
factual allegations pertaining to foreign influence (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.) of the SOR, as 
well as the factual allegation pertaining to personal conduct (¶ 2.a.) of the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. She denied the 
remaining allegation (¶ 1.j.) or portions of other allegations (portions of ¶ 1.a. and 1.d.)  
of the SOR. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since 
December 2008, has served as a deputy recruiting manager, logistic processing 
manager, and office manager.8 She has never served with the U.S. military.9 She was 
granted a U.S. secret security clearance in 2004.10  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in Sudan to Sudanese-born citizen-residents.11 Applicant’s 
father, an officer of the Sudanese military who was forced to retire,12 sought political 
asylum in the United States,13 and immigrated here in 1990.14 Applicant completed her 
                                                          
7
 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents).  
 
 
8
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 19; Tr. at 60. 
 
9
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 35. 
 
10
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 75-76. 
 
11
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 40-41; Tr. at 58. 
 
12
 Government Exhibit 2 (Affidavit, dated December 14, 2010), at 4. 
 
13
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 4. 
 
14
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated February 3, 2012, at 2. 
 
4 
                                      
 
primary schooling in Sudan, and immigrated to the United States with her mother as 
refugees in 1994.15 She was 20 years of age.16 Applicant enrolled in a community 
college in September 1996, and received her associate’s degree in cardiovascular 
technology in May 2005.17 Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2002.18 
When Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen, she took an oath of allegiance to the 
United States. That oath included the words:19 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen.  
 
Applicant has worked for a variety of employers, both part-time and full-time 
since the time she was in college. She was a part-time sales associate from September 
1998 until December 1999 (when her employer went out of business); a part-time sales 
associate from December 1999 until June 2000; a cardiovascular technician from July 
2000 until April 2003; a linguist in Iraq from May 2003 until April 2004; a part-time 
limousine driver from December 2004 until February 2005; a linguist from February 
2005 until March 2005; a part-time limousine driver from March 2005 until June 2005; a 
linguist in Iraq from June 2005 until December 2005; a recruiter, deputy director of 
recruiting, director of recruiting, and project administrator from December 2005 until 
December 2008.20 She joined her current employer in December 2008.21 
 
Applicant was married in August 2000.22 She and her husband, a naturalized 
U.S. citizen who was also born in Sudan,23 have two children, born in the United States 
in September 2004, and May 2008.24 The family resides together in the United States.25  
 
Both of Applicant’s parents are naturalized U.S. citizens residing in the United 
States.26 Applicant has two brothers and one sister, all of whom reside in the United 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
15
 Tr. at 59. 
 
16
 Tr. at 59. 
 
17
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 17-18; Tr. at 59. 
 
18
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 7-8. 
 
19
 8 C.F.R. § 337.1(a) (1995). 
 
20
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 20-33. 
 
21
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 19-20; Tr. at 59-60. 
 
22
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 38. 
 
23
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 38. 
 
24
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 41-42. 
 
25
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 38, 41-42. 
 
26
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 40-41; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
5 
                                      
 
States.27 A third brother, a student, was murdered in the United States.28 Her sister and 
one brother are naturalized U.S. citizens, and her other surviving brother is still a 
Sudanese citizen.29 In addition to her immediate family, Applicant also has several 
aunts and an uncle. One aunt and uncle are citizens of Sudan, but are legal permanent 
residents of the United States.30 Three aunts are Sudanese citizens who still reside in 
Sudan.31 One is a retired professor, and the other two are homemakers.32  
 
Other members of Applicant’s more extended family are: her father-in-law, a 
retired social worker,33 and her stepmother-in-law, also a retired social worker,34 are 
both Sudanese citizens who still reside in Sudan;35 her mother-in-law is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen who works and resides in the United Arab Emirates (UAE);36 her three 
sisters-in-law are Sudanese citizens who still reside in Sudan, where one is a 
homemaker, one is a student, and one is unemployed;37 and her three brothers-in-law 
are Sudanese citizens, with two working in banking and residing in UAE, and one is a 
businessman residing in the United States with Applicant’s sister.38 One of her brothers-
in-law in the UAE was recently granted legal permanent U.S. residency status, and 
expects to relocate here in the near future.39 Other than the military service of 
Applicant’s father, none of her immediate family or extended family members have ever 
been affiliated with the Sudanese or any other foreign government or intelligence 
service.40 
 
Applicant’s method and frequency of contact with her family members and 
extended family members, especially those still residing outside of the United States, is 
varied. Applicant has not seen those family members or extended family members still 
residing in Sudan since August 2007, and generally speaks with them by telephone on 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
27
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 43-46; Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 4-5. 
 
28
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 5. 
 
29
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 43-46; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
30
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 5; Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 6. 
 
31
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 5-6; Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 7-9. 
 
32
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 7-9. 
 
33
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 5. 
 
34
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 3. 
 
35
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 3. 
 
36
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 4. 
 
37
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 7-8. 
 
38
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 7-9. 
 
39
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 7. 
 
40
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 3-9; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 2-7. 
 
6 
                                      
 
one or two, or as many as four, occasions each year.41 As for those family members 
residing in UAE, she has not seen her mother-in-law since July or November 2010 
when her mother-in-law visited Applicant and her husband in the United States, and 
generally speaks with her by telephone on a weekly basis and has e-mail exchanges on 
two to three occasions per month.42 One of her brothers-in-law, who will relocate to the 
United States, visits the family in the United States on a quarterly basis.43 Applicant has 
not seen her other brother-in-law since August 2007.44 Applicant speaks with each of 
those brothers-in-law maybe once every three months.45  
 
Applicant’s father has a friend in the United States who is naturalized U.S. citizen 
(formerly a citizen of Sudan) who is also affiliated with the Sudanese Government.46 
Applicant first met the individual in 1994 and has seen that individual on infrequent 
social occasions over the ensuing years.47 Applicant’s most recent contacts with the 
individual were in 2009 and 2011, at social functions.48 Applicant knows several 
individuals from her childhood who have remained in Sudan. While they were friends at 
that time, she no longer maintains close contact with them, and has not seen her friends 
since August 2007.49 She may, on an annual holiday occasion, speak with them and 
wish them well.50 
 
Sudan 
 
Sudan has been designated by the U.S. Department of State as a state sponsor 
of terrorism since 1993. While Sudan continues to pursue counterterrorism operations 
directly involving threats to U.S. interests and personnel in Sudan, the Sudanese 
Government openly supports Hamas, considering its members freedom fighters. 
Nevertheless, in January 2011, the United States announced that the process of 
withdrawing the “state sponsor of terrorism designation” once Sudan complied with the 
previously agreed-upon Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2005 (CPA), as well as 
current U.S. policy. That policy, announced in 2009, was essentially: 1) achieve a 
definitive end to conflict, gross human rights abuses, and genocide in Darfur; 2) 
                                                          
 
41
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 5-9; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 3-6. 
 
42
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 5; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 4. 
 
43
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 7. 
 
44
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 12, at 8. 
 
45
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 7. 
 
46
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 2, at 4-6; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 8. 
 
47
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 2, at 4-6; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 8. 
 
48
 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 2, at 4-6; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 8. 
 
49
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 8. 
 
50
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 8. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
implementation of the CPA, resulting in a peaceful post-2011 Sudan, or an orderly path 
toward two separate and viable states at peace with each other; and 3) ensure that 
Sudan does not provide a safe haven for international terrorism.  
 
The Sudanese Government has engaged in significant human rights abuses, 
including extrajudicial and other unlawful killings by government forces; torture, 
beatings, rape, and other cruel and inhumane treatment by security forces; arbitrary 
arrest and detention; executive interference with the judiciary and denial of due process; 
restrictions on citizens’ privacy; restrictions on the freedoms of speech, press, 
assembly, association, religion, and movement; trafficking in persons; violence and 
discrimination against women and ethnic minorities; and forced labor. The government 
monitors Internet communications and the security service reads e-mail messages 
between private citizens. U.S. citizens are at risk when traveling in Sudan. Terrorists are 
known to operate in Sudan and continue to seek opportunities to carry out attacks 
against U.S. interests. A wide network of government informants conducts surveillance 
in schools, universities, markets, workplaces, and neighborhoods.  
 
Personal Conduct 
  
 When Applicant was employed as a recruiter, deputy director of recruiting, 
director of recruiting, and project administrator from December 2005 until December 
2008, she was initially permitted to use her personal home computer for work, but she 
was subsequently provided with a company laptop to work at home. Company 
proprietary information was stored in her home computer and later uploaded to the 
laptop to facilitate her work.51 Applicant objected to her “unhealthy and uncomfortable” 
work environment at the office that was “demeaning and intolerable,” and experienced 
work-related stress.52 Largely because of her frustrations with the job, on December 15, 
2008, she submitted her resignation, without advanced notice, to be effective 
immediately.53 However, before she did so, because of anger towards her management, 
and because she thought they could be useful at her new job, she sent herself some e-
mails to her home computer which included three proprietary documents: a hire right 
consent form, a new personnel hire data form, and a candidate check list, all of which 
she considered to be harmless blank templates.54 The materials were never 
subsequently accessed by Applicant and simply remained in her inbox, unopened.55 As 
part of being out processed, Applicant signed an employee release stating she had 
returned all employer property, equipment, and documents.56  
                                                          
51
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 9; Government Exhibit 4 (Affidavit, dated March 26, 
2010), at 2. 
 
52
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 10. 
 
53
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 2. 
 
54
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 10; Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 2; Applicant 
Exhibit B (Affidavit, dated February 27, 2009), at 2. 
 
55
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 10; Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 2. 
 
56
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 2. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
 Applicant commenced her new job with her current employer the following day. 
During her second week on the job, she created a list of 85 possible candidates who 
were linguists. The names were taken from proprietary information that was still in her 
home computer.57 In early January 2009, Applicant was sued by her former employer, 
seeking monetary and injunctive relief, accusing her of breach of contract, breach of 
duty of loyalty, breach of duty to maintain confidentiality of employer information, 
misappropriation of trade secrets, and injunctive relief.58 When she learned of the 
lawsuit, Applicant deleted all the employer propriety information from her home 
computer.59 The matter was settled out of court with no money changing hands, and an 
Order of Nonsuit was issued in June 2009.60 The list of possible linguist candidates she 
had created was destroyed.61 Applicant acknowledged that her actions were a major 
mistake and were wrong. She intends to never take similar actions in the future.62 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s former immediate supervisors, a colleague, her facility security 
officer, and her husband, all support the restoration of her security clearance. They 
have characterized her in highly favorable terms, and attest to her trustworthiness, 
professionalism, dedication to her job, very high work ethics, and honesty. They also 
agree that her actions pertaining to the propriety information was a mistake and out of 
character for her.63 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”64 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
                                                          
57
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 2. 
 
58
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 3. 
 
59
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 3. 
 
60
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 3; Applicant Exhibit A (Order of Nonsuit, dated June 2, 2009); 
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 12. 
 
61
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 3. 
 
62
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12, at 12; Government Exhibit 4, supra note 51, at 3-4. 
 
63
 Applicant Exhibit D (Character reference, dated April 9, 2012); Applicant Exhibit C (Character reference, 
dated April 9, 2012); Applicant Exhibit E (Character reference, dated April 12, 2012); Tr. at 34-35, 55-56. 
 
64
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”65   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”66 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.67  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”68 
                                                          
65
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
66
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
67
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
68
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
10 
                                      
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”69 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.70 Applicant’s varied relationships with her three 
aunts, her father-in-law, her stepmother-in-law, and her three sisters-in-law, all of whom 
are Sudanese citizens who still reside in Sudan; as well as her varied relationships with 
her two brothers-in-law who are Sudanese citizens residing in the UAE, and her mother-
in-law who is a U.S. citizen residing in the UAE, are current security concerns for the 
Government. In addition, the Government remains concerned about family members 
who are Sudanese citizens who reside in the United States. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
69
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
70
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
11 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information” may raise security concerns. Also, under AG ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” is 
potentially disqualifying. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply in this case. However, 
the security significance of these identified conditions requires further examination of 
Applicant’s respective relationships with her family members and other acquaintances 
who are Sudanese citizen-residents, as well as U.S. citizens who reside elsewhere, to 
determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows:  
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or communication with foreign citizens 
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”  
In this instance, Applicant’s relationships with her immediate family members, all 
of whom reside in the United States, either as U.S. citizens or as Sudanese citizens and 
permanent U.S. residents, are of minimal security significance. Her other family 
members, including her mother-in-law who is a U.S. citizen working in the UAE, and two 
brothers-in-law who work in the UAE, with one soon to relocate to the United States, are 
of little security significance as the Government has not presented evidence that their 
residence in the UAE creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. This leaves the focus on Applicant’s other 
extended family members: the father-in-law, the stepmother-in-law, the three aunts, and 
the three sisters-in-law, and on her acquaintances both in Sudan and in the United 
States. 
 
12 
                                      
 
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances. One such 
factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is 
important to consider the character of the foreign power in question, including the 
government and entities controlled by the government within the relevant foreign 
country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is limited to countries that are hostile to the 
United States.71 In fact, the Appeal Board has cautioned against “reliance on overly 
simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating 
cases under Guideline B.”72 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that the nature of the government in Sudan 
and the relationship it has with the United States, may make it more likely that Sudan 
would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or associates in Sudan. 
 
As noted above, the absence of Sudanese government contacts or attempted 
contacts with Applicant or her family members and acquaintances, or the apparent 
absence, so far, of coercive means to obtain sensitive information, does not eliminate 
the possibility that Sudan would employ some coercive or non-coercive measures in an 
attempt to exploit a relative.  There is no evidence that Applicant’s family members are, 
or have been, political activists, challenging the policies of the Sudanese government; 
that terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or her family members; that the 
Sudanese government has approached Applicant; or that her family members currently 
engage in activities that would bring attention to themselves.  
 
Nevertheless, considering the Sudanese government and its position with 
respect to human rights, its aggressive intelligence operations against its own citizens, 
and its relationship with the United States, it is foreseeable that Applicant’s family 
members could be a means through which Applicant could come to the attention of the 
regime. They could also be the vehicle through which Sudan might attempt to coerce 
Applicant. The obscurity of Applicant’s family members is not a meaningful basis for 
concluding that they are beyond the reach of the regime. The Appeal Board has 
consistently held that factors such as an applicant’s relatives’ obscurity or the failure of 
foreign authorities to contact those relatives in the past do not provide a meaningful 
measure of whether an applicant’s circumstances pose a security risk, when, for 
example, the relatives are subject to the authority of a regime that is hostile to the 
United States and has a dismal human rights record.73  
 
                                                          
71
 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
72
 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
73
 See ISCR Case No. 07-18283 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 24, 2009); ISCR Case No. 07-13696 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
9, 2009). 
 
13 
                                      
 
However, the significance of the heightened risk is minimized by several factors. 
On two separate occasions, Applicant was willing to risk her life as part of her duties on 
behalf of the U.S. combat forces in Iraq. She was fully aware of those risks. These 
circumstances demonstrate that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts 
by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit her.74 
Applicant has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. Her 
husband and children, as well as to Applicant’s parents and surviving siblings, and other 
family members are U.S. citizens or residents of the United States. She can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 
8(b) apply, and AG ¶ 8(c) partially applies, especially to the friend of Applicant’s father, 
and Applicant’s friends from her childhood who have remained in Sudan. Even if AG ¶ 
8(b) does not fully apply, the security concerns are mitigated under the whole-person 
analysis below.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. If there 
is: 
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of:  
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; (2) 
disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a 
pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse 
of Government or other employer's time or resources, 
                                                          
 
74
 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
14 
                                      
 
security concerns may be raised under AG ¶ 16(d). 
Under AG ¶ 16(e), “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing . . . . ,” may raise security concerns. Similarly, under AG ¶ 16(f), a 
“violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the employer 
as a condition of employment,” is potentially disqualifying.  
 
As to AG ¶¶ 16(d), 16(e), and 16(f), the sole focus of those potentially 
disqualifying conditions is the incident pertaining to Applicant’s December 2008 actions 
in sending herself some e-mails to her home computer which included three proprietary 
documents, all of which she considered to be harmless blank templates. As part of 
being out processed, Applicant signed an employee release stating she had returned all 
employer property, equipment, and documents, but she had not. During her second 
week on her new job, she created a list of 85 possible linguist-candidates taken from 
proprietary information that was still in her home computer. In early January 2009, 
Applicant was sued by her former employer, seeking monetary and injunctive relief, 
accusing her of breach of contract, breach of duty of loyalty, breach of duty to maintain 
confidentiality of employer information, misappropriation of trade secrets, and injunctive 
relief. AG ¶¶ 16(d), 16(e), and 16(f), have been established. 
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. If “the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 17(c) may apply. Also, AG ¶ 17(d) 
may apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” Similarly, if “the individual has taken 
positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress,” AG ¶ 17(e) may apply. 
 
When she learned of the lawsuit, Applicant deleted all the employer proprietary 
information from her home computer. The matter was settled out of court with no money 
changing hands, and an Order of Nonsuit was issued in June 2009. The list of possible 
linguist candidates she had created was destroyed. Applicant acknowledged that her 
actions were a major mistake and were wrong. She intends to never repeat such 
actions in the future. The incident in question occurred only once – while she was in a 
stressful situation in December 2008 – three and one-half years ago. There has been 
no recurrence of similar conduct, and it is unlikely to recur, as she has relocated to a 
much more favorable work environment. Except for that one incident of aberrant 
behavior, there is little doubt cast on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. Several character references, including those who knew Applicant before, 
during, and after the incident, concur in an assessment that Applicant is trustworthy and 
 
15 
                                      
 
exhibits the highest standards of ethical conduct and moral character. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 
17(d), and 17(e) all apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.75       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation. Sudan is a state 
sponsor of terrorism that is widely known for significant human rights abuses. With three 
aunts, a father-in-law, stepmother-in-law, three sisters-in-law, and an acquaintance, all 
of whom are Sudanese citizens who still reside in Sudan, there is a potential risk that 
Sudan would forcefully attempt to coerce Applicant through those individuals. In 
addition, there was Applicant’s December 2008 action related to the proprietary 
information she had wrongfully retained and used. (See AG & 2(a)(8).)  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
While Sudan is a state sponsor of terrorism, it is not believed to be an active collector of 
U.S. economic intelligence and proprietary information, and there is no evidence that 
Sudan uses coercive measures to gain access to such information. It is apparent that 
Sudan’s self-interest is simply remaining in power. It is very unlikely Sudan would 
forcefully attempt to coerce Applicant through her extended family members and her 
acquaintance still residing in Sudan. The presence of those extended family members 
and the acquaintance in Sudan without any affiliation or relationship to the Government 
of Sudan does not generate a realistic potential for exploitation. As for those family 
members residing in the UAE or the United States, the likelihood of Sudanese efforts 
against them is even more remote.  
                                                          
75
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
16 
                                      
 
 
Since Applicant first received a security clearance in 2004, the foreign influence 
issues have largely improved in her favor, with more family members moving out of 
Sudan and becoming U.S. citizens or residents. There is decreased evidence of a 
“heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion. As for the personal conduct issue, that one incident of aberrant behavior took 
place three and one-half years ago, and there has been no recurrence of similar 
conduct.  It is unlikely to recur. Under the evidence presented, I have no questions 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9).76 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
   
  
                                                          
76
 Although I had previously requested briefs pertaining to the applicability of Department of Defense Manual 
5220.22-M, National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), (February 2006) §2-204, under the 
circumstances herein, a decision on its applicability is not being made. 
 
17 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
