 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07390 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
In 2005-2006, Applicant admitted to viewing nude pictures of children, girls under 
18, and adult pornography, and to violating his employer’s policy restricting the use of 
the Internet during work hours. He continued to view nude pictures of children, girls 
under 18, and adult pornography, and to violate his employer’s policy until 2011. His 
sexual behavior and personal conduct continue to cast doubt on his judgment and on 
his ability to comply with the law and regulations. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 24, 2010. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) (undated), listing security concerns under Guideline D (Sexual 
Behavior) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
February 29, 2012, and requested a decision based on the record. On March 19, 2012, 
the Government requested a hearing before an administrative judge. (Appellate Exhibit 
1, Tr. 18) The case was assigned to me on April 3, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 3, 2012, convening a hearing for May 
7, 2012. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant 
testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 7. All exhibits were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 15, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the factual allegations in the SOR. After a thorough review of 
all the evidence, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor and considered his 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old technical lead software engineer working for a 
government contractor. He was awarded a bachelor’s degree in computer engineering 
in 2000, and a master’s degree in information technology in 2005. Applicant married his 
wife in August 2003, and they have a three year-old son and a one year-old daughter. 
 
Applicant has been working in the same division, although for two different 
government contractors, since he was hired in May 2000. Applicant submitted his first 
SCA in 2000, and he was granted a secret security clearance in 2001, which he has 
held to present. There is no evidence to show that he has compromised or caused 
others to compromise classified information. 
 
In April 2005, Applicant submitted another SCA, and his employer requested an 
upgrade of his clearance. During the investigation process, Applicant participated in 
three interviews, two of which were polygraph assisted interviews. During his March and 
April 2006 interviews, Applicant disclosed that, from 2002 until days before his March 
2006 interview, he used his employer’s Internet connection and computer for personal 
use during work hours. Initially, his use was infrequent, but by the summer of 2005, he 
was spending between four hours per day of an eight hour day, to six hours per day of a 
ten hour day, using the Internet for personal use. 
 
Applicant knew his employer had a policy against the use of the Internet and 
company computer for personal use.2 He explained that he felt bad about his extensive 
use of the Internet, but as a software tester, he had significant downtime, primarily while 
the computer was testing the software and he had nothing to do but to wait for the 
results of the test. Applicant also averred that his job does not involve a linear thinking 
                                                                                                                                             
 
2 Applicant’s employer’s Internet use policy states: “employees must adhere to copyright policies 
and corporate procedure. The Internet is provided to assist employees in the conduct of company 
business, or work-related activities that promote the company’s interest. Usage may not conflict or disrupt 
company business, or compromise employee’s productivity.” (AE 7) 
 
3 
 
 
process, and that he had to distract his mind from his job to then approach the problem 
again with a fresh mind.  
 
Applicant noted, and his performance reviews confirmed, that he has been 
consistently rated as meeting or exceeding performance expectations. His performance 
reviews noted his commitment to his employer and to accomplishing his mission. (AE 2 
and AE 3) Although he was spending a lot of time on the Internet for personal reasons, 
his work was getting done on time. Applicant continued to access the Internet and used 
his employer’s computer for personal use during work hours up to at least November 
2010. (Tr. 71) 
 
Applicant disclosed that between 1996 and 2001, he downloaded between 500 
and 1,000 songs from the Internet, copied these files into CDs, and on about 10 
occasions, he sold the CDs for $15 each. Applicant explained that most of his 
downloads were from Napster, before such behavior was ruled illegal. He stopped 
downloading music from the Internet when he purchased an Ipod around 2001-2002. 
He now downloads his music from Itunes.  
 
Additionally, Applicant disclosed that he had viewed images of people ages five 
to adult on nudist colony websites. The interviewer noted that Applicant described his 
preference for females between the ages of 14 and 16. Applicant also visited teen 
model websites depicting girls ages 14 to 18 wearing bathing suites and posed in 
sexually suggestive ways. Applicant told the interviewer that he masturbated while 
viewing these images up to one month before his June 2006 interview.  
 
In February 2007, the other government agency denied Applicant’s clearance 
upgrade based on the security concerns raised by his admissions during the interviews. 
In March 2007, Applicant appealed the denial of his clearance. In his appeal letter, 
Applicant stated that confessing his sexual behavior was difficult to do, but it was a 
great relief and helpful to him. (GE 2) 
 
In his August 2010 SCA, Applicant disclosed he was denied a clearance upgrade 
in 2007, by another government agency. In November 2011, he was interviewed by an 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator about his 2007 clearance upgrade 
denial. Applicant told the OPM investigator that he was controlling his use of the Internet 
and company computer for personal use during work hours, but that he was still doing it 
when he had down time at work. Applicant denied any intentional viewing of 
pornography at work.  
 
Concerning his viewing of nude pictures of children, Applicant stated that the last 
time he visited a nudist colony website was in 2007. He always used his personal 
computer to view these sites or adult pornography sites. Applicant averred that his 
viewing of children in these websites was accidental, and the pictures were not of a 
sexual nature. He claimed he was not looking for pictures of nude children, or 
pornographic children’s pictures. He averred he is not sexually attracted to children.  
 
 
4 
 
 
At his hearing, Applicant admitted that he has been addicted to pornography 
since high school. He admitted he viewed pictures of naked children while searching 
nudist colony websites; however, he denied he was targeting children, or that the 
children’s and teenagers’ pictures he viewed were of a pornographic nature. He viewed 
pictures of nude girls he believed were under the age of 18, but the pictures did not 
involve sexual behavior. He also viewed teen model websites where girls between the 
ages of 14 and 18 were wearing bathing suits in sexually suggestive poses. Applicant 
admitted to viewing adult pornography sites and to masturbating while viewing such 
sites. He repeatedly denied; however, to masturbating while viewing nude pictures of 
children. Applicant also denied that he has a sexual preference for girls between the 
ages of 14 and 18 over a normal, healthy, adult relationship. 
 
Between his 2006 interviews and his hearing date, Applicant continued to view 
adult pornography websites and nudist colony websites. He visited nudist websites 
depicting pictures of nude children “one or two times” during the period of “a few months 
ago to a year ago.” (Tr. 46-50). He visited adult pornographic websites approximately 
every six months from his 2006 interview until his hearing date. Applicant claimed he 
has not been aroused by any pornographic material since 2006. Although he visited the 
adult pornographic websites, Applicant denies ever masturbating to such material since 
2006.  
 
Applicant’s wife knows that he has watched pornographic websites, but she does 
not know the extent of Applicant’s visits to these websites, nor does she know that he 
has viewed nudist websites with nude pictures of children. 
 
Applicant believes he is an introvert. He has difficulty putting his thoughts 
together quickly, and takes time to verbalize his responses. He believes that the other 
agency’s investigators believed he was lying, and took it out against him, because he 
delayed responding to their questions. Applicant is a devout, religious man. He attends 
church frequently, and volunteers to work for his church on a regular basis. He served 
as a deacon at his church for several years, attended church planning committees, and 
was trusted with his church’s keys, financial matters, and other sensitive information. He 
volunteered to rebuild homes for people affected by hurricane Katrina. 
 
Applicant is considered to be an excellent employee. He performs high-quality 
work, and has consistently received excellent ratings for his values, customer 
satisfaction, ethics, and his commitment to results. He currently is in charge of a team of 
co-workers as the technical lead for the group. He expects he will receive a cycle pay 
raise this year. Applicant repeatedly apologized for his past behavior, and expressed 
regret and remorse for his past behavior. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
5 
 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior,  
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has been addicted to pornography since he was in high school. From 
around 2000 until at least one month before his hearing, Applicant viewed nude images 
of children in nudist colony websites. He claimed he is not sexually attracted to children 
and his viewing of the children’s pictures was incidental to his search for adult 
pornography. He sought nude images of females ages 14 through 18, and accessed 
teen model web sites where girls, ages 14 to 18, were wearing swimming suits in 
sexually suggestive poses. Applicant masturbated while viewing pictures of what he 
believed were girls between the ages of 14 and 18. Applicant also viewed adult 
pornographic material on the Internet from around 2000 until at least one month before 
his hearing. He masturbated while viewing such material. Applicant’s wife is aware that 
he has viewed pornographic material on the Internet. She is not aware of the details and 
the extent of his behavior, nor is she aware of his viewing nude pictures of children.  
 
AG ¶ 13 provides four disqualifying conditions relating to sexual behavior that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether the individual has been 
prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
All of the sexual behavior disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant’s viewing of 
nude pictures of minors (people younger than 18 years old) for his sexual pleasure (to 
masturbate) could be a criminal offense. Even if it is not a criminal offense, it is such a 
repulsive behavior that it would make him vulnerable to possible coercion and 
exploitation. He has been viewing pornographic material since he was in high school, 
and considers himself addicted to pornography. Applicant continued to seek out 
material involving nude minors after his three interviews with another government 
agency in 2005-2006, and after the denial of his clearance upgrade. He continued to 
view material involving nude minors and adult pornographic material up to 2011. He has 
been unable to stop his compulsive, self-destructive, and risky sexual behavior. His 
actions reflect a lack of judgment and may be symptomatic of a personality disorder. 
 
AG ¶ 14 lists conditions that could mitigate the sexual behavior security 
concerns.  
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
7 
 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
AG ¶¶ 14(a), (b), and (c) are not applicable to this case. Applicant was a mature 
adult when he engaged in the questionable behavior. Applicant claimed he decreased 
his behavior after his 2005-2006 interviews and the resulting denial of his clearance 
upgrade. Notwithstanding, he did not completely stop viewing material depicting nude 
minors. Applicant visited nudist colony websites and viewed nude pictures of children up 
to 2011. He also sought pictures of nude girls and adult pornography. Applicant’s wife is 
not aware of the extent of his behavior. Considering the seriousness of his behavior, 
and the adverse social stigma associated with it, Applicant’s behavior is currently a 
basis for coercion and exploitation.  
 
In light of the period during which Applicant engaged in his questionable 
behavior, it is too soon for me to conclude that his high risk sexual behavior is unlikely 
to recur. Considering Applicant’s circumstances (his age, education, work experience, 
and period possessing a security clearance), his actions continue to cast doubt on his 
judgment. I find that the sexual behavior concerns are not mitigated. I conclude 
Guideline D against Applicant.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 From around 2000 until 2011, Applicant viewed nude images of children in nudist 
colony websites. He sought nude images of females ages 14 through 18, and accessed 
teen model web sites where girls, ages 14 to 18, were wearing swimming suits in 
sexually suggestive poses. Applicant masturbated while viewing pictures of what he 
believed were girls between the ages of 14 and 18. Applicant also viewed adult 
pornographic material in the Internet from 2000 until 2011. He masturbated while 
viewing such material. Applicant’s wife is aware that he has viewed pornographic 
 
8 
 
 
material on the Internet. She is not aware of the details and the extent of his behavior, 
nor is she aware of his viewing nude pictures of children.  
 
 From 2001 until at least November 2010, against his employer’s policy, Applicant 
accessed the Internet and used his employer’s computer for personal use during work 
hours. During the summer of 2005, his improper use of the equipment extended to four 
hours in an eight-hour work day, and six hours during a 10-hour work day. Applicant’s 
viewing of nude minors and his use of his employer’s Internet and computer for 
personal use during work hours show questionable judgment and an unwillingness to 
comply with the law. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant disclosed his viewing of nude pictures of minors and his violation of his 
company’s Internet policy during his 2005-2006 interviews with another government 
agency. He has been candid and forthcoming through the security clearance process 
from 2005 up to the day of his hearing. He admitted his transgressions and expressed 
remorse for his actions. Had Applicant stopped his questionable behavior in 2006, likely 
he would have been able to mitigate the current security concerns. 
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant has continued to use his employer’s resources for 
personal use during work hours against his employer’s Internet policy. More disturbing 
is Applicant’s continued accessing websites depicting nude pictures of children, girls 
under the age of 18, and adult pornography. Applicant claimed that he no longer 
masturbates while viewing pictures of minors or any adult pornography. Considering the 
evidence as a whole, his claim is not credible.  
 
 Applicant was made aware in 2006-2007, that his questionable behavior raised 
security concerns to the other government agency, and resulted in the denial of his 
clearance upgrade. Nevertheless, he continued with his questionable behavior between 
2006 and 2011. His disclosures to the government investigators, and at his hearing, 
eliminate some possible vulnerability to exploitation. However, Applicant’s wife is not 
 
9 
 
 
aware of the extent of his behavior. Considering the seriousness of his behavior, and 
the adverse social stigma associated with it, Applicant’s behavior is currently a basis for 
coercion, exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Considering the record as a whole, I find that none of the Guideline E mitigating 
conditions apply. Viewing nude pictures of children and girls under 18 for his sexual 
pleasure shows Applicant lacks judgment. It is also the type of behavior that could 
subject Applicant to undue coercion and exploitation. His questionable behavior 
continued after his 2006 interviews up to at least 2011, and it continues to raise serious 
questions about Applicant’s judgment and his ability to comply with the law and 
regulations. He failed to take positive steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, and duress. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) Applicant is a devout Christian and spends a substantial amount of 
his time working for his church, his community, and taking care of his family. He is 
considered to be a valuable employee with exceptional performance ratings. He has 
held a security clearance since 2001. There is no evidence that he has compromised or 
caused others to compromise classified information. 
 
Notwithstanding, in light of Applicant’s age, education, work experience, and his 
years holding a security clearance, his sexual behavior and personal conduct continue 
to raise doubts about Applicant’s judgment and his ability to comply with the law and 
regulations. Applicant failed to present convincing evidence that he modified his 
behavior and that he has established permanent lifestyle changes to ensure that his 
questionable behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
