 
1 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                       )       ISCR Case No. 11-05766 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on a review of the case file and plea ding, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 21, 2011, Applicant submi tted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for his em ployment with a  defense contractor. (Item 
5) On February 28, 2012, the Defense Offi ce of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for an allegation 
of drug involvement for marijuana use from  May 2004 until September 2010 (Item 1). 
The action was taken under  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;  Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  
 
 The SOR was sent to Applicant on February 28, 2012 (Item 2). He responded on 
March 16, 2012 (item 3), admitting the alle gation, and requesting a decis ion on the 
record (Item 4). Department Counsel s ubmitted the Government’s written case on 
 
2 
 
March 26, 2012. Applicant received a complete  file of relevant material (FORM) on 
March 29, 2012, and was provided the opportunity to file objections and submit material 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the se curity concerns. He provided additiona l 
information on April 26, 2012. The case was assigned to me on May 16, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation under Guideline H. I carefully reviewed the case 
file and the pleadings, and make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a single 25-year-old co llege graduate who has been  an architecture 
draftsman for a defense contractor since De cember 2010 (Item 5). Applic ant noted in 
response to the question conc erning illegal drug use on the security clearance  
application that he used mari juana from May 2004 until S eptember 2010. He furthe r 
stated that his use was infrequent (a couple of times a year) except from May to August 
2005, when it was weekly. He admits to us ing marijuana several dozen times over six 
years. He admits to using marijuana three times in June, July, and September 2010. He 
was only a user and never a purchaser of the marijuana. (Item 5 at 39)  
 
On February 11, 2011, a security investig ator asked Applicant  to clarify his 
statements on the security clearance application concer ning drug use. Applic ant 
admitted using marijuana durin g senior week of high sch ool. He admitted using 
marijuana weekly in the summer of 2005 with  high school friends. During his first two 
years of college (2004/2005), he used marij uana 10 or 15 times a year. He did no t 
purchase the marijuana. It was provided by hi s high school and college friends. During 
his last two years of college (2007/2009), he used marijuana about three times a year at 
parties. He did not purchase the marijuana He did not use marijuana in the summer of 
2008, but did use it a few times after college in the summer of 2009. His last use of 
marijuana was in September 2010. He stated that he does not have a problem with  
drugs, and his drug use is only recreational. He further stated that he does not “foresee 
any increase in his  use of mari juana from about two to four time s a year if at all. He is 
not certain what his future use will be.”  (Item 6 at 10-11)  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted his marijuana use with varying 
frequency from May 2004 until at  least September 2010. He noted increased use from 
May 2004 until 2006, but decreas ed use until his  last use in September 2010. He used 
marijuana in college because of the college environment of freedom. He did not become 
dependent on marijuana, did not require c ounseling, or need rehabilitation. He 
maintained a good ac ademic standard and graduated magna cum laude. He admitted 
using marijuana after college, but at a dramat ically decreased level of frequency. He 
became more mature and was in a professional environment. (Item 4) 
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant st ated that his use of marijuana was  
infrequent and happened under  such circumstances that it is unlik ely to recur. The 
majority of his drug use was in college. While  it continued after colle ge, he did it in a 
professional environment that was lax on  drug use. He told the security investigator he 
was not certain of his future use of mari juana because he did not k now what his future 
 
3 
 
would bring. In his  response to the FORM, he agai n did not c learly state that he would 
not use drugs in the future. He again noted t hat “I do not know what my future holds.”  
He noted that he has not disassociated from his drug-using friends because they are his 
closest friends that he has known since be fore he used marijuana. He c onsiders his 
loyalty to them more import ant than whether they  decide to recreati onally use illeg al 
drugs. If he abandoned his friends simply bec ause of drug use, he would not show he 
was reliable or trustworthy. He stated he has avoided t he environment where drugs are 
used, and he signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for use 
of illegal drugs. He ha s not completed a dr ug treatment program because h e does not 
have a problem with drugs, nor is he de pendent on marijuana. (Response to FORM, 
Letter, dated April 26, 2012)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitabi lity for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consi der the Administrative Gui delines. In addition to brief  
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list  potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating condit ions, which are us eful in evaluating a n 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines ar e not inflexible ru les of law. Instead,  recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these gui delines are applied  in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative proces s. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a consci entious scrutiny of a number of variables known as t he 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative j udge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and pres ent, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national sec urity is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning pe rsonnel being cons idered for access to 
classified information will be re solved in f avor of national secu rity.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Li kewise, I have avoided drawing inferences  
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3. 1.14, the Government must present evidence to es tablish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Direc tive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant i s 
responsible for presenting “wit nesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,  
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . .” The 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks  access to classified  information enters into a fiduciary  
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures thr oughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
 
4 
 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently  fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certai n degree of legally per missible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription  drug can raise questions 
about an indiv idual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair  
judgment and becau se it raises question s about a person’s a bility or willing ness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations . Drugs are mood and behav ior altering 
substances, and include those listed in t he Controlled Subst ances Act of 1970. 
Marijuana is listed in the act as an illegal drug. Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or 
the use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction (AG ¶ 
24).  
 
 Applicant admitted using marijuana in high school, college, and after college from 
2004 until September 2010. He receiv ed the marijuana from friends. Applicant’s 
marijuana use raises Drug Involvement Disqual ifying Conditions AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug 
use); and AG ¶ 25(c) (illega l drug po ssession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution).  
 
 I considered Drug Involvement Mitigat ing Conditions AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infr equent, or happened under such unus ual 
circumstances that it is unlik ely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s  
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated 
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future , such as; (1) dissociation from drug-using 
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the env ironment where drugs were 
used; (3) an appropr iate period of abstinence;  (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation). These mitigating conditions do not  
apply.  
 
 Applicant admits using marijuana with varying frequen cy for about six y ears. 
There were no unus ual circumstances leading to the drug use. He was a young high 
school and college st udent who admits using marijuana because of the opportunity  
when it was provided by friends. While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when 
conduct is recent or sufficient time has passed since the incidents, a determination 
whether past conduct affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must 
be based on a careful evaluation of the totali ty of the evidence. If the evidenc e shows a 
significant period of time has  passed without evidenc e of drug involvement, there must 
be an evaluation whether that  period of time demonstrate s changed c ircumstances or 
conduct sufficient to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation.  
 
 Applicant has not used illegal drugs fo r almost 20 months, since September 
2010. At that time, he was  seeking employment in his  field with a defense contractor 
where drug use was  not tolerated. He start ed with his defense cont ractor employer in 
 
5 
 
December 2012. He is now in  an env ironment where drug us e is prohibited. Prior to 
that, he claims to have been in an environm ent where drug use was tolerated. There is 
no evidence that he s topped associating with drug using friends. In fact, he admits he 
will continue to associate with these friends. T here is no clear indication of his intent not 
to use drugs in the future. He told the securi ty investigator that he may use drugs in the 
future. In response to the FORM, he explained his response to the security investigator, 
but he did not clearly state that he would not use illegal drugs in the future. His answers 
to the security investigator, his response to the SOR, and his response to the FORM are 
not sufficient information of a change of circumstance showing he has reformed and will 
no longer use illegal drugs. Applicant has f ailed to pr esented sufficient information to 
overcome the security concern for his us e of illegal drugs. Guideline H is decided 
against Applicant 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, t he administrative judge evaluates the 
applicant’s conduct and all of  the circumst ances. An administr ative judge s hould 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousnes s of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time  of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary;  (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavio ral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pr essure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate  determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
 Applicant has not established that he is trustworthy, reliable, and exercises good 
judgment. He used marijuana as a high school  and college student, and after receiving 
his degree until he was seeking employment with a defens e contractor. His last use of 
marijuana was approximately  20 months ago. He still ass ociates with those that used 
marijuana with him, and he did not  state his clear intent not to use drugs in the future. 
He did not establish changed  circumstances to show he has reformed and has  been 
rehabilitated. He did not pr ovide sufficient evidenc e to establish that he should be 
trusted with access to classified informati on. The record evidence leav es me with 
questions about Applicant’s elig ibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I find that Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement  security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagr aph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances present ed by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent wit h the natio nal interest to grant Applicant  eligibility for a securit y 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
