Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-7, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-D. AE D was1
timely received post hearing.
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXX, Xxxxx Xxxxx   )       ISCR Case No. 11-06587
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 20 October 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline F, Financial Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting2
a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 3 March 2012, and I convened a hearing 27
March 2012. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 4 April 2012.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is a 50-year-old electrical engineer
employed part-time by a defense contractor since October 2010. He can be employed
full-time if he obtains his clearance. He has not previously held a clearance.
Applicant has an extensive history of financial problems, punctuated by two
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharges. Applicant first filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy
protection in October 1992. In February 1993, he was discharged from about $40,000
debt (SOR 1.a). Applicant attributes his financial problems to his overboard spending.
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection a second time in October
2009. He was discharged from nearly $1.4 million in dischargeable debt in January
2010 (SOR 1.b). Applicant’s second bankruptcy discharge is wholly attributable to his
gambling problem.
From 2006 to 2007, Applicant gambled about twice per month at an out-of-state
casino destination, losing $2,000-8,000 per month. He financed his gambling through an
equity line of credit on his home (SOR 1.d), cash advances on his credit cards (SOR
1.e), a $13,000 line of credit at one casino that became delinquent in 2007 and was
reduced to judgment in 2008 (SOR 1.f), a $5,000 bad check to a second casino (SOR
1.g), and a $7,000 line of credit at a third casino that also became delinquent in 2007
(SOR 1.h). These debts were discharged in the 2009 bankruptcy. But despite his
January 2010 bankruptcy discharge, Applicant continues to gamble. From 2007 to
2010, he traveled to a nearby state about six time to gamble at slot machines. In 2011,
he traveled to the casino city twice to gamble at slot machines (SOR 1.i).
Because of his gambling losses, Applicant was unable to pay his federal income
tax to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for tax year 2009 when due. Consequently, he
owed the IRS $4,800. (SOR 1.c). Applicant had made payments to the IRS reducing his
balance to $1,310 by February 2012 (AE A), but had stopped making payments long
enough ago that the IRS was threatening to file a tax lien against him. Applicant
annotated AE A to suggest that he had established a repayment plan with the IRS to
begin in late-April 2012, but produced no confirmation of such a plan from the IRS.
Meanwhile, he has fallen 180-days delinquent on four education loans totaling nearly
$41,000. His arrears are currently $7,300 (Tr. 36; GE 4).
Applicant has received no financial or credit counseling, except for the minimal
counseling required for his 2009 bankruptcy filing. He claims $1,200 positive monthly
cash flow, but has corroborated no efforts to resolve his remaining delinquent debt.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; (f) financial4
problems that are linked to . . . gambling problems . . . ; (i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by
an unsuccessful attempt to stop gambling, “chasing losses” (i.e. increasing the bets or returning another day
in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling
debts, family conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
3
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, disputed facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the
burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. While Applicant’s actual indebtedness
is only about $1,300, Applicant’s January 2010 bankruptcy discharge of nearly $1.4
million raises grave security concerns about Applicant’s access to classified information,
particularly where he already had one Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in February
1993. And where he continues to gamble.  Further, while Applicant had reduced his IRS4
debt to $1,300, he had stopped making payments and the IRS was threatening further
legal action in February 2012. In addition, although not alleged in the SOR, he was
$7,300 delinquent on $41,000 in education loans. Neither the IRS debt nor the federally-
insured education loans are dischargeable in bankruptcy.
Applicant meets no mitigating factors for financial considerations. His financial
difficulties are recent, his gambling is ongoing, and the circumstances under which his
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur . . . ;
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;7
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications8
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
4
financial problems occurred are thus likely to recur.  Applicant’s compulsive gambling is5
not a circumstance beyond his control, and while his Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge
may have been the only sensible action available to him, he cannot be considered to
have he acted responsibly in addressing his debts under the circumstances because
the debts were due to his own misconduct.  Further, Applicant has not addressed his6
IRS debt, the one debt he could not discharge in bankruptcy.  7
The concern with Applicant is that while he credibly states his intent to resolve
these debts, his financial situation remains in flux. He appears to have the means to
address his remaining delinquent debt, but has not demonstrated a plan for doing so.
Thus, there are too many unknowns to conclude that his financial problems are headed
for resolution.  He has not undertaken meaningful financial counseling, and his8
documents do not suggest a clear path for resolving his delinquent debts. Without such
a path, I cannot conclude that financial problems are unlikely to recur. Further, the
record lacks sufficient information upon which to base a “whole-person” analysis
supporting a favorable clearance action. I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-i: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
