 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00232 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline J, criminal conduct. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 30, 2011, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 27, 2012. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant, and proof of receipt was received by DOHA on March 6, 2012. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant chose not to submit additional evidence. The case 
was assigned to me on May 10, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.y. He also admitted SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.c, while denying 2.b and 2.d. His 
admissions are incorporated into my findings of fact. I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor for whom he has 
worked since April 2002. He is a high school graduate. He was married in 1998, but 
divorced in 2009. He has three children ages 16, 12, and 9. His “take home” pay is 
about $3,000 per month. He stated that he was diagnosed with and treated for multiple 
sclerosis since 2004.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 25 delinquent debts totaling about $11,475. The debts are 
supported by credit reports, dated September 2, 2010, March 8, 2011, and August 2, 
2011. Although he has medical insurance through his job, he attributes most of his 
delinquent debts to medical co-payments resulting from his multiple sclerosis treatment. 
The remaining delinquent debts are various consumer debts which he claims originated 
from his ex-wife’s credit card use. In September 2010, he told a DoD investigator that 
he was going to hire a debt consolidation company to assist him in paying off his debts. 
There is no evidence in the record that he did so. In his September 2011 answer to the 
SOR, he indicated he was filing for bankruptcy protection and that his parents were 
going to assist him with his medical debts from now on. He presented no evidence to 
support either action. There is also no evidence that he sought financial counseling. All 
the SOR debts are outstanding.2 
 
 In August 2009, Applicant and his girlfriend were at a local amusement park 
where they found a key to a storage locker. His girlfriend used the key to enter the 
locker where they found a purse. They took the purse and stole some of the contents 
including money and vicodin prescription pills. Their actions were seen by security 
personnel through on-site cameras and they were arrested. Applicant was also charged 
with possessing Percocet, which he claimed he had because of his multiple sclerosis. 
He did not have the prescription bottle for the Percocet in his possession, so he was 
charged with possession of a narcotic. Applicant admitted to his role in crime, which 
                                                          
1 Items 4 and 13. 
 
2 Items 2, 11-14. 
 
 
3 
 
 
was that of a knowing accomplice. In October 2009, he pleaded guilty to two felony 
charges, second degree burglary and possession of a schedule two controlled 
substance. He was given a deferred sentence on both charges contingent on successful 
completion of three years of probation. His probation ends in October 2012 (See SOR ¶ 
2.a).3  
 
 In December 1995, Applicant was charged with revocation of the deferred 
sentence he received in October 1994. The October 1994 offense resulted when he and 
a friend stole a car stereo from a vehicle in a shopping center. He left his pager in the 
car and the police were able to tie him to the crime. He pleaded guilty to a lesser charge 
of trespassing and was given a deferred sentence. He ultimately completed his 
probation after additional conditions were imposed by the court in December 1995 (see 
SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.d).4 
 
 In November 1994, Applicant invited some friends to his apartment. One of the 
friends brought some alcohol and they all were drinking. Applicant admitted that he was 
intoxicated. He and one of his friends got into a disagreement. They began pushing and 
shoving each other. Applicant stated that the other person was bigger than he was so 
he went into the kitchen, retrieved a knife, and brandished it to the person he was 
fighting. The police were called and Applicant was arrested for assault, menacing, and 
harassment. He pleaded guilty to third degree assault and was sentenced to one year of 
probation. He successfully completed his sentence (See SOR ¶ 2.c).5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
                                                          
3 Items 8-9. 
 
4 Item 6, 8-9. 
 
5 Id. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has numerous past-due debts that he was unable or unwilling to 
satisfy. Both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20, including the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence that he paid or resolved any of his 
delinquent debts. Therefore, his behavior is recent and the delinquent debts remain a 
concern. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s debts 
remain owed and unresolved.  
 
 Applicant experienced a divorce and medical expenses, which could be 
considered conditions beyond his control. However, for this mitigating condition to fully 
apply there must be a showing that Applicant took responsible actions under the 
circumstances. Applicant failed to make such a showing. He indicated he would seek 
 
6 
 
 
debt counseling assistance and/or file for bankruptcy protection, but there is no 
evidence that he did either. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant sought financial counseling. There is no clear 
evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under control. I find 
he has not made a good-faith effort to pay his delinquent debts or attempt to resolve 
them. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant failed to document his dispute of any debts. I find AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) the individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant pled guilty to felony counts of burglary and possession of a controlled 
substance in 2009. He also pled guilty to assault, trespassing, and burglary in 1994 and 
1995. He is also currently on probation. I find that the above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
7 
 
 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s criminal conviction is recent and serious. Additionally, he committed 
his most recent offense after a prior criminal history, which shows rehabilitation has not 
been successful. He is currently on supervised probation. Applicant failed to provide 
sufficient evidence that his reliability, trustworthiness and judgment are not in question 
based upon the nature of his previous offenses. Not enough time has passed to 
determine whether his rehabilitative efforts have succeeded. Applicant has not 
presented sufficient evidence establishing either mitigating condition. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant debt is unresolved with no 
viable plan in place to address it. He also has a history of engaging in serious criminal 
behavior as recently as 2009. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations and Guideline J, criminal conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.y   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
