 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01383   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen 
from Ukraine, maintains close relationships to family members who are citizens and 
residents of Ukraine and Russia. Applicant’s wife, child, and assets are in the United 
States. He has no foreign property interests. Furthermore, his foreign family members 
are not dependent on or involved with the governments of their respective countries. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order (EO) and DoD Directive,1 the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
December 2, 2011, notifying Applicant that it was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his access to classified information. 
DOHA recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke his clearance. The SOR detailed the reasons for the 
action under Guideline B (foreign influence).  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on December 20, 2011, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 7, 2012. The hearing proceeded as 
scheduled on March 28, 2012. Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 2, which were admitted. Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K were admitted 
without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 11, 2012. 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
At hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts about Russia and Ukraine. Applicant did not object to the request, and it 
was granted. The administrative summary regarding these countries is appended to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant submitted nine decisions issued by other 
administrative judges granting access to applicants with similar foreign influence 
concerns. These documents are appended to the record as HE A, without objection 
from Department Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings 
of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, a 49-year-old employee of a federal contractor, was born in the Soviet 
Union, in present-day Uzbekistan. Applicant’s moved with his family to Kiev where he 
completed high school and attended college. After graduation, he was conscripted into 
the Russian Army, completing his two-year compulsory service in 1988. Applicant did 
not maintain any contacts from his military service. After his discharge, he began 
working for a state-owned technology company. When the Soviet Union collapsed in 
1991, Applicant and his family, as residents of Kiev, automatically became citizens of 
Ukraine.1 
 
 In 1991, Applicant married his first wife. As a member of a persecuted religious 
minority, she obtained asylum in the United States. Though not a member of the 
religious group, his wife’s status as an asylum seeker was extended to him and he was 
able to immigrate with her in 1992. They divorced in 1994. Initially, Applicant worked as 
a busboy while he matriculated at a U.S. university, receiving a bachelor’s degree in 
1996. He became a naturalized citizen in 2000. Applicant married his current wife, a 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
1 Tr. 20-24, 59-60; GE 1 - 2. 
 
 
3 
 
distant cousin, in 2009. The couple, who have known each other since they were 
children, reconnected in 2007 when she visited the United States for a professional 
conference. While in Russia, Applicant’s wife worked in advertising. Since immigrating 
to the United States, she has attended school to improve her English-language skills. 
She does not work outside the home. Although she is still a citizen of Russia, she 
currently holds permanent resident status in the United States and is eligible to apply for 
citizenship in the summer of 2012. The couple’s one-and-a-half-year-old daughter is a 
U.S. citizen by birth.2  
 
 Applicant’s mother and brother remain in the Ukraine. She is a retired secretary, 
who receives a small pension from her former employer. His brother, a software 
engineer, works for a private company. Applicant maintains contact with his mother at 
least twice a month by telephone. Occasionally, he sends her money to help with her 
medical expenses. She visited Applicant and his wife in the United States after their 
daughter was born. Applicant does not maintain regular contact with his brother. His 
mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Russia. A retired nurse, she receives income 
from a pension from her former employer and rent from a property she owns. 
Applicant’s wife and mother maintain frequent contact by telephone, at least three times 
each week. She visits Applicant and his wife frequently in New York to spend time with 
her granddaughter. Since the couple married in 2009, Applicant’s mother-in-law has 
visited them six times, most recently from January to March 2012. She is scheduled to 
return in June 2012 for a four-month visit. After his wife becomes a naturalized citizen, 
they plan to sponsor her mother’s permanent entry into the United States.  
 
Since 2008, Applicant has traveled to Russia three times. In 2008, he traveled to 
Russia twice to visit his wife while they were dating. Applicant, his wife, and daughter 
traveled to Russia for the 2011 holiday season to visit his mother-in-law and escort her 
to the United States for an extended visit. Applicant’s brother and mother, who is unable 
to travel to the United States because of her advanced age and health concerns, came 
to Russia to visit with them. Applicant traveled to Ukraine once in 2004.3  
 
 Applicant owns his home and holds other sizeable assets in the United States. 
He has accumulated $35,000 in equity in his home and almost $90,000 in retirement 
savings. He does not hold assets in the Ukraine or Russia.4   
 
Russia5 
 
The Russian Federation is composed of 21 republics. It achieved independence 
with the dissolution of the Soviet Union on August 24, 1991.  
 
                                                          
2 Tr. 20, 24-26, 57-58; AE A- D. 
 
3 Tr. 17-18, 24, 29-31, 37-48; GE 1-2; AE K. 
 
4 Tr. 51-53; AE E-J. 
 
5 HE 1. 
  
 
4 
 
The United States and Russia share certain common strategic interests. Of 
mutual interest to the United States and Russia are counterterrorism and the reduction 
of strategic arsenals. U.S.-Russian relations have often been strained. The Russian 
Federation’s intelligence capability is significant and focuses on collection of information 
from the United States. Russia has targeted U.S. technologies and has sought to obtain 
protected information from them through industrial espionage. Russian espionage 
specializes in military technology and gas and oil industry expertise. In 2010, the United 
States Department of Justice announced arrests of ten alleged secret agents for 
carrying out long-term, deep-covered assignments on behalf of Russia. Russia is a 
leading arms exporter, with major sales of advanced weapons and military-related 
technology to China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela.  
 
Russia has recognized the legitimacy of international human rights standards, 
but human rights abuses continue. The U.S. Department of State reports allegations 
that Russian government officials and others conduct warrantless searches of 
residences and other premises and electronic surveillance without judicial permission.  
 
Ukraine6 
 
Ukraine has a parliamentary presidential system of government. It has been an 
independent state since 1991. The country is undergoing a profound political and 
economic change as it moves from its Soviet past toward a market economy and multi-
party democracy.  
 
Ukraine inherited a military force of 780,000 from the Soviet Union. It is seeking 
to modernize the military and is looking to meet NATO standards. Security forces in the 
Ukraine are controlled by the president, subject to parliamentary investigation. Ukraine’s 
foreign policy goals have been Euro-Atlantic integration and entry into the World Trade 
Organization. It also seeks to maintain good relations with Russia, referring to the 
country as their “permanent strategic partner.” The relationship is strained due to energy 
dependence, the stationing of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol, and by 
Russia almost completely cutting off natural gas supplies in January 2009.  
 
Overall, the Ukrainian human rights record has many problems, including police 
abuse and an unsatisfactory penal system. The law prohibits the use of torture, but law 
enforcement personnel use force and mistreatment routinely to extract confessions and 
information from detainees. Police arbitrarily detain persons, although it is prohibited by 
law. There are also instances of government intimidation of the opposition and 
independent media and reports of government personnel engaged in unlawful 
surveillance and telephone tapping.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
6 HE 1. 
 
5 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
6 
 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
 
 Both disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant’s two-year compulsory military 
service, which ended in 1988, is not indicative of a foreign preference. However, he and 
his wife, a non-U.S. citizen, maintain close relationships with family members in Russia 
and Ukraine. The mere possession of close ties with family members living in Ukraine 
and Russia is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
The countries in question also must be considered. In particular, the nature of 
their government, their relationships with the United States, and their human rights 
record is relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant's family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. Although Russia and the United States are strategic 
partners in some areas, it is also true that Russia has focused its significant intelligence 
capability in an aggressive program of targeting sensitive U.S. information. It also has a 
poor human rights record, and violates civil rights by monitoring email traffic and 
telephone service. Ukraine and Russia maintain a close and complex strategic 
partnership. In addition, Ukraine has a poor human rights record and the government 
uses it resources to intimidate opposition and independent media. Accordingly, I find a 
heightened risk exists. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could mitigate the foreign influence 
concerns under AG ¶ 8. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
 
7 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S., 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest, and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) apply.  Family contacts and ties with 
persons in a foreign country are not automatically disqualifying, but require an applicant 
to present evidence in mitigation and extenuation that he qualifies for access to 
classified information. Applicant’s relationships with his mother and brother in Ukraine 
cannot be considered casual or infrequent; however, there is no evidence in the record 
to suggest that Ukraine is an active collector of sensitive or classified U.S. information. 
Applicant’s relationship with his mother-in-law in Russia also a close one, however, 
none of Applicant’s foreign family members are associated with or dependent on the 
governments of their respective countries. As such, it is unlikely that Applicant will be 
put in a position of having to choose between the interests of his foreign relatives and 
the United States. Applicant entered the United States 20 years ago as a refugee. He is 
firmly rooted to the United States by the presence of his wife and daughter, as well as 
his substantial assets in this country. Viewed in totality, these factors lead me to the 
conclusion that Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). The evidence supports a finding 
that Applicant does not have divided loyalties between the United States, Russia, or 
Ukraine. Based on the evidence, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the Guideline B 
concerns raised in this case. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented in this case, it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility to classified 
information is granted.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
