 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01756 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard Murray, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding sexual behavior. Eligibility for 
a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 24, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions version of a Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on May 25, 2011.2 On another unspecified date, DOHA issued him a set 
of interrogatories. He responded to those interrogatories on September 23, 2011.3 
DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him on January 11, 2012, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
                                                          
1
 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86, dated June 24, 2010). 
 
2
 Government Exhibit 4 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated May 25, 2011). 
 
3
 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 23, 2011). 
 
2 
                                      
 
20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines D (Sexual 
Behavior) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 20, 2012. In a sworn 
statement, dated February 8, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on March 14, 2012, and the case was assigned 
to me on March 16, 2012. A Notice of Hearing was issued on April 5, 2012, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on May 2, 2012. 
 
 During the hearing, four Government exhibits (GE 1 through 4) and four 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through D) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant and one witness testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 10, 2012. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the 
SOR by deleting certain allegations. Specifically, she moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 
2., 2.a., and 2.b. There being no objection, the motion was granted.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted one of the factual allegations (¶ 
1.b.) as well as a portion of one other factual allegation (¶ 1.c.) of the SOR. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied the remaining 
allegation (¶ 1.a.) as well as the remaining portion of one other factual allegation (¶ 1.c.) 
of the SOR. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since January 
2009, has been serving as an associate professional staff I.5 He has never served in the 
U.S. military.6 He was granted a secret security clearance in 2008, but subsequent 
applications for a top secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented 
                                                          
4
 Tr. at 9-10. 
 
5
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 10; Government Exhibit 4, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
6
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
information (SCI) with another agency or department were denied in 2009.7 His secret 
security clearance was suspended in 2010.8 
 
Applicant followed his June 2003 high school graduation with enrollment at a 
domestic university from August 2003 until December 2009 and attendance at a foreign 
university for two summer months each in 2004 and 2005. He obtained a B.S. degree in 
computer science in May 2007, and an M.S. degree in computer science in December 
2009.9  
 
A seasonal lifeguard and swim instructor during his last two years in high school, 
he also held a number of university and part-time positions while attending college.10 
Applicant joined his current employer in May 2008, and served for three months as a 
technical aide, before assuming his current position.11 
 
Applicant has never been married,12 but has cohabited with his girlfriend since 
May 2010.13 
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
 Commencing in about 2001, when he was 16 years of age and in high school, 
and continuing until he graduated from high school in 2003, when he was 18 years of 
age, Applicant downloaded to his computer from Napster and other peer-to-peer file 
sharing applications, music, movies, computer games files, as well as nude images and 
pornographic videos of what he believed to be prepubescent girls in provocative 
                                                          
7
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 24. In October 2009, a clearance decision statement (CDS) was 
issued against Applicant alleging criminal conduct, sexual behavior, and personal conduct pertaining to his previous 
downloading of music, movies, and computer game files, as well as nude images and pornographic videos of 
underage females. No mitigation was found, and he was deemed ineligible for access to SCI. See Government 
Exhibit 4 (CDS from another department or agency, dated October 8, 2009), attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories, supra note 2. Applicant filed a written appeal of the initial decision to the deputy chief of the 
adjudications division in December 2009, and in March 2010, the initial decision was sustained. See Government 
Exhibit 4 (First Appeal Review, dated March 20, 2010), attached to Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, supra note 
2. In April 2010, Applicant filed a written appeal to the Access Appeals Panel (AAP) of the decision of the deputy chief 
of the adjudications division. In November 2010, that appeal was denied and the earlier decisions were sustained. 
See Government Exhibit 4 (Decision of AAP, dated November 18, 2010), attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories, supra note 2. 
 
8
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 24. Applicant’s security clearance was suspended based upon the 
action taken by the other department or agency. See Government Exhibit 4 (Letter, dated May 28, 2010), attached to 
Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, supra note 2. 
 
9
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
10
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 12, 15. 
 
11
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
12
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
13
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 19. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
poses.14 He estimated the girls depicted in the images were generally underage and 
between 11 and 1815 because many were “underdeveloped” and did not appear to have 
any pubic hair.16 There were “indications of at least the start of puberty for a majority of 
the images” he viewed.17 Aside from the appearance of the women in the images, 
Applicant did not know for a fact that they were underage.18 Applicant sought out those 
images and videos because he wanted to view females that were “around” his same 
age for the purposes of masturbation in the privacy of his own room.19 The motivation 
behind his actions was that it was a period of Applicant’s “natural curiosity” about the 
female form during sexual development, because, at that time, he never had a 
girlfriend,20 had never seen a nude female, and had never had sexual relations.21 
 
 Applicant continued to regularly view the downloaded images throughout the 
remainder of his high school years as well as a few times during his freshman year of 
college.22 The summer following his freshman year in college, Applicant studied a 
foreign language in a foreign university, and at the end of his trip, he engaged in sexual 
relations (with a prostitute) for the first time. He was 19 or 20 years old when he stopped 
viewing the images.23 Following that experience, Applicant no longer had the curiosity or 
desire to view the downloaded images.24 After Applicant graduated from high school, he 
never went online to view any child pornography.25 
 
 When Applicant started downloading the images in question, he was not 
technically able to view the image until after it was downloaded. Upon viewing some of 
them he deleted those in which he had no interest.26 Those images that were retained 
on a compact disk might have been copied as part of his routine backing-up of his 
                                                          
14
 Tr. at 28-30, 47-48, 53-54; Government Exhibit 4 (Report, dated August 28, 2009), at 2, attached to 
Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, supra note 2. 
 
15
 Government Exhibit 3 (Summary of Information Changes, undated), attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories, supra note 3. Applicant also speculated that some of the girls may have been approximately 10 to 12 
years of age. See Government Exhibit 4, supra note 14, at 2.  
 
16
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 14, at 2. 
 
17
 Tr. at 57. 
 
18
 Tr. at 79. 
 
19
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 14, at 2; Tr. at 45-48, 56. 
 
20
 Tr. at 74. 
 
21
 Tr. at 32, 74. 
 
22
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated February 8, 2012; Tr. at 30-31, 54, 58. 
 
23
 Tr. at 33; Government Exhibit 4, supra note 14, at 2. 
 
24
 Tr. at 34. 
 
25
 Tr. at 60. 
 
26
 Tr. at 50. 
 
5 
                                      
 
computer files.27 Applicant forgot about the images until shortly before he was 
interviewed during the security clearance review process in 2009.28 He was searching 
among his two desktop computers and two laptop computers at his residence for a 
document and unintentionally came upon some nude female images.29 He discussed 
his newly rediscovered images with the interviewer, and indicated it was time for him to 
“do a little spring cleaning on his computers by deleting all of the underage, 
pornographic videos, and images.”30 Sometime between August 2009 and December 
2009, Applicant physically destroyed the compact disk containing the images and 
searched throughout his computers and hard drives to locate and delete any remaining 
“questionable material” that he had.31 He is ashamed of his conduct pertaining to the 
underage nude images,32 and has no intention of participating in such activities in the 
future.33 Applicant has never been charged by the police with possession of child 
pornography.34 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant met the woman who would become his girlfriend in March 2009, and 
they have since entered into “an extremely close, committed, loving relationship.”35 
They are “best friends” and do everything together.36 They are sexually active with each 
other.37 He told her of the issues pertaining to child pornography after the interview with 
the other agency or department.38 They share computers, and she has seen no 
evidence of child pornography since they have resided together.39 Applicant’s girlfriend 
considers him to be very loyal, dependable, trustworthy, and honest.40 
 
                                                          
 
27
 Tr. at 53. 
 
28
 Tr. at 61. 
 
29
 Tr. at 61-62; Government Exhibit 4, supra note 14, at 2. 
 
30
 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 14, at 2. 
 
31
 Tr. at 38, 69, 84; Government Exhibit 2 (Affidavit, dated July 28, 2010), at 5. 
 
32
 Tr. at 75-76. 
 
33
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 9. 
 
34
 Tr. at 80; Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 8. 
 
35
 Tr. at 35. 
 
36
 Tr. at 90. 
 
37
 Tr. at 93-94. 
 
38
 Tr. at 92. 
 
39
 Tr. at 93. 
 
40
 Tr. at 95-96. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor and second-level supervisor, as well as his 
friends, were informed of the child pornography issues by Applicant. Nevertheless, as to 
his coworkers, they have known him since he started working for them, and they 
support his application for a security clearance. They have characterized him in highly 
favorable terms: trustworthy, thoughtful, reliable, dependable, dedicated, and 
respected.41 Two social friends, a husband and wife, have known Applicant since 2008, 
and they both believe he is a kind and gentle soul and a man of integrity, who is reliable 
and trustworthy.42 They have no reservations regarding having Applicant at their home 
interacting with their children.43 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”44 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”45   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
                                                          
41
 Applicant Exhibit A (Character Reference, dated April 25, 2012); Applicant Exhibit C (Character 
Reference, dated April 27, 2012). 
 
42
 Applicant Exhibit B (Character Reference, dated April 26, 2012); Applicant Exhibit D (Character 
Reference, dated April 28, 2012). 
 
43
 Applicant Exhibit B, supra note 42; Applicant Exhibit D, supra note 42. 
 
44
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
45
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”46 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.47  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”48 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”49 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
  
The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12:  
                                                          
46
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
47
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
48
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
49
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 13(a), “sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether the individual has been 
prosecuted” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 13(c), “sexual behavior 
that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress” may raise 
security concerns. In addition, “sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects 
lack of discretion or judgment” is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 13(d). Applicant’s 
history of downloading and viewing nude images and pornographic videos of what he 
believed to be prepubescent girls in provocative poses between 2001 and 2003 or 
2004, is documented in his statements, affidavit, answer to the SOR, his answers to 
interrogatories, and the evidence, including his testimony, presented during the hearing.  
Applicant’s behavior would appear to be of a criminal nature, it reflected a lack of 
discretion or judgment, and it made him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), and 13(d), apply.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from sexual behavior. Under AG ¶ 14(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there 
is no evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature.” AG ¶ 14(b) may apply where 
“the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” If “the behavior no longer serves 
as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress,” it is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 
14(c). Similarly, if “the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet,” AG 
¶ 14(d) may apply.  
 
AG ¶ 14(a) applies. As noted above, during a period of self-discovery and natural 
curiosity, commencing in about 2001, when he was 16 years of age and in high school, 
and continuing until he graduated from high school in 2003, when he was 18 years of 
age, Applicant downloaded to his computer from Napster and other peer-to-peer file 
sharing applications, nude images and pornographic videos of what he believed to be 
prepubescent girls in provocative poses. He continued to regularly view the downloaded 
images throughout the remainder of his high school years as well as a few times during 
his freshman year of college. In other words, he continued to view the previously 
downloaded images until he was about 19 or 20 years of age. AG ¶ 14(a) does not offer 
a definition of the word “adolescence,” so I have referred to a standard definition of the 
word. “Adolescence” is defined as:50 
 
                                                          
50
 Mosby's Pocket Dictionary of Medicine, Nursing, & Allied Health 29  (2nd ed., Mosby 1994). 
 
9 
                                      
 
. . . the period in development between the onset of puberty and 
adulthood. It usually begins between 11 and 13 years of age with the 
appearance of secondary sex characteristics and spans the teen years, 
terminating at 18 to 20 years of age with the acquisition of completely 
developed adult form. During this period, the individual undergoes 
extensive physical, psychologic, emotional, and personality changes.  
 
Applicant’s sexual behavior occurred during that period of his life where self-discovery 
and natural curiosity about the female body near his age was of significant importance 
to him. Since his first sexual encounter with a female during his summer studies 
program overseas, there has been no evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar 
nature. 
 
AG ¶ 14(b) applies. The sexual behavior pertaining to the downloading of the 
images occurred over nine years ago and has not been repeated since that period. The 
sexual behavior pertaining to the viewing of the images is alleged to have occurred from 
2001 to 2004 – approximately between 8 and 11 years ago, generally on a weekly or 
monthly basis, before it ceased. The viewing generally ceased once Applicant 
experienced his first sexual encounter. Considering his subsequent evolvement and 
sexual and emotional maturity, as well as his current committed relationship with his 
girlfriend, the sexual behavior is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
AG ¶ 14(c) applies. Now that Applicant’s immediate and second-level 
supervisors, his girlfriend, and their friends, as well as the Government are aware of his 
sexual behavior from his past, that sexual behavior no longer serves as a basis for 
coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
AG ¶ 14(d) applies. Applicant’s downloading and viewing of the images took 
place in a private and discreet location – his bedroom – and was not openly broadcast 
to others. No criminal action was ever proposed or taken against him for his actions.  
 
One additional comment is necessary related to two aspects of Applicant’s 
sexual behavior: his accidental or inadvertent viewing of the images in 2009 when he 
again discovered them in his computer, and his failure to delete the images from his 
computers until 2009. Applicant contended he had forgotten that the images had 
remained on his computer (or on a compact disk) after he ceased viewing them, and it 
was not until he was looking for a document in 2009 that he came across them. It is the 
position of the Government that Applicant knowingly and intentionally retained, 
searched for, and viewed, those images. Applicant denied the allegations.  
 
I had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant, observe his 
manner and deportment, appraise the way in which he responded to questions, assess 
his candor or evasiveness, read his statements, and listen to his testimony. It is my 
impression that his explanations are consistent. Considering the quality of the other 
evidence before me, most of which emanated directly from Applicant, they have the 
solid resonance of truth. I find Applicant’s explanations are credible in his denial of 
 
10 
                                      
 
deliberately knowingly and intentionally retaining, searching for, and viewing, those 
images. There is some concern, however, that once those images were rediscovered, 
they were not immediately deleted or destroyed by him. Applicant failed to understand 
the significance of those images at that time, but shortly thereafter did so, and the 
images were deleted or destroyed in 2009 – three years ago. Even if his sexual 
behavior were not mitigated under AG ¶ 14, it would be mitigated under the whole-
person concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.51       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s sexual conduct. Applicant 
downloaded to his computer various peer-to-peer file sharing applications, nude images 
and pornographic videos of what he believed to be prepubescent girls in provocative 
poses. He regularly viewed the downloaded images throughout the remainder of his 
high school years as well as a few times during his freshman year of college, or until he 
was about 19 or 20 years of age. He failed to delete or destroy those images until 2009. 
(See AG & 2(a)(8).)  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s sexual behavior occurred during his adolescence and there is no evidence 
of subsequent conduct of a similar nature. There is no evidence of a personality 
disorder: Applicant is in an extremely close, committed, loving relationship with his 
girlfriend; they do everything together and are sexually active with each other; they 
share computers, and she has seen no evidence of child pornography since they have 
                                                          
51
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
resided together. Applicant’s girlfriend, his supervisors, as well as his friends, were 
informed of the child pornography issues by Applicant. They have all characterized him 
in highly favorable terms. Two social friends, a husband and wife, have no reservations 
regarding having Applicant at their home interacting with their children. Applicant’s 
conduct was not openly or indiscreetly engaged in. No criminal action was ever 
proposed or taken against him for his actions. He has sexually and emotionally 
matured, and the sexual behavior is unlikely to recur. Under the evidence presented, I 
have no questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
