 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06465  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brian E. Kaveney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a naturalized citizen of the 
United States originally from Egypt, maintains close relationships with family members 
in Egypt and in-laws in Taiwan. However, the record establishes that in the more than 
20 years Applicant has lived in the United States, he has cultivated a network of family 
and friends and accumulated significant U.S.-based assets that firmly root him to the 
United States, thereby mitigating the foreign influence concerns raised in this case. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order (EO) and DoD Directive,1 the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
October 13, 2011, notifying Applicant that it was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his access to classified information. 
DOHA recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke his clearance. The SOR detailed the reasons for the 
action under Guideline B (foreign influence).  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on November 9, 2011 and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 7, 2012. The hearing proceeded as 
scheduled on March 29, 2012. Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 
1 and 2, which were admitted. Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through FFF were admitted 
without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 11, 2012. 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
At hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts about Egypt, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the People’s Republic of China. The 
administrative notice summary regarding these countries is appended to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 over Applicant’s objections.2 The facts administratively noticed 
are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old engineer, originally from Egypt. He is employed by an 
engineering firm that frequently works on projects for the federal government requiring 
access to classified information. Applicant completed his undergraduate education and 
one year of compulsory military service, which ended in 1990, in Egypt. He was 
released from his mandatory obligation to the Egyptian Army reserves in 2000. 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1991 to attend graduate school, earning a 
master’s degree and a master’s of philosophy from two prominent U.S. schools. 
Applicant has worked for his employer, who sponsored Applicant’s work visa and 
citizenship application, for 20 years. Applicant became a naturalized citizen of the 
United States in 2006.3 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Egypt. A retired airline employee, 
she supports herself using the proceeds of her pension and the money left to her by her 
deceased husband. She does not rely on Applicant for financial support. Applicant 
maintains contact with his mother weekly, by telephone. His 17-year-old son, born 
during his first marriage, is a dual U.S.-Egyptian citizen living in Egypt with Applicant’s 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
2 Applicant’s counsel objected to the administrative notice summary as it relates to Egypt on the basis that 
it does not establish a heightened risk as required under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b). 
 
3Tr. 68-70, 81, 102-103, 125. 
 
3 
 
ex-wife. He attends an American high school in a large city. Applicant speaks to his son 
at least twice each month by telephone and maintains contact with him using a social 
media website. At the request of his ex-wife, Applicant does not contribute to the 
financial support of his son. Applicant’s older brother is a citizen and resident of Egypt, 
who works as the chief operating officer (CEO) of an Egyptian company. Applicant 
travels to Egypt at least once a year to visit his family members.4  
  
 When Applicant’s father died in 2008, he bequeathed to Applicant, his brother, 
and their mother, joint ownership of a commercial property that Applicant believes to be 
currently valued at $1.2 million dollars.5 Applicant’s brother, with Applicant’s and his 
mother’s power of attorney, manages the building, which is currently unoccupied. In 
2009 and 2010, the building generated rental income. Applicant’s brother would deposit 
Applicant’s share into a bank account that Applicant established specifically for that 
purpose. The account, held by a large international bank, allows Applicant to transfer 
the funds to his U.S. accounts without interacting with Egyptian officials. Applicant 
reported the rental income he received, which amounted to 17 percent of his total 
earnings over the two years, on his federal income taxes as required. Like Applicant, 
neither his mother nor brother relies on the building for income. Because of a downturn 
in the commercial real estate market, Applicant is unable to divest himself of his interest 
in the property either to a third party or his mother or brother.6  
 
 In 2009, Applicant married his second wife, a permanent resident of the United 
States, who is originally from Taiwan. The couple met through a popular U.S.-based 
online dating website in 2007. Unemployed since being laid off from her job as a graphic 
designer in 2009, she has been accepted to a master’s program that will begin in the fall 
of 2012. Applicant and his wife have an 11-month-old son, who is a U.S. citizen by birth. 
Applicant has no intention of obtaining Egyptian citizenship for this child as he did with 
his older son. Applicant’s parents-in-law and two brothers-in-law are residents and 
citizens of Taiwan. His mother-in-law is a retired teacher. His father-in-law and one 
brother-in-law teach at the same private university in Hong Kong.7 His other brother-in-
law is a banker in Taiwan. Applicant and his wife visit her family in Taiwan every year. 
Outside these visits, a language barrier prevents Applicant from maintaining 
independent relationships with his in-laws. Applicant always reports his contacts with 
foreign family members to his facility security officer.8 
 
 In the 21 years Applicant has lived in the United States, he has accumulated 
almost $1 million in assets including his home, bank accounts, retirement savings, and 
                                                          
4 Tr. 64-65, 86-91. 
 
5 Applicant’s previous valuation of the property of $1.5 million dollars was based on the exchange rate 
between the U.S. dollar and the Egyptian pound at the time of his subject interview in February 2011. 
 
6 Tr. 92-98, 100-102, 128-129. 
 
7 The SOR incorrectly alleges that Applicant’s brother-in-law teaches at a university in Taiwan. 
 
8 Tr. 112-124, 134-141. 
 
 
4 
 
life insurance. He has a net worth over $800,000, which does not include his interest in 
the property in Egypt.9 
 
 Before submitting his application for security clearance, Applicant’s facility 
security officer, (FSO) vetted him carefully. Given the specialized and sensitive nature 
of the firm’s work, the firm has developed a strong security culture. The FSO, who has 
worked for the firm for over 30 years, has implemented a layered security protocol, 
which includes training, briefing, access controls, reporting, personal contact, a close 
partnership with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and compliance audits. In the past, 
the firm successfully negotiated an instance where a foreign actor attempted to 
influence an employee working abroad. Because of the firm’s stringent security 
protocols, the organization has twice received awards from DoD regarding its 
implementation of the defense industrial security program. Of the nearly 11,000 cleared 
contractors only 12 receive the award annually. In addition to its engineering work, the 
firm is also hired by municipalities and other companies to develop their security 
protocols.10  
 
 The FSO also believes the strict security environment is maintained by the small 
and close-knit nature of the firm, which has 300 employees, many of whom have 
worked there for over 20 years. The chief technology officer (CTO) describes the firm as 
“a mutually supportive environment . . . where privacy is seldom granted.” Every day for 
the past 20 years, Applicant has eaten lunch with a group of employees including the 
firm’s CEO, CTO, FSO, and managing director of the firm’s business group (managing 
director). They openly and freely share personal information with each other. In the 
CTO’s opinion, it would be difficult for any member of the group to conceal information 
from the others or hide any outside pressure or strain.11 
 
 The CEO, CTO, FSO, and managing director testified at the hearing and 
submitted affidavits on Applicant’s behalf. Applicant and the CEO have a 
mentor/mentee relationship that began when Applicant was in graduate school. The 
CEO, then a professor in Applicant’s graduate program, recruited Applicant into the firm. 
The two talk regularly as Applicant consults the CEO for advice on personal and 
professional matters. The CTO also considers Applicant a friend, who supported him 
when his newborn child required treatment in the neo-natal intensive care unit after 
birth. In turn, the CTO was present when Applicant’s youngest son was born. The FSO 
accompanied Applicant to his naturalization ceremony, and he and his wife were 
witnesses at Applicant’s wedding in 2009. All recounted the leadership Applicant 
displayed as the firm negotiated the September 2011 terrorist attacks and a black out 
that debilitated their city in 2006.12  
  
                                                          
9 Tr. 98-100. 
 
10 AE Z. 
 
11 AE R, Z. 
 
12 AE R, Z, CC. 
 
 
5 
 
 The managing director, who staffs each of the firm’s projects and who ultimately 
approved the firm’s sponsorship of Applicant’s security clearance application, lauded 
Applicant’s character and believes that he has demonstrated a high respect for authority 
and that he follows rules and regulations required of him from an engineering and 
security prospective. For these reasons, he felt comfortable staffing Applicant on federal 
government projects in Egypt in 2006, 2008, and most recently in February 2012. The 
FSO echoed this assessment stating that Applicant has followed the rules and 
regulations of the National Industrial Security Program and its reporting requirements. 
He also attests that Applicant has been appropriately trained and briefed on his security 
duties and that he is keenly aware of the responsibilities that accompany holding a 
security clearance.13  
 
 Although he is unable to renounce his Egyptian citizenship, which can only be 
done by an act of the Egyptian government, Applicant considers himself only a citizen of 
the United States. Before submitting his security clearance application, he surrendered 
his Egyptian passport to his FSO. He also chose not to participate in the most recent 
Egyptian elections, which allowed, for the first time, Egyptian citizens living abroad to 
cast ballots.14 
 
Egypt 
 
Egypt is a republic with a strong executive that has entered into a period of 
profound uncertainty. In February 2011, Hosni Mubarak, the president for the past 29 
years, resigned. A Supreme Council of the Armed Forces exercises executive authority. 
In the past, the United States and Egypt enjoyed a strong and friendly relationship 
based on shared mutual interests in Middle East peace and stability, strengthening 
trade relations, and promoting regional security. 
 
The threat of terrorism in Egypt remains high and transnational terrorist groups 
and local terrorist groups pose threats in Egypt despite Egypt’s aggressive pursuit of 
terrorists and extremism. In 2003, Egypt discovered and disrupted a terrorist plot 
against U.S. interests. Between 2004 and 2006, Egypt suffered a series of deadly, 
coordinated terrorist bombings, which caused many deaths and hundreds of injuries, 
including U.S. citizens. Although the Egyptian government took measures against the 
perpetrators of the attacks, there is a persistent, indigenous threat of terrorist activities. 
In April 2009, the Egyptian government uncovered a Hezbollah cell clandestinely 
operating in Egypt. Terrorists use overt, covert, and clandestine activities to exploit and 
undermine U.S. national security interests. Terrorist organizations currently target the 
U.S. for intelligence collection through human espionage and other means. Terrorist 
groups conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services.   
 
The State Department notes that Egypt’s human rights record is poor and serious 
abuses continue in many areas. Problems include: restriction of freedom of speech 
press assembly, and association; denial of fair trial; lack of due process; limitations on 
                                                          
13 Tr. 66, 108-111; AE Z, BB. 
 
14 Tr. 82-83. 
 
6 
 
the right of citizens to change their government; arbitrary arrest; prolonged detention; 
poor prison conditions; political prisoners and detainees; torture, as well as executive 
branch limitation on an independent judiciary. Torture in Egyptian detention centers is 
pervasive. 
 
Opposition parties continue to lodge credible complaints about election 
manipulation by the government even though recent elections were more transparent 
and better executed than in the past. There remain significant restrictions on the political 
process and freedom of expression for non-governmental organizations. The 
government of Egypt considers all children born to Egyptian fathers to be Egyptian 
citizens. 
 
Republic of Taiwan (Taiwan)  
 
In 1949, two million refugees fled a civil war with Communist forces on the 
Chinese mainland, and established the Republic of China on the island of Taiwan. On 
the mainland, the Communists established the People’s Republic of China (PRC). In the 
1979 Taiwan Relations Act (TRA), the United States issued the “one China” policy, 
formally recognizing the People’s Republic of China (PRC) as China’s sole legal 
government.  
 
Taiwan and the PRC have significant economic ties, which are attributable to 
their physical proximity and history. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion 
from the PRC, which has not renounced the use of force against Taiwan. Because of its 
geographic location, Taiwan has a particular interest in information from the United 
States that could aid it in its own defense. In 2008, Taiwan nationals were involved in 
cases of industrial espionage and export of controlled items. The United States sells 
appropriate defensive military equipment to Taiwan, in accordance with the TRA.  
 
Taiwan has become a modern multi-party democracy with active public 
participation in government. It is an economic power and a leading producer of high-
technology goods. The United States continues to maintain strong unofficial relations 
with Taiwan that include significant commercial ties; objections to PRC threats to use 
force against Taiwan; support of democratic developments; assurances as to its 
security; and continued arms sales. Commercial connections between the United States 
and Taiwan have expanded since the TRA took effect. Taiwan enjoys Export-Import 
Bank financing, normal trade relations status, and ready access to U.S. markets. 
 
People’s Republic of China (PRC) – Hong Kong 
 
 Hong Kong has been a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of the PRC since 
July 1, 1997, and has a population of 7 million, 95 percent of whom are Chinese. 
According to the U.S. State Department, Hong Kong generally respects the human 
rights of its citizens, although core issues remain: the limited right of the people to 
participate in government, violence against women, and worker’s rights. Hong Kong 
maintains a high degree of autonomy, except in the areas of foreign and defense affairs, 
which are the responsibility of the PRC. 
 
7 
 
 
 According to the Interagency OPSEC Support Staff Intelligence Threat 
Handbook, “[t]he United States is a primary intelligence target of China because of the 
U.S. role as a global super power; its substantial military, political, and economic 
presence in the Pacific Rim and Asia; its role as a developer of advanced technology 
that China requires for economic growth; and the large number of Americans of Chinese 
ancestry, who are considered prime intelligence targets by the PRC.” The PRC’s 
Ministry of State Security (MSS) is the “preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency 
in China,” and maintains operations in Hong Kong and other Chinese territories. In 
recent years, the MMS has increased its activities in Hong Kong to operate against pro-
democracy elements in the territory; it also uses facilities available in the territory to 
monitor communications to and from Hong Kong.  
 
 The PRC intelligence collection efforts are growing in scale, intensity, and 
sophistication. It is considered in the counterintelligence community to be one of the 
most aggressive countries targeting U.S military, political, and economic secrets as well 
as sensitive U.S. trade secrets and technologies.  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
8 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
 
9 
 
 Each of these disqualifying conditions applies. Applicant’s compulsory military 
service, which ended in 1990, and his subsequent mandatory 10-year-commitment to 
the Egyptian Army reserves, are not indicative of a foreign preference. However, he and 
his wife, a non-U.S. citizen, maintain close relationships with family members in Egypt 
and Taiwan. The mere possession of close ties with family members living in these 
countries is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
The countries in question also must be considered. In particular, the nature of 
their government, their relationships with the United States and their human rights 
records are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant's family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. Applicant’s mother and brother are citizens and 
residents of Egypt, a country with historically good relations with the United States, but 
also one occupied by terrorist groups and credited with a poor human rights record. 
With the fall of the Mubarak government, it is still too soon to make any sound predictive 
assessments about Egypt’s political future and economic well-being. Furthermore, 
Applicant holds a significant property interest in a valuable piece of commercial real 
estate that also increases his ties to the country and provides another potential source 
of vulnerability.  
 
Applicant, through his wife, maintains close ties to residents and citizens of 
Taiwan who also have ties to Hong Kong. The PRC, through assets in Taiwan and 
Hong Kong, as well as individuals of Chinese ancestry living in the United States,  
actively engages in acts of industrial, political, military, and economic espionage against 
the United States. Furthermore, Taiwan, the PRC, and Hong Kong have significant 
human rights issues. Accordingly, I find a heighted risk exists with respect to Applicant’s 
relationships with foreign family members and foreign financial interests.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could mitigate the foreign influence 
concerns under AG ¶ 8. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S., 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest, and 
 
 
10 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) apply.  Family contacts and ties with 
persons in a foreign country are not automatically disqualifying, but require an applicant 
to present evidence in mitigation and extenuation showing he qualifies for access to 
classified information. Applicant’s relationships with his foreign family members cannot 
be considered casual or infrequent; however, none of Applicant’s family members are 
associated with or dependent on the governments of the countries at issue. As such, it 
is unlikely that he will be put in the position of having to choose between the interests of 
his foreign relatives and the interests of the United States.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States for over 20 years. He has amassed 
significant financial assets in the United States. Although his interest in the Egypt 
property is not insignificant, it is not material to his overall net worth. The property does 
not provide a consistent source of income that is relied on by Applicant, his mother, or 
brother to meet their respective recurring financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has deep-rooted relationships in the United States. He has built a life 
with his wife and youngest son in the United States. In addition, he has significant 
friendships that have evolved from his professional life. In the 20 years Applicant has 
worked for his employer, many of his professional relationships have grown beyond the 
limits of professional contacts to familial-type relationships. During the hearing, it 
became apparent how intertwined the personal and professional lives of his colleagues 
have become. Applicant’s co-workers are his extended family. They have shared many 
of life’s rites of passage and hardships together. Along with the extent of the personal 
relationships Applicant has developed with his co-workers, the security conscious 
nature of his work environment is also an important factor in finding mitigation in this 
case. These relationships root Applicant to the United States in a way that leads me to 
the conclusion that Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the United States. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). I have incorporated my comments 
into the analysis of the applicable mitigating conditions above. The evidence supports a 
finding that Applicant does not have divided loyalties between the United States, Egypt, 
Taiwan, or the PRC and Hong Kong. Based on the evidence, I conclude that Applicant 
has mitigated the Guideline B concerns raised in this case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.m.:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented in this case, it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility to classified 
information is granted.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
