                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------------------      )      ISCR Case No. 11-09469
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
May 8, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on August 18, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 6.)  On November 3, 2011, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on December 6, 2011, and he requested an
administrative hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned
to the undersigned on February 13, 2012.  A notice of hearing was issued on  March 1,
2012, and the hearing was scheduled for March 28, 2012.  At the hearing the
Government presented thirteen exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through
13, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented seven exhibits,
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through G.  He also testified on his own behalf.
The record remained open until close of business on April 9, 2012, to allow the
2
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation.  The Applicant submitted
four Post-Hearing Exhibits on April 9, 2012, which were admitted without objection, and
are referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 4.  The official transcript
(Tr.) was received on April 11, 2012.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of the state Anti-
Deficiency statute.  (Tr. pp. 15 -17.) The Applicant had no objection.  (Tr. p. 17.)  The
attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record.
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 49 years old and unmarried.  He has a Bachelor’s Degree from
the United States Air Force Academy.  He is employed with a defense contractor and is
seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline, except allegations 1(j), 1(k), 1(n), and 1(o).  Those allegations he denied, as
he believes he has paid these debts in full.  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated March
27, 2003; September 14, 2010; February 4, 2011; August 8, 2011, and March 21, 2012,
reflect that the Applicant was at one time indebted to each of the creditors set forth in
the SOR, in an amount totaling in excess of $155,000.  (Government Exhibits 2, 7, 8 10
and 13).
The Applicant attended the United States Air Force Academy and graduated with
a Bachelor’s Degree in 1986.  That same year, he got married, and he had a daughter
in 1988.  In 1994, he and his wife separated.  His wife stayed in their original residence
and the Applicant moved.  The expense of maintaining two households became difficult.
However, he continued to provide financial support to his wife and his daughter.  In
1996, he and his wife divorced.  He completed his military service in July 1997, and
began working for his current employer in 1998.  
3
In 2005, the Applicant purchased a condominium as his primary residence and a
used vehicle for his transportation.  He thought at that time that he could comfortably
afford them.  Several expenses occurred that he had not planned for.  In 2006, the
variable rate mortgage loan on his condominium adjusted to the point that he could no
longer afford the payment.  The home owners association also imposed a special
assessment of $2,500 that further aggravated his financial situation.  His bills were out
of control and he experienced a period of depression that required medication.  During
this period, he was not focused and did not take care of his bills.  He soon realized that
he could no longer afford the condominium.  After two and a half months in mortgage
arrearage, the Applicant packed, moved out of the condo, and left the keys in the
residence.  The house was ultimately foreclosed upon.  The Anti-deficiency statutes in
the state where the condominium was located and foreclosed upon protect the
Applicant from liability in this instance.  The lender took back the house, and there is no
deficiency judgment against the consumer.  Thus, the lender only has the right of
recourse against one act, either the money or the property, not both.  (See, State Anti-
Deficiency statute.)  
  
In December 2001, he contacted a credit counseling service to help him resolve
his debts.  They recommended that he pay the smaller debts first and then tackle the
larger ones.  He has followed their recommendation and since then has been diligently
working toward resolving his delinquent debts.  
The following debts listed in the SOR became delinquent: 1(a). A debt owed to
the Internal Revenue Service in the amount of $12,816 has been paid through
garnishment.  (Tr. pp. 40 - 41.)  1(b). A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $4,432
is being paid in monthly payments of $582.  (Tr. p. 42 and Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  1(c). A
debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $131 has been paid off.  (Tr. p. 43.)  1(d). A
debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $2,105 is being paid in monthly payments of
$200.  (Tr. p. 44.)  1(e) and 1(f). Debts owed to a creditor in the amounts of $1,117 and
$10,482 and are being paid in monthly payments of $255.  (Tr. p. 45 and Applicant’s
Post-Hearing Exhibit 2.)  1(e). and 1(g). are one in the same debt.  1(h). A debt owed to
a creditor in the amount of $1,878 has been paid off.  (Tr. p. 46 - 47.)  1(i). A debt owed
to a creditor in the amount of $9,856 is being paid in monthly payments of $200.  (Tr. p.
47.)  1(j). A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $1,092 is under dispute.  (Tr. p.
49.)  1(k). A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $646 has been paid off.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 1.)  1(l). A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of
$1,477 has been paid off.  (Tr. pp. 50.)  1(m). A debt owed to a creditor for a mortgage
loan in the amount of $112,624 on a house that was foreclosed upon is being paid in
monthly payments of $846.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 3 and Tr. pp. 50 - 52.)
1(n) and 1(k) are one in the same debt and have paid in full.  1(o). A debt owed to a
creditor in the amount of $288 has been paid off.  (Tr. p. 54 - 55.)  1(p). A debt owed to
a creditor in the amount of $168 has been paid off.  (Tr. 55.)  1(q). The Applicant has
had difficulties locating the creditor owed a debt in the amount of $2,030.  He plans to
pay it as soon as possible.  (Tr. p. 55.)  1(r). A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of
$535 has been paid off.  (Tr. p. 56.)  1(s). A debt owed to a creditor for a first mortgage
4
loan in the amount of $220,000 for a house that was foreclosed upon has been
resolved.  (Tr. p. 50.)  
The Applicant currently earns approximately $161,000 annually.  He contributes
between $200.00 and $300.00 monthly to assist his daughter with her college tuition.
His personal financial statement dated March 28, 2012, indicates that after paying his
regular monthly expenses, he has about $1,000 left in discretionary monies to use to
continue resolving his delinquent debts.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  He has incurred no
new debts.  
    
A letter of recommendation from the Applicant’s direct supervisor for the past four
years indicates that the Applicant is highly respected and considered an excellent
performer on the job.  He is technically astute, proactive in taking actions to maintain
customer satisfaction, an effective manager to his team, has excellent job planning
skills, great at coordinating and executing efforts to completion, and makes excellent
technical and programmatic decisions.  He is also said to be a strong and consistent
performer in budget and personnel planning as well as identifying and proposing new or
modified work activities.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)
 
Applicant’s performance appraisals for the years 2007 through 2011, reflect
ratings from, “exceeds performance requirements,” to “outstanding,” in every category.
Applicant’s Exhibits C, D, E, F and G.)
   POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
5
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
6
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows circumstances largely beyond his control, namely his
divorce and its related expenses, as wells as a temporary bout of depression,
contributed to his financial problems.  Admittedly, following his divorce, he failed to
satisfy his debts in a responsible manner.  For some time, he mismanaged his finances
and mistakenly thought he could afford to buy expensive things for himself, including a
condominium and a vehicle.  Unfortunately he was wrong.  Since then, he has taken
responsibility for the debts, and has been working diligently within his means to resolve
them.  
This was an isolated incident that will not recur since the Applicant now has a
clear head and understands that he must remain fiscally responsible if he is to hold a
7
security clearance.  For the past year, he has made a good-faith effort to resolve his
past due indebtedness.  He has addressed each debt listed in the SOR.  He has
contacted a credit counselor who advised him to pay the smaller debts first, which he
has done.  He has either paid off the debts in full, or set up a payment plan that he is
following. He has not incurred any new debt.  He understands the importance of paying
his bills on time and living within his means.  He has clearly demonstrated that he can
properly handle his financial affairs.  There is clear evidence of financial rehabilitation.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in
rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  I have also considered his favourable
performance appraisals as well as his supervisor’s complimentary letter.  Under the
particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed
under all of the guidelines as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of good
judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, and a  willingness to comply with rules
and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may properly
safeguard classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented, including the Applicant’s
favorable work history.  They mitigate the negative effects of his financial indebtedness
and the effects that it can have on his ability to safeguard classified information.  On
balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's case
opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a
finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
8
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
      Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.f.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: For the Applicant.
      Subpara.  1.h.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: For the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.j.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.k.: For the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.l.: For the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.m.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.n.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.o.: For the Applicant.
      Subpara.  1.p.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.q.: For the Applicant.
     Subpara.  1.r.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.s.: For the Applicant.
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
