 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03286 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to establish financial responsibility. Moreover, he falsified his 
security clearance application when he failed to disclose his delinquent debts. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 15, 2010. 
On October 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 Applicant answered 
the SOR on December 20, 2011, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on January 23, 2012. 
 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 30, 2012, convening a hearing for 
February 24, 2012. Applicant requested a continuance on February 21, 2012. A second 
notice of hearing was issued on February 22, 2012, convening a hearing for March 9, 
2012. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted no exhibits. I allowed 
Applicant an additional period after the hearing to supplement the record, but he did not 
take advantage of the opportunity. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 
19, 2012. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to strike SOR ¶ 1.o, because it 
duplicated the facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant did not object, and I granted the 
motion. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, 1.i through 
1.l, and 2.a. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 1.m through 1.o. His admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, and 
having observed Applicant’s demeanor and considered his testimony, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old computer software engineer working for a government 
contractor. He was awarded a bachelor’s degree in engineering, with concentration in 
computer engineering, in May 2006, and a master’s degree in technical and program 
management in December 2010. Applicant has never been married. He is currently 
engaged to the mother of his four-year-old daughter.  
 
Applicant started working full time for government contractors in May 2006, soon 
after he graduated from college. From May 2006 until October 31, 2010, he worked for 
three different government contractors. Between 2006 and August 2010, he earned 
between $52,000 and $58,000 a year, increasing his income over time. From August 
2010 until October 31, 2010, he earned around $77,000 a year. In October 2010, he 
was laid off from his job, and he was unemployed for a period of three months. He was 
hired by his current employer on January 15, 2011. He is currently making 
approximately $80,000 a year.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant stated that his monthly expenses are approximately 
$2,700; however, he believes that after paying his living expenses and some debts, he 
clears around $600 to $700 a month. He does not have a savings account. Applicant 
was granted a secret clearance in July 2006, which he has held without any security 
incidents or concerns. His current employer requested an upgrade of his clearance for 
Applicant to work in certain projects. There is no evidence to show that Applicant has 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant explained that his financial problems are the result of several factors, 
including the commuting expenses associated with him living in one state and working 
in another, the unexpected birth of his daughter and the resulting increase in living 
expenses associated with supporting his fiancé and daughter, providing $500 in 
financial assistance to his mother from January 2011 until October 2011, and being 
unemployed during three months. Applicant has had financial problems since he was in 
college. He attempted to resolve his financial problems by continuously looking for 
better paying jobs. He needs his security clearance to keep his job and further his 
career. Applicant believes he has been doing all that he can do to resolve his financial 
problems considering his circumstances. 
 
Concerning the alleged delinquent debts, Applicant admitted that he has made 
little effort to contact his creditors or to resolve his debts since they became delinquent, 
with some exceptions. In 2008, he contacted the Department of Education to ask 
questions about the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. Apparently, in 1998, the 
creditor started to garnish Applicant’s income tax refunds and his salary. Applicant 
admitted that he owes the Department of Education for his student loans, but he 
disagrees with the total debt owed. His income tax refunds are currently being 
garnished, but since he recently changed jobs his salary is not currently being 
garnished. 
 
Applicant paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. (GE 4) He claimed that he paid the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.n, but he failed to present documentary evidence to 
support his claim. Applicant also noted that he paid or brought current two other credit 
card accounts not alleged in the SOR, and that he brought his car note current. As of 
his hearing date, Applicant had not received any financial counseling. He claimed that 
his fiancé keeps a family budget. She moved in with Applicant in November 2011.  
 
In October 2010, Applicant submitted the pending SCA. In response to Section 
26 (Financial Record) (asking whether he had any debts turned over to a collection 
agency; had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing 
to pay as agreed; had been over 180 days delinquent on any debt; or was currently over 
90 days delinquent on any debt), Applicant answered “No.” He failed to disclose the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, some of which have been delinquent since he was 
in college.  
 
During his December 2010 interview with a Government investigator, Applicant 
stated that he did not disclose the delinquent debts because either he was not aware of 
the debts, or he did not believe the debts were delinquent. At his hearing, he admitted 
he knew some of the debts were delinquent, but he did not disclose the debts in his 
SCA because he did not know who the current creditors were, how much he owed, and 
when the debts became delinquent. Applicant expressed remorse for his omissions in 
the SCA, and for his financial problems. He testified that he knew his bad decisions led, 
in part, to his financial problems and to his failure to disclose the delinquent debts in the 
SCA. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant admitted 13 of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling over 
$35,000, that have been delinquent for a number of years, some of them since he was 
in college. (He disputed the total owed in one of his student loans.) The debts are 
confirmed by the evidence submitted. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior was frequent as demonstrated by the number of debts, the 
aggregate total of the debt, and the period they were delinquent. His financial problems 
are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. 
 
 I considered Applicant’s commuting expenses (although this is not a 
circumstance beyond his control), the unexpected birth of his daughter and the resulting 
increase in living expenses associated with supporting his new family, his financial 
assistance to his parents, and his unemployment for a period of three months as 
circumstances that contributed to his inability to pay his debts. Notwithstanding, these 
circumstances do not fully mitigate the financial considerations concerns.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant has been fully employed with different government contractors since 
2006. His employment progression shows a yearly salary increase from $52,000 to 
$80,000 in his current position. Notwithstanding, Applicant presented little evidence of 
efforts to contact his creditors, payments made, or efforts to otherwise resolve his 
delinquent financial obligations. Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that he 
was responsible in the acquisition of his debts, or addressing his delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence of good-faith efforts taken to bring under 
control his delinquent debts. Additionally, as of his hearing date, he had not received 
any financial counseling. At his hearing, Applicant disputed some debts (or the total 
owed), but he failed to provide documentary evidence to support his dispute, or to 
provide evidence of his efforts to resolve any disputes with his creditors. Financial 
considerations mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20 (b), (c), (d), and (e), do not apply. The 
remaining mitigating condition, AG ¶ 20 (f), is not pertinent to the facts of this case. 
Considering the evidence as a whole, serious questions remain about Applicant’s ability 
to satisfy his debts and meet his financial obligations.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose in his October 2010 SCA the delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR, some of which have been delinquent since he was in college. 
His testimony and admissions establish that he was well aware of his delinquent debts. 
His excuses for his failure to disclose the delinquent debts raise more concerns about 
Applicant’s truthfulness and judgment. 
 
Applicant’s deliberate falsification of his 2010 SCA triggers the applicability of 
disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” 
 
After considering all the AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions, I find none apply. 
Applicant’s falsification is a recent, serious offense (felony-level).2
 
  
                                            
2 See 18 U.S.C. 1001. 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) I considered Applicant’s age, his years working for government 
contractors while possessing a security clearance, and his testimony about the cause 
for his financial problems.  
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to establish financial responsibility in the 
acquisition of his debts, or in his efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. His evidence is 
not sufficient for me to conclude that he is in control of his financial situation. Moreover, 
Applicant falsified his SCA. In light of his age, education, experience working for 
government contractors, and his years holding a security clearance, his behavior raises 
doubts about his judgment and about his ability to comply with the law and regulations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l    Against Applicant 
    and 1.n:       
 
 Subparagraphs 1.m and 1.o:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
