 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 11-09590 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2011, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On January 5, 2012,2 the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
                                                          
1
 Item 3 (SF 86), dated May 16, 2011. 
 
2
 Although Department Counsel stated the SOR was issued on January 5, 2012, the actual SOR is undated. 
The letter of transmittal, with its attached Receipt, is dated January 5, 2012. See Item 2 (Letter of transmittal, dated 
January 5, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 18, 2012. In a statement, 
notarized January 18, 2012,3 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on March 
29, 2012, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of 
the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the FORM on April 5, 2012, but as of May 23, 2012, he had not 
submitted any further documents or other information. The case was assigned to me on 
May 24, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a supply chain quality engineer since November 2007. He was previously 
employed as a quality inspector from October 1987 to November 2007.5 Applicant has 
never served in the U.S. military,6 and has never held a security clearance.7 In the mid-
1980s, he attended a university for one year, followed by another year at a community 
college, but did not receive a degree.8 Applicant was married in August 1992, and he 
                                                          
3
 Item 1 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated January 18, 2012). 
 
4
 Because of the paucity of information in the record (there is no personal subject interview, no personal 
financial statement, no Office of Personnel Management (OPM) report of investigation, no financial records other than 
two 2011 credit reports, and no narrative from the Applicant) – referred to as “gaps in the documentary record” by 
Department Counsel – the only available sources for evidence are the SF 86, the Answer to the SOR, and the two 
credit reports. 
 
5
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 10-12. 
 
6
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
7
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 29. 
 
8
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 8-9. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
and his wife have four children, born in July 1994, September 1996, January 1998, and 
September 2004.9 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
It is unclear when Applicant first started having financial problems, but it would 
appear that they commenced some time before 1996, for in November 1996, he filed for 
bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.10 Unspecified debts, totaling 
about $22,000, were discharged that same year.11 Eventually, accounts again started to 
become delinquent, and were placed for collection or charged off.12  
 
The SOR identified one 1996 bankruptcy and four continuing delinquencies, 
totaling approximately $37,583. One of those accounts (SOR ¶ 1.a.) is a 120 day 
delinquency of $176 on a credit card with a balance of $578;13 another account (SOR ¶ 
1.b.) is a second mortgage, in the amount of $27,807, that was charged off;14 another 
account with a mail order company, appears three times under three separate creditors 
in the same credit report (SOR ¶ 1.c.), initially with a past-due balance of $828,15 but the 
account was charged off and transferred or sold to another collection agent in 2010.16 
The balance was increased to $898 by the new collection agent, and it too charged off 
the account and transferred or sold it to another collection agent.17 In November 2011, 
the current collection agent maintained the account in collection.18 The last account 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.) was the result of Applicant failing to report the closure of his 401(k) in 
2008, leaving a tax liability of $8,300.19  
 
Although Applicant indicated he was either making payments or had already 
settled other non-SOR accounts, and was working on a repayment plan with the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) to resolve his 401(k) account, he has not submitted any 
                                                          
9
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 18-20.  
 
10
 Item 1, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
11
 Item 1, supra note 3, at 2; Item 3, supra note 1, at 32. 
 
12
 Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated May 27, 2011); Item 4 (Equifax 
Credit Report, dated December 7, 2011). 
 
13
 Item 4, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
14
 Item 4, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
15
 Item 4, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
16
 Item 4, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
17
 Item 4, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
18
 Item 4, supra note 12, at 2. 
 
19
 Item 3, supra note 1, at 33-34. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
documentation to support his claims. As far as the SOR-accounts are concerned, as of 
the date of the SOR, the accounts remain unpaid.20 
 
There are no indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or 
are under control. There is no evidence that Applicant has received any financial 
counseling regarding money management, debt consolidation, or repayment plans.  
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”21 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”22   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”23 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
                                                          
20
 Item 1, supra note 3, at 1-2. 
 
21
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
22
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
23
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.24  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”25 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”26 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
                                                          
24
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
25
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
26
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems go as far back as 1996, when his 
delinquent debts, in the amount of about $22,000 were discharged in a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. Despite being afforded a clean financial slate to begin again financially 
unencumbered, his financial difficulties resurfaced and remain unresolved. AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and19(c) apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@27  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. The nature, frequency, and 
recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since about 1996 make it difficult 
to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” Applicant has offered 
no evidence that his financial problems were caused by conditions that were largely 
beyond his control. While he stated in 2011 that he was working on a repayment plan 
with the IRS, and had resolved one non-SOR account and was working on others, he 
submitted no documentation to support his claims. Applicant has offered little evidence 
of a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. Furthermore, there is no 
evidence that Applicant’s financial situation is such that his monthly family income can 
even support any delinquent debt payments. There is no evidence to indicate Applicant 
                                                          
27
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that she or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
has ever received counseling in money management, debt management, debt 
repayment, or budgeting. In light of Applicant’s substantial period of continuing financial 
problems, it is unlikely that they will be resolved in the short term, and they are likely to 
continue. The evidence does not support a conclusion that Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Accordingly, Applicant failed to mitigate his financial situation, 
and under the circumstances, his actions do cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.28   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.29       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has a good 
employment history, having served with one employer for 20 years.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant encountered substantial financial delinquencies that were discharged in 
bankruptcy in 1996, but since that time, his financial problems resurfaced. It is unclear 
why Applicant has encountered continuing financial problems. There is no evidence that 
he ever sought financial counseling to assist him in addressing those problems. His 
track record for addressing his delinquent debts is unsatisfactory. Applicant could have 
made some reasonable timely efforts to resolve some of his SOR accounts, but there is 
no evidence that he has done so. Applicant’s actions indicate poor self-control and a 
                                                          
28
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
29
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
lack of judgment, which raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability 
to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
