 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 11-01585    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s insubordinate and 
disrespectful response to an investigation of a potential security violation, initiated by his 
own false statements, lead to his termination from his previous employment. With no 
security violation being committed, Applicant’s behavior was appropriately handled as a 
personnel issue. The personal conduct concerns raised by the incident have been 
mitigated. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order (EO) and DoD Directive,1 the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 
2 
 
December 2, 2011, notifying Applicant that it was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his access to classified information. 
DOHA recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke his clearance. The SOR detailed the reasons for the 
action under Guideline E (personal conduct).  
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned 
to me on February 7, 2011. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on March 27, 2012. 
Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted over Applicant’s objections.2 Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H were 
admitted without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 11, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a federal contractor. In March 2010, his 
former employer terminated him, for cause, which resulted in his access to classified 
information being suspended.3  
 
 In January 2010, Applicant began working off-site at a client location, but 
retained his office at corporate headquarters. On a Friday evening, Applicant received 
an e-mail from the information technology (IT) manager, who was not his supervisor, 
informing him that he needed to move out of his office and relocate to a nearby cubicle, 
because the office was needed for a new employee. First taken aback, then angered by 
the request and the short notice of it, Applicant called his supervisor to determine how 
to respond. Applicant’s supervisor told him not to move out of the office. Unbeknownst 
to Applicant, his supervisor and the IT manager were engaged in a disagreement about 
the allocation of corporate office space. Based on his supervisor’s advice, Applicant 
sent an e-mail to the IT manager indicating that he would not move because he worked 
on classified information that would be inappropriate to have in an open cubicle 
environment. Because the office in dispute was not authorized for the use or storage of 
classified information, the IT manager forwarded Applicant’s e-mail to the facility 
security officer (FSO).4 
 
 Upon receiving the forwarded e-mail, the FSO called Applicant into a meeting 
that evening to investigate whether or not Applicant was using and storing classified 
information in the office. After a tense, lengthy conversation, the FSO determined that 
Applicant did not, in fact, access or store classified information in his office and that 
Applicant lied to the IT manager about doing so. The FSO concluded that Applicant did 
not understand classification levels and ordered him to receive training on the issue. 
                                                          
2 Tr. 12-13 (Applicant objected to GE 1, his signed security clearance application, because it contained 
inaccurate information. He objected to GE 3, his personnel file from his former employer, on the grounds 
of completeness. During his case-in-chief, Applicant supplied the documentation he believed to be 
missing from the file.) 
 
3 GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 23-27, 92-97; GE 3 at 112-113, 120. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant agreed to do so. At the conclusion of the meeting, he packed up his office, 
turned in his corporate identification cards, and left the building.5 
 
 On the hour-long ride home, Applicant began replaying the events of the day in 
his mind and became increasingly angry. By the time he reached home he was 
apoplectic and sent a belligerent e-mail to the FSO and the IT manager. While he 
apologized for saying that he accessed classified information in the office, he accused 
the FSO and the IT manager of taking his e-mail out of context, explaining that he was 
merely trying to retain the office space for his team. He decried their lack of 
professionalism and called their behavior toward him obnoxious. He also informed the 
FSO that he did not need and would not attend the recommended training because he 
had committed no security violation. Saturday, Applicant received an e-mail from the 
director of human resources (HR) informing him of his termination.6  
 
 On Sunday, Applicant sent an e-mail to the FSO apologizing for his overly harsh 
and disrespectful e-mail. Although he was seeking a review of his termination from high-
level management, he agreed to take any security training the FSO deemed necessary. 
Applicant’s employer decided not to reinstate him. Consequently, the company 
terminated Applicant’s employment, filed an incident report in the Joint Personnel 
Adjudication System (JPAS), and suspended Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant consulted an attorney to help him resolve any issues his 
termination may have raised with this security clearance. Under the belief that Applicant 
had retained an attorney to represent him in a legal action against the company, the HR 
director began soliciting information about negative incidents involving Applicant. The 
HR director received three reports.7 
 
 In the first incident, a co-worker on a business trip with Applicant indicated that 
Applicant was pulled over by a police officer for running a red light. The co-worker 
observed that Applicant politely, but vehemently disagreed with the officer about 
whether he ran the light. The traffic stop ended with a warning to Applicant, who after 
driving away, talked about the incident with his co-worker using foul language and 
exhibiting signs of anger leading the observer to send another co-worker a text 
message calling Applicant “scary.” In the second report, the same co-worker reported 
that on a business trip, Applicant tried to board an earlier train home. Because the train 
was leaving in less than 20 minutes, security regulations prevented Applicant from 
boarding the train. Despite buying a ticket for the later train, Applicant attempted to 
board the earlier train. He was turned away by security. The co-worker indicated that 
Applicant was visibly angry about not being allowed to board the earlier train. In the third 
incident, another co-worker reported that, in 2009, Applicant tried to leave a client site 
with an unauthorized piece of equipment that he intended to carry home on a 
commercial airplane. Before leaving the site, Applicant returned the equipment 
                                                          
5 Tr. 34-36; GE 3 at 120-122. 
 
6 Tr. 37-41; GE 3 at 109-111. 
 
7 Tr. 41-44; AE H.  
 
 
4 
 
concerned that it may cause problems with airport security. No one reported or 
disclosed this event until after Applicant was terminated.8  
 
 Applicant, a software engineer, has held a security clearance since at least 2002. 
Prior to his termination, Applicant did not have any prior security violations or history of 
disruptive behavior. The married, father of five children is actively involved in his church 
congregation and community.9  
 
Policies  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
                                                          
8 GE 3 at 129-132, 134-135. 
 
9 GE 1; AE A-B. 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that are relevant to this case 
under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or their characteristics indication that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes, 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the work 
place; 
 
(3)  a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
Both disqualifying conditions apply. In an effort to avoid being relocated from a 
closed-door office to a cubicle, Applicant intentionally lied to the IT manager about his 
use of classified information in that space. Applicant’s reaction to the security violation 
investigation initiated by his statements, the e-mail he sent lambasting the FSO and the 
IT manager for their handling of the situation, as well as his refusal to take the training 
 
6 
 
required by his FSO, was inappropriate and raises concerns about Applicant’s judgment 
and his willingness to comply with rules and regulations.  
 
 The guideline notes several mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17. Of these, only 
one applies: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Applicant had an unprofessional reaction to an understandably irksome problem. 
His actions raised a personnel issue, that his employer remedied by terminating him. 
The company’s investigation found that Applicant did not commit a security violation. He 
did not misrepresent himself to an outside party on a matter related to his employment. 
In response to an internal company issue, which could have been handled more deftly 
by all involved, he inflated his need for a corporate resource by exaggerating the nature 
of his project to the IT manager. While Applicant’s insubordinate and disrespectful 
conduct may have merited disciplinary action, his behavior was neither threatening nor 
indicative of violent behavior. Despite efforts to malign Applicant after his termination, 
he did not have a history of disruptive or otherwise inappropriate behavior. This incident 
amounted to a single demonstration of bad behavior related to a banal corporate issue. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
I have no reservations or doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Applicant’s one-time lapse 
in professional judgment is not reflective of his ability to safeguard and protect classified 
information. Similarly, the picayune episodes dredged up by Applicant’s former 
employer are not indicative of Applicant’s unwillingness to follow rules, questionable 
judgment, reliability or trustworthiness. At most, these tales of Applicant’s allegedly bad 
behavior show that he was not particularly well liked by his co-workers. An individual’s 
security worthiness should not be influenced by his likeability or lack thereof. Applicant 
may be irascible, but such a personality trait is not a bar to having access to classified 
information. The security concerns raised by the one-time event alleged in the SOR are 
mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a.:     For Applicant  
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented in this case, it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest  to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility to classified 
information is granted.  
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
