 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02075 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns, but 
he has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
 Statement of the Case 
 
On November 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F (financial considerations), J (criminal conduct), and E (personal conduct). 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 12, 2011, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on February 29, 2012. A complete copy of the 
 
2 
 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 21, 2012. As of May 24, 
2012, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on May 29, 2012. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance for the first time. He is a high school graduate and attended a trade 
school after graduation. He is married. It appears that he has children, but he did not list 
any children on his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86).1  
 
 Applicant did not register with the Selective Service System, as was required by 
the Military Selective Service Act, 50 U.S.C. App. § 453. He stated that after he 
graduated high school, he went directly to a trade school and then immediately started 
working after graduating from the trade school. He thought he had registered, but he 
realized he had not when he checked with the Selective Service System.2 
 
 Applicant operated his own business, and his finances were stable through the 
mid-2000s. He and another individual opened a separate business in about 2004. 
Applicant’s partner handled the administrative side of the business, which included 
managing the accounting and ensuring the taxes were paid. The business was 
unsuccessful, and without Applicant’s knowledge, the partner was not paying the taxes. 
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a $31,962 tax lien against Applicant in 2007. 
Applicant and the partner severed the business relationship in about 2008, but Applicant 
was left with multiple unpaid bills.3 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2011. He received financial 
counseling as a requirement of his bankruptcy. The bankruptcy was converted to a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 2011. The bankruptcy was dismissed in 
November 2011 for failure to file information.4  
 
 The SOR alleges the IRS tax lien, eight delinquent debts, three unpaid 
judgments, and Applicant’s bankruptcy. Applicant denied owing the $3,150 debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.i, which he stated was settled. That debt is listed on the most recent credit 
report from February 2012, with a balance of $3,150. Applicant did not submit any 
documentation showing that the debt was settled. He accurately stated that the debts 
                                                          
1 Items 6, 7.  
 
2 Items 5-7. 
 
3 Items 5-8, 13. 
 
4 Items 5, 8, 14. 
 
 
3 
 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m were duplicates of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 
1.b. He admitted the remaining financial allegations, with explanations.5   
 
 Applicant stated that the IRS seized about $13,000 from his bank account as 
payment towards his back taxes. He also stated that “[t]he IRS is due some money, [he] 
had unfiled returns which have been filed and will be settling this issue [as soon as 
possible].” He did not submit any documentation establishing any payments toward the 
delinquent taxes.6 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k allege two past-due mortgages and a past-due home 
equity line of credit owed to the same financial institution. Applicant stated that he had 
recently made a $3,200 payment towards his home mortgage. He did not submit 
documentation of any payments.7 
 
 The remaining delinquent debts and unpaid judgments total about $155,000. 
Applicant did not submit any documentation establishing payments toward any of these 
debts.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
5 Items 5-7, 9-12.  
 
6 Items 5, 9-13.  
 
7 Items 5, 9-12. 
 
8 Items 5, 6, 9-12. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
5 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m are duplicates of the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.b. The duplicate allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m are concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
 Applicant’s financial issues are related to his failed business. That was beyond 
his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
  Applicant has not submitted any evidence of payments toward his delinquent 
debts. His Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed in November 2011 for failure to file 
information. Applicant received financial counseling as a requirement of his bankruptcy, 
but there is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant acted responsibly 
and made a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. His 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely 
to recur. They continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. The first part of AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable; the second part is not. I find that 
security concerns remain despite the presence of limited mitigation. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Applicant failed to register with the Selective Service System, as was required by 
the Military Selective Service Act, 50 U.S.C. App. § 453. It is a criminal offense, 
punishable by imprisonment of not more than five years and a fine of not more than 
$10,000, to knowingly fail to register. Both disqualifying conditions have been 
established.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 It has been more than 20 years since Applicant failed to register with the 
Selective Service System. His criminal record is otherwise clean. I find there is evidence 
of successful rehabilitation, and Applicant’s criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 
32(a) and (d) are applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
 
7 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant displayed questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations when he failed to register with the Selective Service System. That 
conduct also created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 
16(c) and 16(e) are applicable as disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant has been open and honest about his failure to register with the 
Selective Service System, which reduces his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, 
and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are also applicable under 
the same rationale discussed under Guideline J.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F, J, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 46 years old. It has been decades since he failed to register with the 
Selective Service System. That conduct is no longer a security concern. His financial 
problems were caused by a failed business venture. His Chapter 7 bankruptcy was 
converted to a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and then dismissed for failure to file information. 
Applicant’s current plan to address his delinquent debts is unknown. The limited 
information in the record has not convinced me that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently 
in order to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns, but he has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
