 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10154 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a life-long illegal marijuana user. He used marijuana after he 
submitted his May 2011 SCA, and after he was questioned by a government 
investigator about his illegal marijuana use in June 2011. He continues to associate with 
his illegal drug-using friends and relatives. He presented no documentary evidence of a 
recent diagnosis or prognosis related to his illegal drug use. His recent behavior casts 
serious doubt on his reliability, judgment, and ability to comply with the law. Clearance 
is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 5, 2011. On 
January 4, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
 Applicant answered the SOR on 
 
2 
 
 
January 18, 2012, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case 
was assigned to me on February 7, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 13, 2012, convening a hearing for 
March 5, 2012. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant 
testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 4. All exhibits were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 9, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the single factual allegation under SOR ¶ 1.a. He denied the 
single allegation under SOR ¶ 2.a. His admission is incorporated as a finding of fact. 
After a thorough review of the evidence, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor 
and considered his testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old entrepreneur, owner, and senior manager (chairman of 
the board, chief executive officer) of several companies. One of the companies handles 
government contracts and it is sponsoring Applicant (its Chief Executive Officer) for a 
security clearance to qualify for a facility security clearance. Applicant was awarded a 
bachelor’s degree in 1973-1974. He married his wife in 1973, and they have three 
grown daughters. This is his first security clearance application. 
 
Applicant described himself as a product of the “60’s” when everybody grew up 
using marijuana. He has illegally used marijuana since he was in high school to present. 
In 1967, at age 18, Applicant and a friend purchased several ounces of marijuana in an 
Asian country. They travelled to a second Asian country where the marijuana was 
discovered in his luggage. He was arrested, held in jail overnight, and deported. 
Applicant disclosed this incident in his SCA and discussed it with a government 
investigator during a June 2011 interview. Except for the above incident, Applicant has 
never been arrested or charged with any criminal offense. 
 
During college, Applicant smoked marijuana or hashish every weekend. He also 
purchased marijuana for his personal use. He reduced his marijuana use after he 
started his company in 1974, but he has continued his marijuana use through the years 
to present. Applicant testified that with age, his use of marijuana has diminished. He 
currently smokes marijuana on an average of three times a year. The marijuana is 
supplied by friends, and shared with other people, usually at a social event.  
 
Applicant’s most recent marijuana use occurred during a family reunion and 
skiing trip in December 2011-January 2012. He smoked marijuana with one of his 
daughters while in a ski lift chair. During his June 2011 interview, Applicant told the 
                                                                                                                                            
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
 
 
investigator that, in the future, he intends to take a puff of marijuana when he feels like 
it. 
 
Applicant has always known that marijuana use is illegal. He believes it ought to 
be decriminalized. He enjoys using marijuana, and he ignored the law because it is a 
misdemeanor offense in most states, just like a speeding ticket. Applicant has not 
participated in any substance abuse counseling. He presented no documentary 
evidence of a recent diagnosis or prognosis related to his illegal drug use. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose in his answer to question 23a of his May 2011 SCA 
that during the preceding seven years he had illegally used marijuana. He also failed to 
disclose in his answer to question 23c, that during the preceding seven years he had 
illegally possessed marijuana. (The last omission was not alleged in the SOR.)  
 
Applicant credibly testified that his omission was an innocent mistake and not 
made with the intent to mislead the Government. He explained that he submitted his 
hand-written SCA (AE 2), in which he admitted his recreational marijuana use to 
present, to his security advisor for review and comments. The security advisor 
incorrectly transferred Applicant’s information into an electronic SCA. The security 
advisor made the mistake of answering “No” to question 23a, and did not include 
Applicant’s comment about his present use of marijuana. Applicant failed to review the 
electronic SCA before it was submitted to another Government agency. Applicant’s 
security advisor submitted a sworn statement (AE 4) indicating that he “inadvertently 
made an error in transposing the information.”  
 
Applicant candidly discussed his past and present illegal marijuana use with a 
government investigator during his June 2011 interview. He also was candid and 
forthcoming during his hearing. Applicant submitted a statement promising to abstain 
from the use of any illegal drugs in the future. He also promised that if he were to use 
any illegal substance, he would report such use to his facility security officer.  
 
Applicant testified that he has been an old-school businessman all of his life, and 
his word is his bond. He has learned to make sacrifices all of his life to be successful in 
his business. He does not consider abstaining from marijuana use a sacrifice because 
he only uses marijuana infrequently. He is willing to make the necessary lifestyle 
changes to remain abstinent.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
4 
 
 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant, who is 62 years old, has illegally used marijuana from high school to 
present. His most recent marijuana use occurred in December 2011-January 2012, with 
his daughter, while on a family holiday vacation. He used marijuana after he submitted 
his May 2011 SCA, and after he was questioned by a government investigator in June 
2011, about his illegal drug use. 
 
 
5 
 
 
At age 18, Applicant was arrested in a foreign country for possession of several 
ounces of marijuana. Applicant has always known that his possession and use of 
marijuana was illegal, and that his drug-related behavior would adversely affect his 
ability to possess a security clearance. Notwithstanding, he chose to ignore the law 
because he enjoyed using marijuana. He has not participated in substance abuse 
counseling. He presented no documentary evidence of a recent diagnosis or prognosis 
related to his illegal drug use. 
 
Two drug involvement disqualifying conditions raise security concerns in this 
particular case: AG ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse”;2
 
 and AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession 
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase.”  
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
                                            
2  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
I find that none of the Guideline H mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s life-long 
illegal marijuana use is recent and frequent. Because of his age, education, and 
experience working with the Government, he was aware of the illegality of his actions 
and the adverse consequences he would face because of his misconduct.  
 
Applicant continued to use marijuana after he submitted his May 2011 SCA and 
after his June 2011 interview with a government investigator. He also continues to 
associate with his drug-using friends and relatives. He presented no documentary 
evidence of a recent diagnosis or prognosis related to his illegal drug use. He has not 
implemented realistic lifestyle changes to help him remain abstinent. Under the 
circumstances, more time without using illegal drugs is necessary before drug 
involvement concerns can be mitigated.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant failed to disclose his illegal marijuana use during the preceding seven 
years on his May 2011 SCA.  
 
  Applicant’s failure to disclose the above information, trigger the possible 
applicability of the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
 
7 
 
 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
Applicant credibly testified that his omission was an innocent mistake and not 
made with the intent to mislead the Government. His security advisor incorrectly 
transferred Applicant’s information into an electronic SCA. Applicant candidly discussed 
his past and present illegal marijuana use with a government investigator during his 
June 2011 interview. He also was candid and forthcoming during his hearing. 
 
 Guideline E mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(f): “the information was 
unsubstantiated,” applies and it mitigates the personal conduct security concerns. In 
sum, I find that Applicant’s omission was not deliberate or made with the intent to 
mislead the Government. His disclosures to the government investigator, and at his 
hearing, eliminate any possible vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. His 
omission does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant is life-long illegal marijuana user. He most recently used 
marijuana after he submitted his May 2011 SCA, and after he was interviewed about his 
illegal marijuana use in June 2011. He continues to associate with his illegal drug-using 
friends and relatives. He presented no documentary evidence of a recent diagnosis or 
prognosis related to his illegal drug use. 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole, I find Applicant’s recent 
questionable behavior casts serious doubt on his reliability, judgment, and willingness 
and ability to comply with the law. He failed to mitigate the Guideline H security 
concerns. 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
