 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08143 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On August 21, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He submitted some documents. 
Department Counsel did not object to them and they are admitted. On February 4, 
2015, Department Counsel prepared the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). 
 
2 
 
 
The FORM was mailed to Applicant on February 19, 2015, and it was received on 
March 26, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not object to any of the 
documents submitted by the Government, and they are admitted. In response to the 
FORM, Applicant provided additional information, which was included in the record 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.g. He denied the remaining 
allegations. I have incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He has not served in the military. He is a college 
graduate. He has been married since 1992. He has two children, ages 21 and 19. He 
has worked for the same federal contractor since 1986.1 
  
 The SOR alleges 10 delinquent debts totaling approximately $72,488 and a past 
due mortgage of $251,000. Applicant’s indicated his financial problems began in 1996 
when he and his wife cared for her siblings after the death of her parents. He indicated 
this continued until approximately 2004 or 2005. He did not provide any specific 
information as to how old the siblings were, how many siblings, or what specific support 
they provided. He indicated he was living within his means prior to 1996 and then began 
using credit cards to keep up with expenses. He fell behind on paying his credit cards 
and mortgage. He stated that in approximately 2004 or 2005 he used a debt 
management firm to help manage his finances up until about 2011. He did not provide 
any additional information regarding what action the firm took on his behalf.2 He also 
attributed his problems to his “bad handling of finances” and his wife’s use of credit 
cards without his knowledge.3 
 
Applicant provided documented proof that he resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.d, 1.i, and 1.k.4 The remaining delinquent debts alleged are verified by credit reports.5 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($3,795) is a state tax lien. Applicant originally attributed 
this lien to property tax owed on his residence when he fell behind in paying his 
mortgage. He indicated in his personal subject interview (PSI) that a plan was worked 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 5. 
 
3 Item 4 pages 36 and 38. 
  
4 Item 3 pages 3-5, 9, 14, and 16. 
 
5 Items 6, 7, and 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
out with the mortgage lender and he believed the taxes were up to date.6 In his answer 
to the SOR, he indicated the tax lien was for delinquent state income taxes from 2007. 
He was investigating the lien believing there is an error. He indicated that the balance 
owed was $4,091, and he made an initial payment of $820 and agreed to pay off the 
balance over twelve months with monthly payments of $275. He did not provide any 
documented proof of payments.7 In his response to the FORM, he indicated he was 
continuing to research the legitimacy of the debt and was paying $250 a week on the 
debt. He did not provide documents to support his payments.8 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($251,000) is a home mortgage that Applicant stated was 
foreclosed and sold. He indicated in his answer to the SOR that he became aware in 
January 2014 that the house was being foreclosed. He was unaware of the situation 
before then because his wife was handling the finances. He believed their mortgage 
was being modified. He indicated they were required to vacate the house in May 2014. 
No other information was provided regarding the status of this debt or if a deficiency 
remains.9 
 
Applicant disputes that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($2,388) and 1.h ($4,802) belong 
to him, but failed to provide corroborating documents to support his position.10 He also 
disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($44,673). He indicated in his PSI that he could not recall 
when the account in SOR ¶ 1.f became delinquent, but he had a payment plan to 
resolve the debt through monthly payments for the next six years.11 In his answer to the 
SOR, he provided a document showing an account was settled, but the account number 
is not the same as the alleged debt. Applicant did not provide further documents to 
prove the settled account is the same as the alleged account.12 
 
Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he had a payment plan for the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($773), but did not provide supporting documents to show his 
payments.13 In his response to the FORM, he indicated he was “starting to make 
payments on this item,” but failed to provide documents to show his payments. 
 
Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($7,473) 
was a credit card account that his wife put his name on without his knowledge. He 
                                                          
6 Item 5. 
 
7 Item 3 pages 6-7. 
 
8 Response to FORM.  
 
9 Item 3 page 8, Item 6. 
 
10 Items 7 and 8. 
 
11 Item 5 at 2. 
 
12 Item 3 page 11. 
 
13 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 
stated that he was only an authorized user and had no liability for the account. Applicant 
provided a document from the creditor indicating authorized users had no contractual 
financial obligation on the account.14 In his PSI he indicated that this credit card was 
being used to pay household expenses, and he was making monthly payments of $325 
to resolve the debt in six years.15  
 
Applicant provided a credit report dated August 5, 2014, which lists a new 
delinquent debt for $361.16 
 
Applicant indicated in his answer to the FORM that he intended to pay all of his 
creditors; has never been arrested; and works hard at his job. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
14 Item 3 at 15. 
 
15 Item 5. 
 
16 This debt is not alleged in the SOR and will not be considered for disqualifying purposes, but will be 
considered when analyzing Applicant’s credibility and the “whole-person.” 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has 10 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling approximately 
$72,488 and a delinquent mortgage account of $251,000, which are several years old 
and some are not resolved. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant provided supporting documents to show he has resolved the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.i, and 1.k, and he is not liable for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j. AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies to these debts and the allegations are resolved in his favor. 
 
Applicant indicated his financial problems began in 1996 when he and his wife 
cared for her siblings. Their assistance continued until approximately 2004 or 2005. He 
also indicated his poor financial management and his wife’s mismanagement of their 
finances, as well as her failure to tell him about their problems, contributed to the 
delinquent debts. Applicant continues to have delinquent debts that have not been 
resolved. It has been more than ten years since providing assistance to his wife’s 
siblings ceased. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s debts are recent, and 
there is insufficient evidence to conclude that his recent financial problems were the 
result of unique circumstances that are unlikely to recur.  
 
Assuming responsibility to care for Applicant’s wife’s siblings may have been a 
condition beyond his control. However, his poor financial management was within his 
control. His wife’s mismanagement was somewhat within his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), there must be evidence that Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. He began experiencing financial problems in 1996. After 
approximately 2004 or 2005, he no longer had the additional financial responsibility of 
 
7 
 
 
caring for his wife’s siblings. It appears he sought financial assistance in 2004 through a 
debt management firm, but discontinued using it in 2011. No specific evidence was 
provided as to what the firm did for him in resolving his debts or why he stopped using 
it. There is insufficient evidence that Applicant acted responsibly in resolving his debts. 
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has received recent financial 
counseling, or that his finances are under control. He indicated he is paying certain 
debts through monthly payments, but there is no documented proof to support his 
position. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
Applicant disputes some debts, but did not provide the basis of the legitimacy of 
the past-due debts or provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute 
or evidence of actions he has taken to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 51 years old. He has had financial difficulties dating back to 1996. He 
resolved some delinquent debts, but others remain outstanding. He failed to provide 
information about the status of any deficiency on his foreclosed mortgage. He did not 
provide documentation to support payments he indicated he made on debts. He did not 
submit a budget or plan to resolve the debts. Applicant has not established a consistent 
financial track record to show he is resolving his financial problems. Although there is 
 
8 
 
 
some evidence of mitigation, it is insufficient to meet his burden of persuasion. The 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.h  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.k:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
