 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08081  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations 
concerns raised by his $39,000 of unresolved delinquent debt. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 3, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on March 23, 2015. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant, who received 
the FORM on April 2, 2015. He did not respond. The case was assigned to me on May 
26, 2015. I admitted the items attached to the FORM as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 9, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 39, has worked for a federal contractor since February 2012. He is 
seeking a security clearance for the first time. On his security clearance application, 
submitted in March 2012, Applicant disclosed his failure to file state income tax returns 
between 2008 and 2010. He also disclosed several delinquent accounts. The ensuing 
investigation confirmed Applicant’s failure to file federal and state income tax returns 
during the aforementioned years and his indebtedness to 11 creditors for approximately 
$39,000.3 
 
 Applicant claims that his financial problems began when he and his wife 
experienced periods of unemployment. After quitting a job that he felt required too much 
travel in April 2010, Applicant was unemployed for eight months. He was also 
unemployed for three months in 2008 and two months in 2005. Applicant returned to 
full-time employment in November 2010 and has since been employed without 
interruption. The record does not indicate specific dates for Applicant’s wife’s 
unemployment. Applicant attributes his failure to file his federal and state income tax 
returns between 2008 and 2010 to not having all of the W-2 forms necessary to do so.4  
 
 Applicant admits all but two of the debts alleged in the SOR, specifically SOR ¶¶ 
1.d ($506) and 1.i ($1,346). Applicant claims that the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
($538) and 1.d are duplicates. Although the accounts have the same date of last 
payment, they were opened under different account numbers, three years apart. 
Applicant also denies the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, a judgment obtained by a 
creditor in 2006, stating that he is unfamiliar with the account and did not attend any 
court proceedings regarding a delinquent debt. He was made aware of the debt during 
his April 2012 subject interview. Applicant informed the investigator that he would 
investigate the debt and resolve it if the account proved to be a legitimate debt. 
Applicant has not provided any documentation to establish a legitimate basis for 
disputing that he is not responsible for the alleged debt. Although Applicant admitted 
that he owes the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j ($1,055), the account is simultaneously 
reported as being current and delinquent on GE 7, the most recent credit report in the 
record. Because of the conflicting information, I resolve the conflict in Applicant’s favor.5  
                                                          
2 GE 4. 
 
3 GE 5. 
 
4 GE 4, 6. 
 
5 GE 6-9. 
 
 
3 
 
 The remaining debts alleged in the SOR remain unresolved. Applicant claims to 
be making payments toward the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b for a state tax lien 
and a student loan, respectively. However, he did not provide any documentation to 
corroborate his claims. Nor are his claims supported by the record. The most recent 
credit report in the record, GE 7, dated March 2015, shows no change in the account 
balance for the state tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($4,186), and an increase in the 
account balance for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, now $32,408 from the $30,594 
alleged in the SOR. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant states that he intends to repay 
his delinquent accounts. Not only did Applicant fail to produce any evidence of debt 
repayment, he also failed to produce any evidence to indicate that his outstanding 
federal and state income tax returns have been filed.6  
 
 According to a personal financial statement Applicant completed in March 2014, 
he and his wife are employed. After paying their recurring expenses and consumer 
credit accounts, which totals approximately $11,000 in addition to the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR, they have disposable income of approximately $23.7 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
6 GE 4-9. 
 
7 GE 6.  
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”8  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $39,000 in delinquent debt. 
The allegations are supported by the record, establishing the Government’s prima facie 
case.9 Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his debts as well as a history of 
not doing so.10 Although Applicant’s financial problems may have been caused by 
events beyond his control, it is not enough to mitigate the financial considerations 
concerns. Since obtaining steady employment in 2008, Applicant has not acted 
responsibly to resolve his delinquent debt. He has not shown a good-faith effort to 
reduce his indebtedness or that his finances are under control. Applicant has not 
received financial counseling. While Applicant may well be able to meet his recurring 
monthly living expenses, this does not resolve the security concerns raised by his 
history of financial problems or unresolved delinquent debts. Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing and unresolved. None of the financial mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s ability to properly handle 
and safeguard classified information. Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet his burdens of 
production and persuasion. In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant 
chose to rely on the written record. In doing so, however, he failed to submit sufficient 
information or evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, mitigate the financial concerns, or establish evidence of 
financial rehabilitation. The security concerns raised in the SOR remain. Following 
Egan11 and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting 
national security.  
 
                                                          
8  AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 GE 4-9. 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
11 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i, and 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.j.     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
