 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06756  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
raised by his $23,400 in unresolved delinquent debt and his failure to disclose the 
delinquent accounts on his security clearance application. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 28, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on March 16, 2015. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant who received 
the FORM on March 27, 2015. He responded timely. Without objection, the documents 
appended to the FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 and 
the documents submitted by Applicant are admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through C. The case was assigned to me on June 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 54, has worked for a federal contractor since May 2011. Before 
accepting his current position, Applicant worked as a store clerk in a small hardware 
store. He previously held a security clearance between 1980 and 2001 when he served 
in the U.S Air Force. Applicant submitted a security clearance application in March 
2012. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant owes approximately $23,400 on 
22 delinquent accounts.3  
 
 Applicant did not disclose any derogatory financial information on his security 
clearance application in response to the question seeking information about 
delinquencies involving routine accounts. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant claims 
that he was in a bad place when he completed the application and that he answered the 
questions on the application to the best of his ability. At the time Applicant completed 
the form, he had not received any mail from his creditors at his new address. He did not 
believe that he had any charged-off accounts or any accounts that were greater than 
120 days past due. He also stated that any discrepancies were cleared up in his subject 
interview with a background investigator. However, in his April 2012 subject interview, 
Applicant informed the investigator that he listed 11 delinquent accounts on the original 
copy of the application he completed. When the application was returned to him for 
corrections, the delinquent accounts were deleted.4  
 
 According to Applicant, his financial problems began during the dissolution of his 
second marriage in May 2011. During the divorce proceedings, Applicant relocated to 
another state for his current job. Applicant explains that in addition to his relocation and 
living expenses, he continued to pay the mortgage on the home he previously shared 
with his ex-wife, as required by the terms of their divorce. On his own, he also assumed 
responsibility for the college expenses of their three children. His finances were strained 
by the increase in financial obligations and a decrease in income caused by a $900 
reduction in Applicant’s disability benefit from the Department of Veterans Affairs. 
Applicant’s financial problems worsened after he remarried in July 2011. Before their 
marriage, Applicant’s third wife worked in the medical field, earning $65,000 annually. 
Shortly after their marriage, she began experiencing a series of health issues that 
rendered her disabled and unable to work. As a result, Applicant assumed responsibility 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 4. 
 
4 GE 3-4, 6. 
 
3 
 
for her financial obligations. Applicant prioritized the needs of his family, their recurring 
living expenses, and his secured debt. He allowed unsecured debts to fall delinquent.5  
 
 Applicant admits 18 of the 22 debts alleged in the SOR. He denies the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($2,842) and 1.l ($30) because he is not familiar with them. 
Applicant discussed the debts in his subject interview in April 2012. Since then, he has 
not provided any documentation to establish a legitimate basis for disputing that he is 
not responsible for the alleged debt.  Applicant denies the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r as 
a duplicate of ¶ 1.k. Although the account balances reported on the credit reports in the 
record are the same, $85, the accounts show different creditors, different account 
numbers, and different activity dates. Applicant also denies the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.u ($2,811), claiming that the debt has been satisfied through the garnishment of his 
military retirement pay. He did not provide any documentation to corroborate his claim.6  
 
 As for the 18 debts Applicant admits, he has only taken steps to address the 
student loan debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. Applicant rehabilitated the loans 
and began making payments under a new payment plan in April 2015. In 2014, the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($1,400), 1.i ($1,261), and 1.n ($1,117), were forgiven by 
their creditors.7 Applicant properly reported the forgiven debt as income on his 2014 
federal income tax return and paid the necessary taxes. The remaining debts are 
unresolved.8 
 
 Applicant intends to pay his debts and avers that he will do so in time. In his 
response to the FORM, Applicant identified a number of changes in cash flow that will 
allow him to do so. His wife was awarded Social Security disability benefits, which 
allowed them to pay off her car loan. The garnishment on Applicant’s military retirement 
pay will be satisfied in the upcoming months. Applicant believes these changes will 
make $850 to $1,000 available for the payment of his delinquent accounts. Also, 
Applicant’s claim against the Veteran’s Administration regarding the reduction of his 
disability benefits was resolved in his favor. He expects to receive a lump-sum payment 
of $4,000 in retroactive pay.9 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
                                                          
5 GE 3, 6. 
 
6 GE 3, 5, 7.  
 
7 Applicant also claims that SOR ¶ 1.f was also forgiven by the creditor. However, none of the account 
identifiers on the cancellation of debt forms matches that debt or any other alleged in the SOR.  
 
8 AE A - C.  
 
9 GE 3, AE A - C .  
 
4 
 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”10  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $23,400 in delinquent debt. 
The allegations are supported by the record, establishing the Government’s prima facie 
case.11 Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his debts as well as a history of 
not doing so.12 Although Applicant’s financial problems may have been caused by 
events beyond his control, he has not proven that he acted responsibly given his 
circumstances. Nor does the evidence establish that Applicant has made a good-faith 
effort to repay his creditors. Applicant has taken active steps to resolve only 3 of the 24 
delinquent accounts in the SOR, the student loan accounts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.c. With only two payments on these debts, Applicant has not established a positive 
history of repayment or actual debt reduction. Furthermore, the resolution of SOR ¶ 1.u 
                                                          
10  AG ¶ 18. 
 
11 GE 4-9. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
 
5 
 
by garnishment (which is not supported by the record), and the cancellation of debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i. and 1.n were resolved, albeit in Applicant’s favor, by action 
of the respective creditors. 
  
Applicant has stated his intentions to pay his debts in the future. However, this 
promise, no matter how genuine, does not mitigate the security concern. Applicant 
failed to establish a track record of financial reform or rehabilitation. Accordingly, none 
of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Personal Conduct 
  
 Conduct involving a lack of candor or dishonesty, in particular, a failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security process raises questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.13 The 
SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose any derogatory information on 
his March 2012 security clearance application. Applicant denies the allegation. Proof of 
omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of 
mind when he completed the application. Applicant has provided conflicting 
explanations for his omissions. Neither is credible. Applicant was admittedly in a bad 
place emotionally and financially when he completed his security clearance application. 
It is likely that securing better paying employment was a priority for him at the time. This 
provides sufficient circumstantial evidence of Applicant’s intent to withhold information 
from the government.14 
 
 Applicant’s deliberate falsification is not a minor offense. Applicant held a security 
clearance for the duration of his 21-year career in the military. He undoubtedly 
completed numerous security clearance applications and should have known the 
importance of full disclosure. He has not acknowledged or taken responsibility for his 
behavior. None of the personal conduct mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Based on the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s ability to properly handle 
and safeguard classified information. Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet his burdens of 
production and persuasion. The security concerns raised in the SOR remain. Following 
Egan15 and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting 
national security.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 AG ¶ 15. 
 
14 AG ¶ 16 (a). 
 
15 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.v:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
