 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-05693 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by a history of failing to meet 
her financial obligations. She amassed a significant amount of delinquent debt, and 
resolved most of it through wage garnishment and a recent Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
Notwithstanding the presence of some mitigation, an insufficient amount of time has 
passed to conclude that her finances are under control and financial problems will not 
recur. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On August 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s conduct and circumstances raised security 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 On October 6, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish her continued eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On November 20, 2014, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed. Applicant’s hearing was originally scheduled in 
January 2015 and then in February 2015, but were canceled on both occasions due to 
inclement weather. By agreement of the parties, her hearing was held on March 17, 
2015. Department Counsel offered Government exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 4. Applicant testified 
and offered Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.) A – J. She requested additional time post hearing 
to submit documentary evidence. I granted her request, and she timely submitted Ax. K. 
All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) 
was received on March 25, 2015, and the record closed on April 3, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact:2 
 
 Applicant, 41, was born overseas and became a U.S. citizen in around 1997. She 
has been married for about 14 years, and has three children. She earned her bachelor’s 
degree in electrical engineering in 2000, and has been continuously employed as a 
federal contractor for the past 15 years. She has held a security clearance since about 
2002, and has been with her current employer since 2011. (Tr. at 9, 22, 27, 41-42; Gx. 
1) Her current supervisor writes that Applicant is reliable and completes her assigned 
work in a timely and professional manner. (Ax. G) 
 
 In January 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA or 
application) as part of the periodic reinvestigation of her background. She listed about 
eight delinquent debts totaling over $145,000. (Gx. 1 at 39-51) She was subsequently 
interviewed by a background investigator, and discussed the eight delinquent debts 
listed on her application. She also discussed with the investigator over 20 debts listed 
on her credit report as either reduced to judgment, in collection status, or seriously past 
due. She explained that her financial problems stemmed from her husband’s failed 
business. He operated the business from 2005 to 2009, and since then had been 
unemployed or underemployed. She also told the investigator that she was in “the 
process of setting up a payment plan with all creditors . . . and will satisfy the debts in 
the near future.” (Gx. 2, Personal Subject Interview, March 21, 2012, at 3)  
 
 In January 2014, Applicant responded to a DOD CAF interrogatory that inquired, 
in part, as to what steps she had taken to resolve her delinquent debts. The 
interrogatory also requested that Applicant provide documentation to support any claim 
of debt resolution. (Gx. 2, Instructions, ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) Applicant responded by noting 
that her husband was expecting to start a full-time job in April 2014, at a starting annual 
salary of $80,000. She further noted that their goal was “to pay off all our debts and 
bring all past due accounts to current status.” (Gx. 2, Response to ¶ 7).  
 
                                                          
2 In reaching my findings of fact, I have made only those inferences reasonably supported by the 
evidence and, where necessary, resolved any potential conflict raised by the evidence.  
 
3 
 
 
In response to the DOD CAF interrogatory, Applicant submitted a personal 
financial statement (PFS). The PFS reflects a monthly net remainder (disposal income 
remaining after paying expenses and debts) of over $900 and about $17,000 in assets. 
The PFS also reflects that Applicant’s single largest monthly expense, following her 
mortgage, was $920 for “credit cards and other debts.” (Gx. 2)  
 
Applicant also submitted documentation that her pay was garnished to satisfy 
some past-due debts. She submitted offers she received from overdue creditors to 
settle over $180,000 in delinquent debt. At hearing, Applicant submitted documentation 
that she accepted one offer for $4,000 to resolve a $13,000 delinquent home equity line 
of credit (HELOC). (Tr. at 36-38, 42-43; Gx. 2, Settlement Offers; Ax. I)  
 
 In August 2014, the SOR, listing 16 delinquent debts totaling over $150,000, was 
issued.3 Applicant again explained that her financial problems stemmed from her 
husband’s failed business. She amassed the delinquent debts from 2009 to 2014. 
Applicant’s husband filed and had his debts discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
around September 2014. Applicant subsequently filed her own petition for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, and her debts were discharged in January 2015. All the SOR debts, except 
for Applicant’s student loan debt (1.n), were resolved either through involuntary wage 
garnishment or through the Chapter 7.4 (Tr. at 23-26, 38-62; Gx. 3 – 4; Ax. A)  
 
Applicant submitted documentation that she is now paying the homeowner’s 
association (HOA) fees on two properties, her primary residence and a rental property. 
She previously failed to pay the HOA fees on both properties and the homeowner’s 
association secured judgments against her in 2009, which went unresolved until 
recently. Applicant and her husband had two other properties that were disposed of 
through foreclosure or an agreed-upon short sale. (Tr. at 42-47, 60-62; Gx. 3 – 4; Ax. K)  
 
 Applicant’s husband secured a job with the federal government in February 2015, 
at a starting annual salary of approximately $64,000. The job is a two-year term 
appointment. (Ax. C) The record is silent as to what occurred with the prospective job 
he was expected to start in April 2014. Applicant recently received a raise, and her 
current annual salary is approximately $97,000. (Ax. D) She testified about taking an 
online financial counseling course. She currently has three credit cards, including a 
$7,000 line of credit that she opened after the bankruptcy. (Tr. at 29, 55-56) She 
submitted a written budget, which indicates that, after paying their monthly expenses 
and debts, her family has over $7,000 in monthly discretionary income. (Ax. E) She 
testified, however, that after paying her monthly expenses and debts, her monthly “cash 
flow” is “about $2,000.” (Tr. at 28)  
 
                                                          
3 The SOR alleges two separate debts at subparagraph 1.d. I amended the SOR to reflect that the 2009 
judgment for $1,232 is 1.d(1), and the $8,565 charged off account is 1.d(2).  
 
4 Department Counsel stipulated that the SOR debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.i and 1.l are duplicates. Accordingly, 
SOR 1.i is decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant submitted a portion of a bank statement to show that she is paying her 
student loans. (Ax. J) The bank statement reflects expenditures at one clothing store 
that exceeds the total monthly amount allotted for such expenditures, as reflected on 
the PFS and the written budget submitted at hearing. When questioned about this 
discrepancy, Applicant explained that the expenditure was due to a particular clothing 
store having a yearly sale that she generally takes advantage of. (Tr. at 62-63; Contrast, 
Ax. J, with, Gx. 2, PFS, and Ax. E) The bank statement, Ax. J, also reflects deposits of 
approximately $16,200, and withdrawals or debits of over $16,800.5  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security 
clearance.”).  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
                                                          
5 Ax. J reflects deposits and withdrawals from January and February 2013, or about seven months before 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant did not submit other credible documentary evidence 
reflecting that her spending habits have changed and her testimony indicates it has remained the same.  
 
5 
 
 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.6 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern regarding an individual who fails to pay their financial 
obligations and incurs delinquent debt is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The security “concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in satisfaction of 
his or her debts.”7 The concern also encompasses financial irresponsibility, which may 
indicate that an applicant would also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or 
careless in handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
Applicant has a history of failing to meet her financial obligations, as evidenced 
by several judgments, some dating back to 2009, and over $100,000 in delinquent debt 
that was ultimately discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy. This record evidence 
raises the financial considerations security concern and establishes the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
                                                          
6 Security clearance determinations are “not an exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a 
person’s security suitability.” ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004). See also ISCR Case 
No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014); ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013).  
 
7 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 (App. 
Bd. June 26, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant and her husband overextended themselves to invest in his business. 
This financial decision was not a matter beyond her control, but the business’s failure 
and her husband’s subsequent unemployment and underemployment was a matter 
largely beyond her control. However, Applicant failed to responsibly manage her 
finances under the circumstances. She has been aware of the Government’s concerns 
regarding her delinquent debts for the past three years and has repeatedly promised to 
resolve her debts. Instead, she ignored the vast majority of her overdue creditors, even 
after some of them secured judgments against her, and spent her disposable income on 
consumer-related purchases. She resolved her longstanding past-due debts only after 
the SOR was issued. She then eliminated the great majority of her past-due debts 
through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy.8 Although bankruptcy is a viable and legal avenue by 
which an individual can resolve their debts, Applicant failed to establish that her current 
financial situation is under control and she has changed the spending habits that 
contributed to her past financial problems.9 In reaching this adverse conclusion, I 
considered Applicant’s testimony and the unrebutted evidence regarding her spending 
habits that, notwithstanding the receipt of financial counseling, tends to indicate poor 
                                                          
8 Applicant brought current her student loans and resolved other non-alleged delinquent debt outside of 
bankruptcy. SOR 1.n, alleging that one of her student loans is in collections, is resolved in her favor. This 
favorable record evidence does not outweigh the security concerns raised by Applicant’s accumulation of 
a substantial amount of delinquent debt and disregarded for the majority of the debt until recently.  
 
9 ISCR Case No. 10-03578 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 4, 2012) (“the mere filing of a bankruptcy petition and the 
successful receipt of a discharge, standing alone, does not satisfy the good-faith requirement of AG ¶ 
20(d),” nor necessarily mitigate security concerns raised by the accumulation of delinquent debt) 
(emphasis in original).  
 
7 
 
 
self-control and lack of financial reform.10 Accordingly, I find that AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies, but none of the other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).11 I gave due consideration to all the favorable and 
extenuating factors in this case, including Applicant’s honesty during the security 
clearance process and that she has held a clearance for over 10 years without apparent 
issue. Additionally, I took into account that she has been her family’s primary 
breadwinner for many years and the primary caretaker for the couple’s three minor 
children. Furthermore, she brought her student loans current and resolved a few other 
debts not alleged in the SOR.  
 
 The favorable record evidence, however, does not outweigh the security 
concerns raised by Applicant’s financial situation. Applicant accumulated a significant 
amount of delinquent debt and for years promised to resolve her debts. Despite having 
the apparent means to resolve her past-due debts, Applicant took little to no voluntary 
action to resolve her delinquencies. Instead of paying her overdue creditors, Applicant 
spent her disposable income on consumer-related purchases. After the SOR was 
issued, Applicant discharged over $100,000 in delinquent debt through a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy – debt she had amassed from 2009 to 2014. An insufficient amount of time 
has passed to mitigate the security concerns raised by her accumulation of such 
substantial debt, especially in light of the conflicting evidence adduced at hearing 
regarding her current finances. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts and 
questions about Applicant’s continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h, 1.j – 1.m, 1.o:       Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i and 1.n:        For Applicant 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 10-03578 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 4, 2012) (judge properly examined “circumstances 
underlying Applicant’s debts, concluding that his financial management habits evidenced unreliability, 
untrustworthiness, and an unwillingness to follow rules and regulations”).  
 
11 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
