 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10341 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s urine sample tested positive for marijuana. Notwithstanding, after 
considering all the evidence, I determined that Applicant unknowingly ingested the 
marijuana. He mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 28, 2012. 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) on December 31, 2014.1 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Applicant answered the SOR on February 19, 2015, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 3, 2015. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 6, 2015, 
scheduling a hearing for May 6, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered two exhibits (GE 1 and 2), which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but did not submit any documentary 
evidence. However, attached to his answer to the SOR, Applicant submitted copies of 
negative urinalysis test results that he took from 2007 to 2014. Additionally, he 
submitted letters of appreciation for a job well done, an e-mail notifying him of his 
successful completion of a counter-intelligence interview, a reference letter from his 
supervisor, and an employee of the month award. These documents are part of the 
record, and I considered them in my decision-making process. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 14, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted that in December 2011, he 
submitted a urine sample that tested positive for marijuana and that at the time he held 
a security clearance. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence, and having considered Applicant 
demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:   
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old aircraft mechanic and crew chief. He has been 
employed by a federal contractor for close to 32 years. He completed avionics 
electronics technician school in 1980. He has held a secret clearance for 30 years and a 
top secret clearance for 20 years. He does not believe his loss of access to classified 
information will result in the loss of his employment. His only limitation will be a lack of 
access to classified areas of an aircraft. He has never been married, and he does not 
have any children.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana a few times when he was in high school. He did not 
knowingly use marijuana after high school. On December 4, 2011 (Sunday), Applicant 
attended a football game party. He was invited to the party by a friend, and the party 
was held at one of his friend’s family members. Applicant testified that this was the first 
time ever, and the last time, he visited his friend’s family. The host offered marijuana-
laced brownies to Applicant. The brownies were in a tin container away from the food 
table. Applicant claimed that he declined the offer. However, there were other brownies 
in plates at the food table, and he consumed two to four of those brownies. He did not 
believe the brownies at the table were laced with marijuana because they were there for 
everybody’s consumption. He did not feel any effects after consuming the brownies. (Tr. 
22-27) 
 
On December 6, 2011 (Tuesday), Applicant provided a urine sample, which 
tested positive for the marijuana metabolite. Applicant denied knowingly consuming 
marijuana. When asked why he tested positive for marijuana, Applicant offered two 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
possibilities - that he unwittingly consumed marijuana-laced brownies, or that his 
specimen was tampered, because his impression was that the vials of urine were not 
sealed in his presence. (The document Applicant submitted relating to the chain of 
custody for his urinalysis sample indicates he certified that “Each sample bottle used 
was sealed with a tamper-evident seal in my presence; and that the information 
provided on this form and on the label affixed to each specimen bottle is correct.” The 
nurse-observer and Applicant signed the form indicating the sealing and integrity of the 
urine sample Applicant provided. (Tr. 31-32; 42-43))  
 
Because of his job as an aircraft mechanic, Applicant has been required to take 
random urinalysis tests since he started working for his employer. He testified that he 
had about 15 negative urinalysis tests before he tested positive on December 6, 2011, 
and about 30 after December 6, 2011. All of those urinalysis tests before December 
2011, and after, including a test on January 4, 2012, were negative for the presence of 
illegal drugs. (Tr. 17, 19, 35-36) He was usually urinalysis tested at least once a month 
after December 2011. His most recent urinalysis test was in December 2014. Applicant 
credibly testified that he has not consumed any illegal drugs since December 2011. 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant included copies of urinalysis test 
documents from May 2007; December 2011; January–May 2012, July 2012, 
September-December 2012; February 2013, May-August 2013, October-December 
2013; and August-September 2014. There were three additional urinalysis test 
documents, but the dates were illegible. All the above documents reflect negative test 
results, except for the December 2011 test. After he tested positive for marijuana, 
Applicant participated in substance abuse counseling through his employer’s employee 
assistance program, and attended four substance abuse classes.  
 
Applicant has not returned to the location where he believes he consumed the 
marijuana-laced brownies. He has friends that are marijuana users, but if they use 
marijuana they do it behind his back and do not let him know. (Tr. 33) His most recent 
attendance at a party where marijuana was openly used was at a neighbor’s bonfire 
party about three years ago. He claimed he has not been to another party with his 
neighbors since, but he still feels compelled to talk to them. (Tr. 33-34) He has attended 
other parties where he believed marijuana may have been discretely used outside of 
Applicant’s close proximity. (Tr. 34) 
 
Applicant assures that he is conscientious about security matters and making 
sure the aircraft entrusted to his care are properly maintained. His employer decided not 
to fire him after he tested positive for marijuana because he is such an excellent 
mechanic; however, he believes if he tests positive for illegal drugs again, he will be 
fired. (Tr. 39) Applicant’s aircraft mechanic’s license will also be revoked if he tests 
positive for drugs again. He promised that his urinalysis tests will not be positive for 
illegal drugs in the future. (Tr. 45)  
 
Applicant believes that he is an honest person that exercises good judgment, and 
an excellent aircraft mechanic. Applicant’s direct supervisor for the past five years 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
lauded his motivation, intelligence, professionalism, reliability, contributions to mission 
accomplishment, and emphasis on safety and maintenance. In 2010, Applicant received 
the employee of the month award from his employer, and a letter of appreciation for 
support of a demonstration flight. On December 10, 2012, he also successfully 
completed a counterintelligence polygraph.  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s demeanor while 
testifying, I find that Applicant did not knowingly use marijuana before his December 
2011 urinalysis test. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes four drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug abuse;”2 
“(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;” “(c) illegal drug possession;” and “(g) any illegal 
drug use after being granted a security clearance.”  
 
Applicant’s urine sample tested positive for marijuana in December 2011. 
Nonetheless, after considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant unknowingly 
ingested the marijuana. I have arrived at that determination based on his extensive 
participation on a urinalysis testing program (with negative results for the presence of 
drugs, except for the December 2011 test) in combination with his character evidence 
and his credible testimony. Because I determined that Applicant did not use marijuana 
knowingly, there is no illegal drug abuse, possession, or use. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), 25(c), 
and 25(g) are not applicable.  
 
  Since I determined that Applicant did not illegally used marijuana in 2011, there 
is no conduct to be mitigated, and it is unnecessary to discuss mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, 
but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old aircraft mechanic and crew chief, who has been an 
employee of a defense contractor for more than 31 years. He has held a secret 
clearance for 10 years and a top secret clearance for 20 years. He is considered to be a 
good aircraft mechanic who makes significant contributions to his employer. He was 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
lauded for his motivation, intelligence, professionalism, reliability, and emphasis on 
safety and maintenance. He successfully completed a counterintelligence polygraph in 
December 2012.  
 
There is no evidence of security violations or of any security concerns, except for 
his December 2011 positive urinalysis test. Considering the evidence as a whole, I 
determined that Applicant unknowingly ingested the marijuana. Applicant credibly 
testified that he will never consume illegal drugs in the future. He clearly understands 
the possible adverse consequences he will face if he is ever involved in the use of 
illegal drugs. He specifically understands that he will be fired from his job, and his 
aircraft mechanic license and his eligibility for a security clearance will be revoked. 
 
I considered that Applicant displayed poor judgment by consuming brownies after 
his host offered him marijuana-laced brownies. He indicated that he will refrain from 
associating with any marijuana users in the future. Notwithstanding, after weighing all 
the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the drug involvement security concerns.      
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
