The Government submitted nine items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 13-01396
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On February 7, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 21, 2015.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 31,
2014 . Applicant received the FORM on April 22, 2015. Applicant timely submitted a1
response  to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
Applicant has two credit collection accounts in the payment program. The credit report lists “pays as      2
agreed.”
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F  and provided explanations. 
Applicant is 46 years old. He graduated from high school in 1986.  Applicant is
married and has one son. He has been employed with his current employer since 2006.
He has held a security clearance since August 2003. (Item 5)
The SOR alleges one delinquent debt, and a past-due mortgage loan payment
totaling about $2,873. (Item 5) It also alleges failure to file federal and state income tax
returns for tax years 2010 through 2012. It also alleges an indebtedness to the IRS for
past-due taxes for tax year 2009 in the amount of at least $2,200. (Item 1)
Applicant stated that he was paying his bills and was current with all debts until
2010. In 2010, his wife left her employment and did not find employment for several
months. When she became employed her income was significantly lower. This resulted
in financial hardship for the family. (Item 4)
In addition, Applicant explained that between 2010 and 2012 he had multiple
financial setbacks due to a car accident, which involved medical and legal debts. He
also noted his wife’s issues with alcohol which impacted his life financially. He enrolled
in a debt--management program in 2012.  He believes he is gaining financial stability.2
(Item 4)
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement that shows a total net monthly
income of $5,251. After expenses and a debt payment to a consolidation company of
$797, he has a monthly net remainder of $400. (Item 6)
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that his tax information is at the
accountant and ready to be picked up. He elaborated that lack of funding has prevented
paying the accountant. He has been working to settle the tax and working with an
accountant since June 2013. (SOR 1.a-1b)
As to 1.c, Applicant stated that the taxes from 2011 and 2012 will result in a
credit that eliminate the debt to the IRS for 2009. He provided documentation to support
his claim. (Response to FORM)
As to 1.d, Applicant has not had adequate funding to pay the account ($199). He
will resolve as soon as possible. In his answer to the FORM, he admits that he still
owes this debt, but is trying to contact the collection company.
 
3
Applicant states that he is current with his mortgage loan account (1.e). He
claims that he has been current since April 2014. He claims that he refinanced his
home and his mortgage payments were reduced by $400 a month. (Item 6) He provided
documentation in response to FORM to support his claims.
When Applicant responded to the FORM, he stated that all Federal tax returns
have been completed and filed for 2010 through 2012. In 2010 he claims he owed
$5,462, but in 2011 he received a refund of $3,354. He noted a refund of $5,229 from
tax year 2012. He provided copies of tax returns and payments made to IRS.  He noted
refunds for 2011 ($856) and 2012 ($789).  Applicant stated that the federal taxes owed
for 2009 were paid in full with the refund from 2011. He provided supporting
documentation.  
Applicant disclosed his failure to file tax returns and pay taxes on his 2013
security clearance application. He stated that he is in the process of settling the tax
issues. During his 2013 interview he mentioned a payment arrangement with the IRS to
pay $200 a month for his 2009 tax liability. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant noted
that the tax information was complete and ready to be resolved. He provided the
necessary documentation with his response to the FORM. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
4
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
5
Applicant admitted that he had delinquent debts and taxes. He also failed to
timely file his 2010 and 2011 federal and state tax returns. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts), FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) , FC
DC AG ¶I 19(g) (failure to file taxes as required or the fraudulent filing of same) also
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant has resolved the
tax issues and attributed his delinquent debts and late filing of taxes to his wife’s leaving
her employment without another position, a car accident, and legal bills. He  provided
some nexus with regard to the failure to file his tax returns since 2010 until 2015.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies. Applicant cited to his lack of funds, and his debt-consolidation plan in 2012. He
worked to refinance his mortgage and has been current since 201`4. He sought help
with his tax returns in 2013. He  provided evidence to show that he has acted
responsibly under the circumstances.  
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application. In 2012, he entered into a
consolidation plan for two accounts. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications that the
problem is being resolved, or is under control)  applies.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
6
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 46- year- old employee, holding a security clearance. Applicant did not
timely file his federal tax returns for the tax years 2010 and 2011. He stated that this
was  due to his loss of his wife’s income. He owed taxes for 2009. He admits that his
financial problems have continued for a number of years. He  provided  evidence that
he has resolved the tax issues and the late mortgage payment. He admits he still owes
for the phone account. He has promised and intends to pay his delinquent debt. He
went to an accountant to help him resolve the issues. He  provided sufficient
information concerning the payment plan with the account that he stated that he is
repaying.  Applicant  refuted and mitigated the Government’s case concerning the
financial considerations security concerns. His credit reports reflect all accounts “paying
as agreed.”  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
