 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 14-01824 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He is delinquent on 
approximately $85,000 in student loans owed to one lender and $58,800 owed to 
another creditor. He has five additional unpaid collection accounts totaling 
approximately $3,000. Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 27, 2014, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On July 18, 
2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated January 
30, 2015. The FORM contained nine attachments (Items). On February 19, 2015, 
Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially 
disqualifying conditions. No documentation was received from Applicant. On April 27, 
2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the 21 accounts placed for 
collection. He asserted he was attempting to consolidate his student loan debt and 
would have to research the other debts. (Item 4) I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as 
facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old business application administrator who has worked for 
a defense contractor since May 2013 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 5) 
He had two periods of schooling during which he incurred $80,000 in student loans 
during his first period and $40,000 during his second period of education. (Item 9) He 
indicated on his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) that his 
student loans were delinquent. (Item 5) In December 2007, his schooling ended and 
repayment of the student loans was to commence in June 2008. He made partial 
monthly payments until December 2008, when he stopped making payments. From 
June 2010 until May 2013, his wages were garnished to pay his student loans. In May 
2013, payments stopped and, as of his January 2014 personal subject interview (PSI), 
he had had no contact concerning his student loans. (Item 9)  
 
 In Applicant’s January 1014 Personal Subject Interview (PSI), he stated it was 
his intent to contact the lender in order to make payment arrangements or to modify his 
loans in an attempt to satisfy the debt. His credit reports lists $84,793 owed one creditor 
for eight student loans and owed to another creditor $58,811 for eight other student 
loans. (Items 6, 7, and 8) 
 
 Other that Applicant’s student loans, he has five additional collection accounts 
totaling approximately $3,000. In his SOR answer, he indicated he had to research 
these debts because he did not know the nature or source of the debts. Applicant did 
not provide documentation showing payment on any of his debts.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
4 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has more than $143,000 of delinquent student loans. He also has four 
collection accounts that remain unpaid. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
5 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He produced no evidence of 
circumstances beyond his control. He has provided no documentation showing payment 
on any of his debts. Even the four smaller debts of less than $500 each remain unpaid. 
He has not acted responsibly in addressing his debts. He provided no evidence he has 
received credit or financial counseling. He has not demonstrated that his financial 
problems are under control or that he has a plan to bring them under control. He has not 
made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. There is nothing in the record 
supporting that conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual. Applicant 
has been asked about these obligations starting in January 2014. Given sufficient 
opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, Applicant has failed to act timely or 
responsibly under the circumstances. Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. There is no showing of circumstances beyond his 
control. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant has not 
received financial counseling. Additionally, there is no clear showing that his financial 
obligations are being addressed.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because Applicant 
has failed to document payment on any of the delinquent accounts. The garnishment of 
his wages, which ended in May 2013, to address the student loans is not considered a 
good faith effort to repay creditors. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply because Applicant has not disputed any of the delinquent debts. He admitted 
all of the debts, but indicated he would have to do further research concerning five of 
them that were not student loans.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The majority of the debt set forth in 
the SOR was not incurred on luxuries, but for student loans. This is not the type of debt 
that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. However, Applicant has failed to 
document any payment on those loans. He has been aware of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent debts since his January 2014 PSI, which was reinforced in 
the June 2014 SOR. No delinquent debts have been paid and there is no 
documentation Applicant has recently contacted his creditors.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances and facts which would mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. He failed to provide such 
information, and by relying solely on his paragraphs of explanation in response to the 
SOR, he failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
7 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.u:   Against Applicant   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
