 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-02765   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated over $88,000 of delinquent debt owed to three creditors 
for judgments entered between 2009 and 2010. He failed to provide evidence that he 
paid or resolved any of the three judgments. Resulting security concerns were not 
mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On February 20, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86) for an investigation. On August 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On August 18, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On February 27, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
seven Items, was provided to Applicant on March 19, 2015, and he was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on March 25, 2015, and returned the receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). He provided additional information in response to the FORM within 
the 30-day period. Department Counsel had no objection to said submission, which I 
subsequently marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE A), and admitted into the record. DOHA 
assigned the case to me on May 22, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for all three debts 
alleged in the SOR. (Item 1.) His admissions are incorporated into these findings.  
 
 Applicant is 25 years old. He is unmarried, but engaged. He attended college 
from November 2008 to December 2010, and earned an associate’s degree. He was 
unemployed while attending college and briefly after graduation. He began working in 
February 2011. He was employed fulltime from November 2005 to November 2008. 
(Item 2.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated March 2013, July 2014, and 
February 2015, the SOR alleged three delinquent judgments totaling $88,094. One 
judgment for $13,865 was entered in 2010 and related to an unpaid credit card. Two 
judgments were entered in 2009, one for $73,505 and another for $724. The $73,505 
judgment related to a restaurant lease Applicant co-signed with his sister. The debt 
arose after the restaurant closed. The creditor for the $724 judgment was an apartment 
complex where Applicant had rented a unit. Applicant disclosed these delinquent debts 
in his February 2013 SF-86. (Items 2 through 6.)  None are resolved. 
 
 Applicant said the judgements accumulated during the three years he was 
unemployed as a result of an injury. He also attributed the financial problems to a move 
home during that time, to take care of his sick mother and help his sister with her 
restaurant business while she was serving in the Merchant Marine. He said he had 
worked out a repayment plan for the $13,865 judgment but was unable to maintain the 
payments after he became unemployed. Recently, he has been unsuccessful in 
negotiating with the credit card and lease creditors, and unable to locate the apartment 
complex creditor. (Item 1; Answer; AE A.)  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant obtained credit counseling or sought 
assistance with a debt consolidation company within the past couple years. He did not 
provide a budget or a solid plan to address the delinquent debts. He submitted no 
evidence concerning the quality of his professional performance, or the level of 
responsibility his duties entail. He provided no character references describing his 
judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. The 
protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires 
that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
 
4 
 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s unpaid judgments accumulated between 2009 and 2010. He has 
been unable or unwilling to satisfy or resolve them. The evidence raises both security 
concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts, which arose in 2009 and 2010, remain unresolved. 
Because he failed to address any debt, he did not demonstrate that such problems are 
unlikely to continue or recur. His reliability and trustworthiness in managing delinquent 
debts remain a concern. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant provided some evidence that his financial problems arose as a result of 
circumstances beyond his control, specifically an injury. However, his other reasons for 
failing to address his obligations, such as a decision to attend school fulltime, were 
within his control. He did not present any evidence that he attempted to resolve the 
debts while they were accumulating. AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal application.  
 
 Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling. He has not shown 
clear indications that the delinquent debts are under control. Thus, AG ¶ 20(c) has no 
application. He did not provide sufficient documentation to demonstrate that he has 
made a good-faith effort to resolve any of the three SOR-listed debts. Hence, AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply. Applicant admitted owing the three debts, hence, there is no 
reasonable basis to dispute any delinquent debt. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 25 years old. He 
has been employed with a defense contractor since February 2011. He truthfully 
disclosed three unpaid judgments in his 2013 SF-86. However, he submitted no 
evidence that he paid, is paying, or otherwise resolved any of them. He did not present 
a budget or plan for addressing the debts which are five and six years old. The 
likelihood that similar problems will continue is significant; and the potential for pressure, 
coercion, or duress is undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for financial considerations 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
