 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-03548 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by a history of failing to pay 
his financial obligations. He amassed over $100,000 in delinquent debt, which he 
recently discharged through Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Delinquent federal taxes and 
student loans totaling over $70,000 remain outstanding. Notwithstanding the presence 
of some mitigation, it is too soon to conclude that his finances are under control and 
financial problems will not recur. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On August 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging that Applicant’s conduct and circumstances raised security 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 On October 30, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his continued eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On January 21, 2015, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed. Applicant’s hearing was scheduled, with the 
agreement of the parties, for March 19, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled. At 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 6. Applicant 
testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – J. He requested additional time post-
hearing to submit documentary evidence. I granted his request, and he timely submitted 
Ax. K – Ax. N. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The hearing 
transcript (Tr.) was received on March 27, 2015, and the record closed on April 3, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant, 44, is a federal contractor and has been working for his current 
employer since 2002. He is a few credits shy of completing an undergraduate degree in 
criminal justice. He has held a security clearance since 2003. He submitted reference 
letters from coworkers and others relaying their favorable impressions regarding his 
work ethic, professionalism, honesty, and dependability.2 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems for several years. His 2009 credit report 
reflects numerous adverse accounts, including a seriously past-due mortgage, a 
charged-off second mortgage, student loans in collection status, and several other 
collection accounts.3 His current security clearance application reflects delinquent 
federal and state taxes, student loans, and mortgage-related debt, as well as a failure to 
file federal and state tax returns.4 
 
In 2013, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, declaring over $150,000 in 
liabilities, of which more than $70,000 was for delinquent taxes and student loans. 
Applicant reported approximately $30,000 in assets and a gross income of about 
$60,000. He also reported that, after paying his recurring monthly expenses, he was 
running a monthly deficiency of about $100. In July 2014, Applicant was granted a 
Chapter 7 discharge that resolved all his past-due debts, except for his outstanding 
federal taxes and student loans.5 
 
 Applicant claims that his financial trouble stems from his inability to pay the 
mortgage on his former home following the divorce from his ex-spouse in 2003. He 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 14, 21-22; Gx. 1; Ax. E.  
 
3 Gx. 3.  
 
4 Gx. 1 at 26-30.  
 
5 Gx. 2; Ax. H. The bankruptcy resulted in the discharge of Applicant’s $59,000 delinquent mortgage. (Gx. 
2, Schedule F) He received a settlement of $4,500 to resolve a claim that the creditor garnished his pay 
after he filed for bankruptcy. (Ax. C) The record is silent as to how Applicant used this money, but he 
testified that the total amount in his checking and savings account was less than $1,000. (Tr. at 65) 
 
3 
 
 
claims his mortgage lender accepted a short sale, but the loan was sold to another 
lender that secured a judgment after the sale and garnished his pay to recover the 
deficiency balance. He submitted a letter from the lender holding a second mortgage 
lien on the property, which reflects that it would accept $2,000 from a short sale of the 
property. He did not submit documentation regarding the purported short sale. He 
continues to reside at the residence and pays rent to his cousin. He also states that his 
financial trouble is related to his own medical issues, and the financial strain of 
supporting and caring for his elderly father.6  
 
 At hearing, Applicant discussed his delinquent taxes and student loans. He 
testified that in 2010 he deliberately changed his withholdings to increase his take-home 
pay. At around the same time, he took a vacation trip to the Caribbean. He was unable 
to pay the resulting tax obligations, and did not file his federal tax returns for tax years 
2010 through 2012. He currently owes the IRS approximately $34,000 for tax years 
2010 through 2012. He received notices from the IRS regarding his overdue tax returns, 
but took no action to resolve his tax situation until recently. He now has an installment 
agreement with the IRS. The installment agreement requires him to pay $150 a month, 
and his first monthly payment was due in November 2014. Applicant did not make the 
initial four monthly installment payments. He waited until shortly before the hearing to 
make a lump sum payment of $600 to the IRS for the missing payments.7  
 
About a month before the hearing, Applicant also entered into an agreement to 
resolve his delinquent student loans, which total over $40,000. He testified that the 
student loan repayment plan requires that he pay $295 monthly. He further testified that, 
as of the hearing, he was two months in arrears on his student loans. He did not submit 
documentation regarding the student loan repayment plan. He timely submitted his April 
2015 monthly payments for his overdue taxes and student loans. 8 
 
Applicant received credit counseling through the Chapter 7 bankruptcy. After the 
hearing, he signed up for further financial counseling. He submitted a personal financial 
statement (PFS), which reflects that after paying his monthly expenses and debts, he 
supposedly has about $170 in discretionary income to pay unexpected expenses.9 
Applicant did not explain why, if his PFS is accurate, he failed to pay his required 
monthly installment payments to the IRS for four straight months.  
 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 41-46; 72-73; Gx. 2, Statement of Affairs at 2; Ax. F; Ax. G; Ax. K.  
 
7 Tr. at 48-60; Gx. 1; Ax. D, Ax. I. The SOR alleges Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state tax 
returns for 2010 and 2011. Applicant’s failure to file and pay his federal taxes for the 2012 tax year is only 
being considered in assessing his mitigation case and whole-person factors.  
 
8 Tr. at 31-44, 66-68; Gx. 6; Ax. D, Ax. I; Ax. N.  
 
9 Gx. 2; Ax. J; Ax. M.  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security 
clearance.”).  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.10 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
                                                          
10 Security clearance determinations are “not an exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a 
person’s security suitability.” ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004). In making such 
determinations, judges examine an individual’s past history and current circumstances. ISCR Case No. 
11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014); ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013). 
 
5 
 
 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern regarding individuals who fail to pay their financial 
obligations and incur delinquent debt is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
Thus, the financial considerations security “concern is broader than the possibility that 
an applicant might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money 
in satisfaction of his or her debts.”11 The concern also encompasses financial 
irresponsibility, which may indicate that an applicant would also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in handling and safeguarding classified information.  
 
Applicant’s track record of not paying his financial obligations is evidenced by the 
accumulation of over $100,000 in delinquent debt that was discharged through Chapter 
7 bankruptcy about a year ago. His reported liabilities were nearly three times greater 
than his current gross income,12 and over five times greater than his reported assets. 
His current delinquencies include federal taxes and student loan debt totaling over 
$70,000. Even after becoming aware of the Government’s concerns regarding his 
finances, Applicant continued to fail to meet his financial obligations. Notably, he failed 
to abide by the terms of the installment agreement he entered into with the IRS. The 
record evidence raises the financial considerations security concern and establishes the 
following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; and 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). See also ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 (App. 
Bd. June 26, 2012). 
 
12 See Tr. at 72 (from 2010 to present, yearly gross income went from $38,000 to about $60,000). 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are, in part, due to matters outside of his control. 
Specifically, medical issues and the financial support he provides his elderly father. 
However, the primary cause of his financial predicament is his own inability to manage 
his finances. He deliberately changed his withholdings in 2010 to reduce the amount 
deducted from his earnings for federal and state taxes. He used his increased take-
home pay for other matters, including a trip to the Caribbean. He was unable to pay his 
taxes, and did not file his federal tax returns when due for three consecutive years.  
 
 Moreover, Applicant failed to establish that he responsibly managed his finances 
under the circumstances and in good faith resolved his past-due debts. He took no 
action to resolve his past-due debts, to include his delinquent federal taxes and student 
loans, until his financial situation placed his security clearance and the job that requires 
he maintain a clearance in jeopardy.13 Although bankruptcy is a viable and legal avenue 
by which individuals can resolve their debts, in the year that has passed since 
Applicant’s debts were discharged through bankruptcy he has demonstrated a lack of 
commitment to paying his financial obligations. Applicant’s past history and recent 
conduct in failing to comply with the terms of his IRS installment agreement, as well as 
being two months in arrears on his student loan debt provides little comfort that he will 
manage his finances in a responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 10-03578 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 4, 2012) (“the successful receipt of a [bankruptcy] discharge, standing alone, does 
not satisfy the good-faith requirement of AG ¶ 20(d),” nor necessarily mitigate security 
concerns raised by the accumulation of delinquent debt) (emphasis in original). 
                                                          
13 See, Tr. at 39-40, 58.  
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has received financial counseling. He also recently agreed to 
repayment plans to resolve his past-due federal taxes and student loans. However, his 
track record over the past year and his testimony denote a lack of true financial reform. 
Accordingly, it is far too soon to conclude that his financial situation is under control and 
financial problems will not recur. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).14 I gave due consideration to all the favorable and 
extenuating factors in this case, including Applicant’s honesty during the security 
clearance process and that he has held a clearance for over 10 years without apparent 
issue. Additionally, I took into account the favorable character references. However, the 
favorable record evidence does not outweigh the security concerns raised by 
Applicant’s long-standing financial problems. His relatively recent action to resolve a 
substantial amount of past-due debt is insufficient to mitigate concerns raised by his 
adverse financial history, including three successive years of failing to meet the 
obligation of all citizens to file and pay their taxes. Furthermore, Applicant’s failure to 
comply with the terms of the IRS installment agreement undercuts evidence he 
submitted regarding the supposed healthy state of his current financial situation.  
 
 An individual is not required to be debt free, or required to resolve all past-due 
debts simultaneously or even resolve the delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. 
However, individuals seeking a security clearance must establish that they manage their 
finances in a manner expected of those granted access to this nation’s secrets. 
Notwithstanding the presence of some favorable evidence, Applicant failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion.15 Consequently, the record evidence leaves me with doubts and 
questions about Applicant’s present eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.s:         Against Applicant 
                                                          
14 The non-exhaustive list of factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 11-02087 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2012) (Favorable evidence regarding individual’s 
character “may not be sufficient to mitigate a history of ongoing, significant delinquent debt.”). 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
