 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----- )  ISCR Case No. 14-02726 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 8, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On August 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 (e-QIP, dated November 8, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 3, 2014. In a notarized, undated 
statement, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. On October 17, 2014, he 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant on 
April 2, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after 
receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as 
well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on April 14, 
2015. A response was due by May 14, 2015. There is a memorandum, dated May 27, 
2015, which indicated that Applicant had submitted information in response to the 
FORM within the allocated time period, but no such documentation is in the case file. 
The case was assigned to me on June 9, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a project manager with his current employer since August 2007.3 He is a 
1987 high school graduate.4  He has never served with the U.S. military.5 He has held a 
security clearance since 2008.6 Applicant was married in October 1990.7 He has three 
children (born in 1992, 1996, and 1999).8 
                                                          
2
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, undated). The file is somewhat confusing, because there is an e-
mail from the DOD CAF, dated October 6, 2014, wherein Applicant was informed that he had failed to state whether 
or not he wanted a hearing before an administrative judge. However, in Applicant’s Answer, there is a handwritten 
entry, signed by Applicant, which clearly states “I do not wish a hearing.” See Item 4, at 2. 
 
3
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
4
 Item 7 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 7, 2014), at 1. 
 
5
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
6
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 26. 
 
7
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
8
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 16-17. Applicant apparently coaches little league baseball for his son. Item 7, 
supra note 4, at 1. 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 It is unclear when Applicant first experienced financial difficulties. A review of his 
December 2013 credit report reveals a number of accounts that became delinquent in 
2011.9  
 
The SOR identified five purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $35,115, which had been placed for collection or charged off. Those 
debts and their respective current status, according to the credit report, Applicant’s 
comments to the investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM),10 
and his Answer to the SOR, are described as follows:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. - a past-due balance of $173 on a medical account about which 
Applicant claimed to have no knowledge;11 SOR ¶ 1.b. - a past-due balance of $9,261 
on a total mortgage loan of $277,500;12 SOR ¶ 1.c. – an unpaid credit card balance of 
$15,503 that was charged off;13 SOR ¶ 1.d. - an unpaid charge account balance of 
$6,363 (of which $1,651 was past-due), about which Applicant claimed to have no 
knowledge, that was charged off;14 and SOR ¶ 1.e. - a charge account balance of 
$3,815 (of which $816 was past-due).15  
 
It is unclear how or why Applicant’s finances deteriorated to the point where his 
accounts were not timely addressed by him to prevent them from becoming delinquent, 
placed for collection, or charged off. Although Applicant reported that his salary was 
“cut” in January 2011,16 and that he had “large medical bills,”17 he offered no 
explanations as to the severity or duration of his reduced salary, the significance of the 
medical issues, or if any of the issues were largely beyond his control. He noted that 
one of his accounts became delinquent when he was under the erroneous impression 
that the account was being paid through bill pay.18 He denied any knowledge of several 
accounts. Applicant initially contended he was working with some creditors to develop a 
repayment plan, had actually agreed with other creditors regarding repayment plans, 
and he was making payments to at least one creditor. He claimed that his intent was to 
                                                          
9
 Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated December 25, 2013).  
 
10
 Item 7 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 7, 2014). 
 
11
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 5. 
 
12
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 5. 
 
13
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 5. 
 
14
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 10. 
 
15
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 10. 
 
16
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 2-4. 
 
17
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 29. 
 
18
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
resolve his delinquent accounts by February 2014.19 Applicant failed to submit any 
documentation to support his contentions that: a) he had a payment plan; and b) that he 
had made any payments to the creditors under the plan. Furthermore, he admitted that 
as of the date of the SOR, those accounts remained delinquent. 
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did 
not submit a personal financial statement to indicate his net monthly income, his 
monthly household or debt expenses, or whether or not he has any funds remaining at 
the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. Applicant offered no evidence to 
indicate that his financial problems are now under control. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”20 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”21   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
                                                          
19
 Item 7, supra note 10, at 3-5. 
 
20
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
21
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”22 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.23  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”24 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”25 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
                                                          
22
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
23
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
24
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
25
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant has had a long-standing problem with his finances which 
started as early as 2011. He found himself with insufficient funds to continue making his 
routine monthly payments and various accounts became delinquent, and were placed 
for collection and charged off.  AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”26 In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
                                                          
26
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies. 
The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since 
about 2011 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent.” Applicant attributed his financial problems to a “cut” in salary and large 
medical bills, but without any explanation as to those two factors, it is difficult to assess 
the significance they had on his overall financial situation. Applicant denied having any 
knowledge of some of his delinquent accounts, but instead of researching those 
accounts to determine if the allegations were accurate, he took no action. Aside from 
unconfirmed statements that he was working with some creditors, Applicant offered no 
documentary evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve any of his delinquent debts. He 
essentially ignored them, and seemingly continues to do so.  
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be, or if he has any 
funds remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. There is no 
evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant has 
not acted responsibly by failing to address his delinquent accounts and by making little, 
if any, efforts of working with his creditors.27 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.28 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
                                                          
27
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
28
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.29   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has been 
with the same employer since August 2007. He coaches little league baseball. He has 
declared his intentions of bringing his accounts current and repaying them.  
 
While there are three individuals who maintain frequent contact with Applicant 
who were interviewed by the OPM investigator, they made no direct references to 
Applicant’s reputation for reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant’s 
long-standing failure to repay his creditors since 2011, even in the smallest amounts, or 
to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. There are no indications that Applicant’s financial problems are 
under control. Applicant has simply made the assertions that he contacted some of his 
creditors and arranged for debt repayment plans. In the absence of documentation to 
support his assertions, little weight can be given to those assertions. Applicant’s actions 
under the circumstances cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Considering the absence of confirmed debt resolution and elimination efforts, 
Applicant’s financial issues are likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:30 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.’ However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has ‘. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.’ The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.’) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
                                                          
29
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
30
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring his delinquent debts.  Overall, the 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. See AG ¶ 
2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
