 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03492 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations), but failed to mitigate those concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. 
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue Applicant’s security clearance. On December 18, 2014, Applicant answered 
 
2 
 
 
the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on February 2, 2015. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 11, 2015, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on February 24, 2015. Applicant waived the 15-day notice of hearing 
requirement in ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive.1 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
5. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F. The record of 
the proceeding was initially left open until March 10, 2015, and later extended to March 
24, 2015, to provide Applicant the opportunity to submit additional matters. Applicant 
submitted AE G through J. All proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence, including 
some submitted after the post-hearing submission deadline. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on March 4, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 45, has been working for a defense contractor since February 2004. 
He graduated from high school in 1988, earned a bachelor’s degree in business 
management in 1992 and a master’s degree in business administration in 1999, and 
has been pursuing a doctorate degree since 2006. In April 2014, he retired from the 
active Army Reserve in the grade of major (O-4) after 21 years of service. He is married 
and has two children, ages 15 and 16. He has held a security clearance since 1992 and 
has submitted at least one security clearance application in the past.2 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant had four delinquent debts 
totaling $49,104 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d). Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged Applicant 
deliberately falsified his responses to financial questions in an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) that he signed on September 20, 2013, by failing 
to disclose the four debts alleged under Guideline F (SOR ¶ 2.a). In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant denied each allegation.3  
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to various reasons. First, Applicant’s 
wife was unemployed for about a year from early 2013 to early 2014. She was earning 
about $85,000 annually before her unemployment. She became unemployed because 
of a downturn in the economy and because she was experiencing some medical 
problems. She did not receive unemployment compensation during her unemployment. 
Second, his son had medical problems that generated significant bills. Applicant had 
health insurance with a $5,000 deductible and his insurance did not cover the payment 
of all of his son’s medications. Applicant indicated that he was paying $300 to $400 a 
week for his son’s medicine before he started buying generic drugs. Third, Applicant 
                                                          
1 Tr. 10-11. 
 
2 Tr. 4-7; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  The SOR incorrectly stated that Applicant executed his e-QIP on 
November 20, 2013. It, however, was certified on November 18, 2013. 
 
 
3 
 
 
experienced his own medical problems. He was diagnosed with post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD), prolonged and secondary to combat. He also had other medical 
problems. To address his medical problems, he had to take time off work, some of 
which was unpaid sick leave. Consequently, there were periods when his pay was 
reduced due to his medical problems.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – mortgage 120 days or more past due for $29,188 with a total 
balance of $492,690. Applicant purchased this home in 2004. After the purchase, he 
took out a second mortgage to make some home improvements. In 2006, both 
mortgages were combined into one mortgage during a refinancing that resulted in 
monthly mortgage payments of $3,649. In 2008, he moved to another state for work and 
began renting this home. He encountered problems with some renters and had to make 
repairs after they left the leased property. Applicant further indicated that he stopped 
making payments for 90 days to qualify for a loan modification, but then was told by the 
lender that he earned too much money to qualify for a loan modification. A credit report 
dated November 6, 2013, revealed that this mortgage account had a date of last activity 
of March 2013. Applicant received a couple of short sale offers that fell through before 
he eventually sold this home through a short sale. The home sold for $347,000 on May 
13, 2014. The short sale agreement indicated the creditor would not pursue a deficiency 
judgment for any resulting loan deficiency. A credit report dated January 15, 2015, 
reflected this account had a zero balance.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – repossessed timeshare with a delinquent balance of $19,522.  In 
2008, Applicant purchased a vacation condo timeshare for $48,000. His monthly 
payments on the timeshare were $535. He stated that he made the payments in a 
timely manner until 2013, when he encountered the financial problems discussed 
above. A credit report dated November 6, 2013, reflected that the date of last activity on 
this account was April 2013, that the creditor closed the account, and that the timeshare 
was repossessed by at least October 2013. This credit report also reflected that the 
account was past due $2,675 and had an outstanding balance of $19,522. At the 
hearing, Applicant indicated that he contacted the creditor’s attorneys in about 
November 2014 in an attempt to begin making payments again, but was told the debt 
was “discharged.” He indicated that he was waiting to hear from the creditor if this debt 
could be settled. His goal was to resume making the payments again. A credit report 
dated January, 15, 2015, listed this account as 120 days or more past due for $2,140 
with a balance of $19,522 and the date of last activity was June 2013. In a post-hearing 
submission, Applicant stated, “[the creditor’s] debt amount was inaccurate the total 
dollar amount is $5,856.74 (sic) I am working a payment structure currently. I should 
have the updated information payment structure from [the creditor] by the end of next 
week.” However, Applicant provided no additional information about this debt.6  
                                                          
4 Tr. 37-39, 43-48, 50-52, 56-58; AE A, F. 
 
5 Tr. 39-42, 53-56, 59-64; GE 2, 3, 5; AE D. 
 
6 Tr. 42-47, 64-70; GE 2, 3; AE H. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d – collection accounts for $347 and $47, respectively. 
Applicant testified that these medical bills arose from his son’s health problems. The 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was assigned for collection in April 2013, while the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d 
was assigned for collection in June 2013. He testified that these bills were paid, but did 
not provide proof of the payments at the hearing. In his post-hearing submission, 
Applicant presented documentation showing these bills arose from when he received 
emergency room treatment during a Reserve training weekend in December 2012. An 
email from a Defense Health Agency specialist indicated the two bills were paid in 
March 2015.7 
 
 Falsification allegation. In his e-QIP of September 20, 2013, Applicant answered 
“No” to questions that asked whether, in the last seven years, he had any possessions 
or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed, had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency, and had been over 120 days delinquent on any debt; 
or whether he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. In the e-QIP, 
Applicant answered “No” to all the financial questions and did not disclose that he was 
experiencing any financial problems. At the time he signed the e-QIP, his payments on 
his mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a) had been over 120 days delinquent and the medical debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d had been turned over to a collection agency.8 
  
 At the hearing, Applicant indicated that he did not disclose his delinquent 
mortgage on the e-QIP because he had a short sale contract to sell the home. He also 
noted that two previous short sale contracts had fallen through. He stated,  
 
I didn’t know I had to put that down. I mean, I had, when I filled it, at the 
time I filled it out initially, I had a contract on the house and I had 
something worked out with [the creditor], as well, where if I sold the house 
right there, before this short sale, you know, everything would be cleared. 
 
He also stated that he knew he was behind on his timeshare payments when he 
submitted his e-QIP. However, he stated that he was talking to the creditor when he 
began experiencing financial problems. The creditor supposedly told him that, because 
he had significant equity in the timeshare, he needed only to pay a maintenance fee of 
$116 to avoid having his account become delinquent. He claimed that he paid the 
maintenance fees, but provided no proof of those payments. Despite his claim of 
making the maintenance fee payments, the timeshare was repossessed. At the hearing, 
he was informed that he could present proof that he made the maintenance fee 
payments in his post-hearing submission. He did not provide proof of those payments.9 
                                                          
7 Tr. 47-48, 66-67; GE 3; AE G-J.  
 
8 GE 1, 2, 3. Applicant did disclose in the e-QIP that he had a civil court action against him for child 
support payments in 2002, and indicated that matter was resolved.  
 
9 Tr. 52-56, 59-70. Applicant also indicated that the Service Member Civil Relief Act (SCRA) provided 
him protection regarding his mortgage. He failed to explain how the SCRA protected him since he had 
been discharged from active duty in 2010, well before his default on the mortgage payments. See Tr. 60-
 
5 
 
 
 Financial Situation. In early 2014, Applicant’s wife returned to work. At the time of 
the hearing, she was working two jobs and earning about $105,000 annually. 
Applicant’s annual income was about $86,000. He also received about $1,537 a month 
in VA benefits. He did not provide a monthly budget, but indicated that he had about 
$400 left over each month after paying his expenses. He also testified that he had about 
$300 in a saving account and put most of his saving in a 401(k) account. His most 
recent credit report indicated that he had a credit card account that was $629 past due 
with a balance of $4,165, which was not alleged in the SOR. He indicated the credit 
card account was used to pay medical expenses for his son and he was working with 
the creditor to resolve this debt.10 
 
 Character Evidence. Applicant completed two tours of duty in Iraq and three in 
Afghanistan. A DD-214 reflected that he served in Afghanistan from September 2009 to 
June 2010 and was released from active duty in July 2010 with an honorable 
characterization of his service. He has been awarded the Afghanistan Campaign Medal 
with Campaign Star, Army Achievement Medal, Army Reserve Components 
Achievement Medal as well as other ribbons and medals.11 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
63. The SCRA does not relieve service members of their legal or financial obligations, but in certain 
circumstances may give them time to address such issues. Typically, protection under the Act must be 
requested during the service member’s active duty or within 30-180 days after military duty ends. 
Applicant failed to establish that the SCRA applied to any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
  
10 Tr. 45-51; AE C. The debt not alleged in the SOR will not be considered in analyzing the application 
of the disqualifying condition, but may be considered in analyzing the application of the mitigating 
conditions and in making a whole-person assessment.  
 
11 GE 2; AE B  
 
 
6 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
7 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions under AG ¶ 19 that could raise security 
concerns. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable to pay for an 
extended period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant resolved the delinquent mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.a through a short sale in 
May 2014. By contacting the Defense Health Agency, he resolved the medical debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d.  
 
While the vacation timeshare in SOR ¶ 1.b still appears as a delinquent debt on 
Applicant’s most recent credit report, he most likely does not owe anything further on that 
debt. He purchased the timeshare for $48,000 in 2008. He made payments on the 
 
8 
 
 
timeshare for about five years and reduced the account’s balance to $19,522. In 
November 2013, the creditor reported the timeshare was repossessed. No evidence was 
presented to establish the value of the timeshare at the time of the repossession or to 
show the creditor later sold the timeshare. However, given the amount of equity Applicant 
had in the timeshare, it is unlikely the creditor would incur a loss if the timeshare is resold, 
but instead would most likely realize a gain in such a transaction. Based on these facts, I 
find the delinquent timeshare no longer presents a financial security concern.  
 
Applicant’s and his wife’s combined annual income is about $200,000. They 
appear to be living within their means. In the past, they experienced conditions beyond 
their control that contributed to their financial problems, but they worked through those 
problems. Their financial problems are being resolved and are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) 
and 20(c) apply. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant stopped making payments on his mortgage in March 2013. When he 
signed his e-QIP on September 20, 2013, his mortgage payments were over 120 days 
delinquent. At that time, he knew his wife had been out of work for a number of months; 
that his income had been significantly reduced; that he was struggling financially; and 
that his mortgage was over 120 days delinquent.  
 
Applicant’s explanation for not reporting the delinquent mortgage on his e-QIP is 
difficult to believe. He claimed that he thought he did not have to report the delinquent 
mortgage because he had a contract for a short sale of the property pending that would 
resolve the mortgage. He noted that he had two other short sale contracts that had 
fallen through. Consequently, he knew there was a possibility this latest short sale 
contract could also fall through. The questions in the e-QIP that asked whether he had 
 
9 
 
 
been over 120 delinquent on any debt in the past seven years or whether he was 
currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt are not complicated or confusing. 
Applicant has a bachelor’s degree in business management and a master’s degree in 
business administration. He is pursuing a doctorate degree. He served in the military as 
an officer. He has held a security clearance for over 20 years and submitted a security 
clearance application in the past. He has the intelligence, maturity, and experience to 
understand those e-QIP questions. No reasonable basis exists for Applicant to have 
interpreted those questions as not requiring disclosure of the delinquent mortgage 
because a short sale contract was pending. Even if the mortgage had been resolved 
through a short sale when he signed the e-QIP, he still would have been required to 
report that delinquency because of its occurrence in the past seven years. I do not find 
Applicant’s explanation credible. I find that Applicant deliberately falsified his response 
to those e-QIP questions by failing to disclose the delinquent mortgage.     
 
Applicant stopped making payments on his timeshare in either April or June 
2013. Given the periods involved here, I cannot find that the timeshare was over 120 
days delinquent when his signed his e-QIP on September 20, 2013. Furthermore, the 
date the timeshare was repossessed is unknown. It is possible the repossession may 
have occurred after he submitted the e-QIP in September 2013 and before his credit 
report was pulled in November 2013. Accordingly, I find insufficient evidence was 
presented to conclude that Applicant falsified his e-QIP responses by not disclosing the 
delinquent timeshare in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
Additionally, it is plausible that Applicant was not aware of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.c and 1.d when he signed his e-QIP. No evidence was presented that he reviewed his 
credit report before submitting his e-QIP. Absent such a review, he most likely would not 
have known that the Defense Health Agency did not pay the bills arising from the 
emergency medical treatment he received while preforming Reserve duty. I find that 
Applicant did not falsify his e-QIP responses by not disclosing the delinquent debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. 
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
10 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant’s e-QIP falsification, as discussed above, is recent and significant. In 
falsifying his e-QIP, he seriously undermined the security clearance adjudication 
process. I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply to his falsification.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
My comments under Guidelines F and E are incorporated in this whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment.  
Applicant retired from the Army Reserve after serving honorably for over 20 
years. He has served our country in Iraq and Afghanistan. He has held a security 
clearance for many years without incident. Nevertheless, his falsification of e-QIP 
responses raises serious security concerns that have not been mitigated. Overall, the 
 
11 
 
 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to his eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. Applicant mitigated the security concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline, but failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns under personal conduct guideline. 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    Against Applicant  
   Subparagraph 2.a:            Against Applicant 
     
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
