 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03102 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kristan A. Siegwart, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s history of poly-drug abuse covers a period of 11 years ending in 
2013. His ADHD and difficulty handling anxiety make it more likely that he will succumb 
to these pressures and resume self-medication with illegal drugs. He has five 
misdemeanor-level convictions from 2005 through 2009, and an additional 2009 driving 
while intoxicated conviction. More time without illegal drug use, or other criminal 
behavior, is necessary to provide assurance of Applicant’s successful rehabilitation and 
eligibility for access to classified information. He did not mitigate drug involvement and 
criminal conduct concerns. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 25, 2013. 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) and Guideline J (criminal 
conduct) on August 5, 2014.1 Applicant answered the SOR on August 28, 2014, and 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
April 9, 2015, after Applicant requested an expedited hearing. That same date, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing scheduling 
a hearing for April 13, 2015.  
 
Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days advanced notice of the 
hearing. (Tr. 10-11) Department Counsel offered six exhibits into evidence (GE 1 – 6), 
and Applicant offered one exhibit with eight parts into evidence (AE 1 with Tabs 1-8). 
There were no objections, and I admitted all exhibits into evidence. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 21, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. SOR ¶ 1.h alleges that after 
October 2006, Applicant attended a drug treatment program. Applicant correctly argued 
that this allegation does not constitute a disqualifying condition under Guideline H. 
Applicant is credited with mitigating SOR ¶ 1.h. After a complete and thorough review of 
the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact:   
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 2005, and received an associate’s degree in 2010 and a bachelor’s 
degree in 2012. Applicant married in 2014, and his daughter was born in 2015. He has 
been working for his current employer since May 1, 2013. He requires a security 
clearance to continue his employment.  
 
 Applicant has a long history of illegal poly-drug use. From June 2007 to January 
2013, he used Ecstasy about 15 times; from June 2005 to August 2007, he used 
cocaine about three times; from April 2004 to June 2006, he used psilocybin 
mushrooms twice; from October 2002 until March 2012, he purchased marijuana on 
diverse occasions; and from October 2002 to April 2013, he used marijuana on 
numerous occasions and sometimes on a daily basis. Applicant also used lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD) one time between April 2004 and June 2006.  
  
When Applicant was completing his 2013 SCA, he realized he needed to end his 
illegal drug abuse, to stop associating with drug users, and to focus on his family. He 
learned that his drug abuse was a form of self-medication, and he recognized the need 
for change. He acknowledged that he needed to learn coping mechanisms for 
addressing his stress and anxiety. He stopped his drug abuse previously, and was in a 
substance abuse treatment program for six months; however, in April 2013, he made a 
stronger commitment to ending his drug abuse because of his relationship with the 
woman he subsequently married, and because he wanted to retain his employment. (Tr. 
90, 93)   
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
 Applicant signed a statement of intent to not use illegal drugs in the future, and 
agreed to the automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation. (AE 1(1)) 
Applicant provided urine samples for urinalysis-drug testing on November 10, 2014, 
December 26, 2014, and March 14, 2015. All three tests were negative for the presence 
of illegal drugs. (AE 1(2)) Applicant promised he would not resume his drug abuse. He 
has reduced his alcohol consumption from about five beers at a sitting to a beer or two. 
He meets with a therapist about every three weeks.  
 
Applicant’s spouse discovered he was abusing marijuana when they were dating. 
He tried to stop abusing drugs “many times.” (Tr. 61) It was necessary for him to stop 
being around other drug users for him to refrain from drug abuse. In 2013, he ended his 
association with other drug abusers and his use of illegal drugs. He found new hobbies 
and improved his physical fitness to refrain from his drug abuse. In 2015, he was further 
motivated on his efforts to avoid drugs by his desire to be a good father to his daughter. 
He ended his alcohol consumption on March 26, 2015. Applicant’s wife was pleased 
with his decision to end his drug abuse. She randomly tests him for illegal drug use with 
test kits she purchased commercially. He was negative for use of illegal drugs on all of 
her drug tests. 
 
 Applicant’s mother testified that Applicant was diagnosed with attention deficit 
disorder (ADD) when he was a child. He was treated with Ritalin and Adderall. He did 
not want to take his medications because he could not sleep at night. She first became 
aware that he was abusing alcohol and drugs in 2001, when he was in the 9th grade.  
 
In 2013, Applicant decided to change his life. He improved his physical 
conditioning, he focused his energies on his family and work, embarked on learning 
projects, gained positive friendships with mature adults, and he decided to refrain from 
abuse of alcohol and drugs. Applicant is now an attentive and dedicated father to his 
child. Applicant told his mother that he ended his drug abuse in 2013.  
 
 Dr. N testified as an expert witness. She is a licensed clinical psychologist that 
received a Ph.D. in 1970. (AE 1(7)) She is the director of a small mental health clinic, 
and specializes in the treatment of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). 
Applicant sought an assessment from Dr. N. She interviewed Applicant for 90 minutes, 
and he completed two ADHD-related questionnaires. Dr. N noted that abuse of illegal 
drugs is common for those suffering from ADHD - “[y]outhful experimentation, poor 
judgment, impulse control, [and] self-medication” of anxiety and depression with illegal 
drugs and alcohol are common behaviors. The great majority of those suffering from 
ADHD do not complete college; however, Applicant was able to do so after seven years, 
showing exceptional perseverance. Patients with ADHD often mature as they age 
through their 20s, and they are able to persevere and become successful.  
 
Dr. N believes Applicant is on a “very positive path,” and he is unlikely to return to 
any kind of substance abuse. He has managed not to relapse despite the pressures of 
marriage, parenthood, employment, and financial concerns. He is currently suffering 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
from anxiety and worries about whether he will lose his security clearance and 
employment. She recommended Applicant receive treatment for anxiety management. 
He is receiving help from a psychotherapist. She provided a positive prognosis stating 
that he should be able to continue to refrain from drug abuse.  
  
In addition to his drug-related criminal behavior, the following incidents raised 
criminal conduct security concerns: In October 2005, Applicant and some friends were 
driving around, and Applicant was hitting cars with a metal object. Applicant was 
charged with (1) Destruction of Property—Monument—Value Greater than $1,000, a 
felony, and (2) Destruction of Property, misdemeanor. He was convicted of two counts 
of destruction of property at a misdemeanor level, and the court sentenced him to six 
months in jail (suspended) and probation for six months.  
 
 In October 2006, Applicant was charged with Possession of Drug Paraphernalia, 
a misdemeanor. In March 2007, he pleaded guilty, and the court placed him on 
probation for six months.  
 
 In June 2007, Applicant was drinking beer on the beach with friends around a 
bonfire. Applicant was charged with possession of an open container of alcohol, a 
misdemeanor. He pleaded guilty, and the court placed him on probation.  
 
In January 2009, Applicant was involved in a traffic accident. His blood alcohol 
content (BAC) was .178. He was charged with Driving While Intoxicated (DWI), a 
misdemeanor. In April 2009, he was convicted of DWI, and sentenced to 60 days in jail, 
with 56 days suspended. He was on probation until April 2010.  
 
Applicant’s pastor has known Applicant for 15 years. He stated that Applicant has 
been active in his church. He has seen Applicant mature over the years, and believes 
that he is now “an outstanding citizen in his community.” (AE 1(3))  
 
Applicant’s manager describes him as having “strong character, deep desire to 
truly support the Army, and potential to learn, grow, and master” his specialty. He is 
trustworthy, reliable, committed to the Army and his country, diligent, and patriotic. He 
supports approval of Applicant’s security clearance. (AE 1(4)) 
 
Applicant’s father is a retired Army lieutenant colonel; his mother is a retired 
Army colonel; and they have been married for 32 years. His father retired in 1996, and 
became a government contractor. He has held a security clearance since 1977. He 
attributed Applicant’s drug abuse to self-medication for ADHD and friends who were bad 
influences. He praised Applicant for his “turnaround” and lauded him for being extremely 
trustworthy and honest. (AE 1(5)) 
 
Applicant’s best friend has known Applicant for more than 10 years. He believes 
that Applicant has matured, surrounds himself with successful people, and stopped 
using illegal drugs. He is confident Applicant will not resume his illegal drug use, and he 
supports reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. (AE 1(6))   
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
In 2005, Applicant received a $1,000 military service scholarship. In 2014, 
Applicant received security training, sexual harassment and assault prevention training, 
AT Level 1 awareness training, and security refresher training. (AE 1(8))    
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
abuse;”2 and “(c) illegal drug possession.”  
 
Applicant has a history of illegal drug involvement. He used Ecstasy about 15 
times from June 2007 to January 2013. He used cocaine about three times from June 
2005 to August 2007. He used psilocybin mushrooms twice between April 2004 and 
June 2006. He purchased and used (sometimes on a daily basis) marijuana on diverse 
occasions from October 2002 to April 2013. Applicant used LSD on one occasion 
between April 2004 and June 2006. He disclosed his drug involvement on his April 25, 
2013 SCA, his SOR response, and at his hearing. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply.  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
                                            
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Considering the period during which Applicant illegally used drugs, and number 
and type of drugs he used, I find that his illegal drug use is recent. Applicant’s recent 
recognition of the adverse impact on his life of his drug abuse is encouraging. His 
current behavior creates some certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. 
AG ¶ 26(a) partially applies to his illegal drug-related offenses, but does not fully 
mitigate the concerns. 
 
Applicant has disassociated from his drug-using associates, friends, and 
contacts. He has broken his patterns of drug abuse, and he has changed his life with 
respect to illegal drug use. However, he has only abstained from drug abuse for about 
24 months, and his drug abuse is recent. Applicant provided “a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) partially 
apples, but does not fully mitigate the concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 26(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not abuse prescription drugs. 
Applicant satisfactorily completed a drug treatment program; however, he cannot 
receive full credit because he resumed using illegal drugs after the treatment program. 
AG ¶ 26(d) partially apples, but does not fully mitigate the concerns. 
 
In conclusion, Applicant ended his 11-year period of poly-drug abuse in April 
2013, about 24 months before his hearing. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs 
are evident. He understands the adverse results from drug abuse.3 Applicant’s progress 
so far is encouraging; however, considering the period during which he abused illegal 
drugs, and the type and number of drugs he used, the passage of time so far is 
insufficient to establish his successful rehabilitation, that his recidivism is unlikely, and to 
demonstrate his maturity and good judgment. He failed to mitigate drug involvement 
security concerns.   
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern about criminal conduct, “Criminal activity 
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and 
“(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
                                            
3Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Applicant has a history of criminal misconduct. In October 2005, Applicant was 
charged with Destruction of Property—Monument—Value Greater than $1,000, a 
felony, and Destruction of Property, a misdemeanor. He was found guilty of two 
misdemeanor counts of destruction of property. In October 2006, Applicant was 
convicted of Possession of Drug Paraphernalia, a misdemeanor. In June 2007, 
Applicant was convicted of possession of an open container of alcohol, a misdemeanor. 
In January 2009, Applicant was convicted of DWI, a misdemeanor. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 
31(c) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant has five misdemeanor-level convictions from 2005 through 2009. His 
offenses appear to be substance-abuse related. He ended his illegal drug use in April 
2013 and his alcohol use in March 2015. I note that he has not been arrested for any 
criminal offenses since January 2009. In the last two years he married, and his daughter 
was born. He appears to be more mature, and to be making efforts to show his 
successful rehabilitation. He expressed regret and remorse for his criminal behavior.  
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s illegal drug use is recent and more time without 
criminal offenses is necessary before his rehabilitation will be established. His criminal 
conduct continues to cast doubt on his ability and willingness to comply with the law, 
rules, and regulations. Doubts persist about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Criminal conduct concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H and Guideline 
J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was young and immature when he began using illegal drugs. His drug abuse may have 
been caused, in part, by his ADHD condition. Applicant is now a 28-year-old employee 
of a federal contractor and makes contributions to his employer. He has been making 
positive lifestyle changes. He completed a bachelor’s degree in 2012, married in 2014, 
and his daughter was born in 2015. He is now dedicating himself to his family and his 
work.  
 
Applicant’s admissions of drug possession and use on his SCA are a positive 
sign that Applicant is taking responsibility for his drug abuse. He stopped using illegal 
drugs in April 2013. He participated in a drug-treatment program, and received a 
positive prognosis. He knows the consequences of drug abuse.  
 
Applicant’s pastor, manager, father, mother, spouse, and best friend credibly 
described the change that Applicant has undergone since April 2013 and support 
approval of his security clearance. They described him as mature, trustworthy and 
reliable. He is committed to his job, his family, and his country. He is diligent and 
patriotic. They are confident he will not resume his illegal drug possession and use. I am 
impressed with Applicant’s sincerity and commitment to change, his promise to continue 
to refrain from using illegal drugs, and his decision to be honest in security matters.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at this 
time. Applicant has an extensive history of poly-drug abuse covering a period of 11 
years. Each time he possessed illegal drugs, he committed a state and federal crime. 
His ADHD and difficulty handling anxiety make it more likely that he will succumb to 
these pressures and resume self-medication with illegal drugs. He has five 
misdemeanor-level convictions from 2005 through 2009. In January 2009, Applicant 
was convicted of DWI after being involved in a traffic accident. His poor judgment in 
driving while intoxicated placed himself and other drivers at risk. He ended his alcohol 
consumption in March 2015.  
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated drug involvement and 
criminal conduct security concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security 
clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform 
necessary to justify the award of a security clearance in the future.  
Applicant’s illegal drug use is recent and more time without substance abuse and 
criminal offenses is necessary before his rehabilitation will be established. Both his 
criminal conduct and drug abuse continue to cast doubt on his ability and willingness to 
comply with the law, rules, and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has not fully mitigated the security concerns pertaining to 
drug involvement and criminal conduct.      
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
