 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04048 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Sudan and immigrated to the United States in 2001. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2007. Applicant has two siblings, six half-siblings, 
and four in-laws, who are citizens and residents of Sudan. For 12 years he sent 
financial support to his mother, who lived there but recently died. Applicant failed to 
present sufficient evidence to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 10, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1990), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines effective after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DoD could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for him.  
 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing November 6, 2014, (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on February 24, 2015, and issued a 
Notice of Hearing on March 10, 2015, scheduling the hearing for April 2, 2015. The 
hearing convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified. He offered five exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 10, 2015. The 
record remained open until April 21, 2015, to give the parties an opportunity to submit 
additional documents. Department Counsel submitted another document as noted 
below. Applicant submitted an additional document that I marked as AE F and admitted 
without objection. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Sudan. She provided 12 supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts (HE 1.) Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and Department 
Counsel’s request was granted. (Tr. 14.)  
 
During the hearing, I requested information regarding Applicant’s Joint Personnel    
Adjudication System (JPAS) entry. Department Counsel submitted said document that I 
marked as HE 2 and admitted into the record without objection. (Tr. 57.) 
 
On April 20, 2015, Department Counsel submitted another exhibit, which she 
requested be appended to the 12 documents in HE 1. Applicant had no objection, and 
Department Counsel’s request is granted. (GE 5.) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004), and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR. His 
admissions, including those made in an April 2010 and October 2013, 
Counterintelligence Focused Security Screening Questionnaires (CFSSC), are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. (Answer; GE 3, 4.)  
 
Applicant was born in Sudan. He is 47 years old. In 1989 at the age of 22, he left 
Sudan and went to India to pursue a college education. In 1994 he graduated from an 
Indian university with a bachelor’s degree. In 2001 he immigrated to the United States 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
on a lottery visa. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2007. (Tr. 21-22; GE 1.) From 
June 2010 to November 2011, he worked in the Middle East as a linguist for a defense 
contractor. From November 2011 until January 2012 he worked for a different defense 
contractor in the Middle East. (Tr. 25, 27.) He held an interim security clearance during 
that time. In February 2012 he returned to Sudan to take care of his ailing mother. He 
stayed there until March 2013. On his return he was unemployed for a period of time. 
(GE 3.) He now works for a limousine service. (Tr.  23.)  He returned to Sudan once in 
2009, twice in 2012, and twice in 2014.1 (Tr. 29, 36, 40.) 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Sudan. His father is deceased. His mother 
resided there until she died in August 2014. From 2002 until she died, he sent her about 
$600 a year. (Tr. 33, 38; GE 3.)  His brother and sister are citizens and residents of 
Sudan. (Tr. 38.) He speaks to his brother about once a month, and his sister every three 
months. (Tr. 30, 34.) Applicant’s step-mother is a former member of the Sudanese 
parliament. His step-father is a retired Sudanese Military officer. He speaks to his step 
parents annually. (GE 3, 4.) Four of his  half-brothers and his two half-sisters are 
citizens and residents of Sudan. Another half-brother is a citizen of Sudan, residing in 
Ukraine.  (AR.) He reported in October 2013 that  he spoke to his step-family members 
quarterly. (GE 3.) He testified that he now speaks to one half-brother periodically and 
the others not as often. (Tr. 32.) He spoke to his half-brother living in Ukraine about 
three months ago. (Tr. 31.) He continues to speak to his half-sisters once every three 
months. (Tr. 34.) Other than his wife, he has no immediate relatives living in the United 
States. (Tr. 28.) 
 
In November 2012 Applicant married his wife while visiting Sudan. She was born 
in Sudan and resided there until September 2014, when she moved to the United States 
and became a permanent U.S. resident. He sponsored her for citizenship. She worked 
as a pharmacist in Sudan. She is attending a U.S. school.  (GE 1, 3; Answer.) They are 
expecting their first child in June 2015. (Tr. 9.) Her parents were born in Sudan. Her 
father is deceased. Her mother is a citizen and resident of Sudan. She speaks to her 
mother every day. (Tr. 35.) His two brothers-in-law and sister-sister-in-law are citizens 
and residents of Sudan. (Tr. 35.) Applicant’s wife has no immediate relatives living in 
the United States. (Tr. 28.) Applicant gave or sent his wife about $1,200 while she was 
living in Sudan. (GE 3.) 
 
Applicant owns a house in the United States, which he purchased in 2008 for 
about $100,000. The mortgage balance is about $65,000 to $70,000. He does not have 
any retirement accounts in the United States. (Tr. 37.) 
 
Applicant’s uncle testified. He is Applicant’s father’s brother. He has lived in the 
United States since 1996. He is married and has children, all of whom reside in the 
United States. He worked as an U.S. Army interpreter from 2003 to 2010 in the Middle 
East and held a security clearance. He said Applicant attends some family functions. He 
stated that Applicant is hard-working and loves the United States. (Tr. 49-54.) 
 
                                            
1Applicant returned to Sudan twice in 2012, once to visit his mother, and once to marry his wife. He 
returned twice in 2014, once before his mother died and once after her death. (Tr. 33, 40.)  
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant provided a letter from an Air Force colonel for whom he worked during 
a ten month tour in the Middle East. The colonel complimented Applicant on his 
translation competency and performance. (AE E.) Applicant also submitted a Certificate 
of Appreciation for his work there. (AE D.) 
  
Sudan 
 
I took administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents concerning Sudan, which are incorporated herein by reference. Of particular 
significance are Sudan’s history of state-sponsored terrorism, and the United States’ 
trade embargo on Sudan. Sudan has a dismal record of human rights violations and is 
experiencing significant political unrest. The U.S. State Department has issued travel 
warnings to the country because of ongoing threats to U.S. citizens and its interests. 
Sudan engages in illegally collecting U.S. technologies and proprietary materials.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Sudan is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
compromise of classified information. (See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001)).  
 
Sudan has significant internal anti-western terrorism threats that operate openly 
contrary to U.S. interests. It is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected 
information. The relationship of Sudan with the United States places a significant 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with family 
members living in Sudan, or holding Sundanese citizenship and residing in the United 
States, do not pose a security risk. While there is no evidence that intelligence 
operatives or terrorists from Sudan seek or have sought classified or economic 
information from or through Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule 
out such a possibility in the future. Applicant should not be placed in a position where he 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
family members with ties to Sudan. Accordingly, Applicant’s family connections there 
have more potential to generate a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion under AG ¶ 7(a) than would similar connections to 
many other countries.  
 
Applicant’s relationships with two siblings, four in-laws, and six half-siblings, who 
are citizens and residents of Sudan, create substantial potential for conflict of interest. 
His mother no longer poses a security risk. Although his wife now resides with him, she 
is a citizen of Sudan and maintains relationships with three family members, who are 
citizens and residents of Sudan. These relationships are sufficiently close in nature to 
raise a security concern about Applicant’s desire to assist those family members by 
providing sensitive or classified information. The evidence is sufficient to raise potential 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), and 7(d).These facts meet the Government’s 
burden of production by raising the aforementioned foreign influence disqualifying 
conditions and shifting a heavy burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Those with potential application in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Considered in light of the substantial anti-Western terrorism threat and state 
sponsored terrorist activities in Sudan, Applicant did not demonstrate that it is unlikely 
he could be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual and those of the United States due to family ties in Sudan. He has ongoing 
relationships with family members, and an interest in protecting two siblings, six half-
siblings, and four in-laws, living in Sudan. He should not be placed in a position where 
he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
family members, who might be coerced by terrorists or other entities in Sudan. In 
addition, his communications with Sudanese family members since coming to the 
United States are sufficiently frequent, such as to not be construed as casual or 
infrequent. He visited Sudan at least six times since arriving in the United States in 
2001. In 2012 he married his wife in Sudan. She resided there until September 2014. 
Accordingly, he failed to establish mitigating conditions set forth in AG ¶¶ 8(a) or (c). 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) provides some mitigation. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he 
“can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” He has 
lived in the United States since 2001 and became a citizen in 2007. His child will soon 
be born in the United States. He has some financial ties to the United States, including 
a piece of real estate that he purchased. He competently served as a linguist, 
supporting U.S. troops in the Middle East. He has an extended family living in the 
United States. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence 
weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. He is an intelligent, articulate, 
and educated person, who has lived in the United States for 14 years. His wife is a 
recent permanent U.S. resident. He has an extended family here. He owns a home in 
the United States. He worked as a linguist for the U.S. Army in the Middle East and 
gained the support of his command. 
 
The circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more 
significant than the facts weighing toward approval of his security clearance. Applicant’s 
two siblings, six half-siblings, and four in-laws are citizens and residents of Sudan. His 
step-parents both held positions with the Sudanese government. Applicant has frequent 
contact with his family members residing in Sudan, indicating a commitment to them 
and their welfare. He sent money to his mother from 2002 until her death in 2014. More 
importantly for security purposes, there is a significant risk of terrorism and human 
rights abuses in Sudan. Terrorists there are hostile to the United States, engage in 
violence against its citizens and residents, and actively seek classified information. 
Terrorists or the Sudanese government could attempt to use Applicant’s family 
members to obtain protected information and compromise Applicant’s responsibilities to 
the United States.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:                 Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:       For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c through 1.j:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
