 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-04648 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 11 collection accounts totaling 
$7,511. He failed to provide sufficient documentation of his progress resolving his 
financial problems. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 4) On October 29, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On November 24, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. (Item 3) A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 19, 2015, was 
provided to him on April 7, 2015.1 Applicant timely responded to the FORM. By 
memorandum dated June 1, 2015, Department Counsel had no objection to Applicant’s 
FORM response. The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d through 1.h, and 1.j, 
and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.i, and 1.k. He also provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old associate employed by a defense contractor since 
September 2012. (Item 4; FORM response) He seeks to renew his security clearance. 
Applicant has successfully held a security clearance since 1984. 
 
In May 1997, Applicant was awarded an associate’s degree. He was married 
from March 1987 to October 2006, and that marriage ended by divorce. Applicant 
remarried in May 2010. He has two adult sons. (Item 6) 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from January 1984 to October 2004, and was 
honorably discharged. He has been employed in the defense industry with a variety of 
employers since he retired from the Army. There is no evidence of security violations or 
use of illegal drugs.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s credit reports and SOR allege 11 collection accounts totaling $7,511. 
(Items 1, 5, 7) Summarized, the debts are a credit card collection account for $2,034, a 
credit card collection account for $1,748, a medical bill collection account for $138, a 
cable bill collection account for $370,  a utility company collection account for $297, a 
former apartment complex collection account for $51, a credit card collection account 
for $1,160, a business collection account for $236, a cable company collection account 
for $333, a collection account for $205, and a credit card collection account for $939.  
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to the business downturn of three 
businesses owned by him and his former wife as well as a divorce. (FORM response) 
                                            
1
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated April 7, 2015, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated April 21, 2015. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2
Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
He claimed in his SOR answer and FORM response that his debts were resolved or 
being resolved. Applicant added that he was unaware of many of these debts when they 
were brought to his attention during his Office of Personnel Management Personal 
Subject Interview (OPM PSI) conducted on June 4, 2014. (Items 3, 6; FORM response) 
Applicant did not provide specifics on the nature of his businesses or specifics on how 
or why the businesses failed. There is no record of financial counseling. 
 
The only documentation that Applicant provided was in his FORM response and 
that was for SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,160 collection account) and 1.j ($205 collection account). 
With regard to SOR ¶ 1.g, he settled the account for $928 and began making $154.68 
monthly payments on May 4, 2015. Proof of the first payment dated May 4, 2015, was 
submitted. With regard to SOR ¶ 1.j, he submitted proof of payment for $205.42 on May 
7, 2015. Applicant claimed that he had disputed one of his accounts and had been in 
contact with several of his creditors. (FORM response)  Apart from these two SOR 
debts, Applicant did not submit any evidence documenting his efforts to resolve his 
remaining nine SOR debts. 
 
Applicant’s FORM repeated the admonition about the absence of corroborating 
documentation and other mitigating information and explained that Applicant had 30 
days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting 
forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you 
do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be 
assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence 
set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3) Applicant’s limited FORM response provided 
corroborating documentation for his resolution for only two debts. 
 
Applicant stated that over the last 20 years he has worked with the U.S. military 
and has demonstrated his honesty, moral character, trustworthiness, and honor. He 
further stated that his actions taken to settle his debts prove that his past circumstances 
do not raise any concerns about his ability to hold a security clearance. (FORM 
response)               
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports and SOR response. Applicant’s SOR alleges 11 collection accounts 
totaling $7,511. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to his SOR debts except for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.g and 1.j. With regard to those two debts, they are mitigated by AG ¶ 20(d). He did not 
provide sufficient information about his finances to establish his inability to make greater 
progress paying his creditors. Three business failures and a divorce may have 
damaged his family finances and may be circumstances largely beyond his control. 
However, he did not provide details how those factors impacted his finances, and if they 
did, how he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
  
                                            
3
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 Applicant did not provide documentation showing his income and expenses, and 
he did not provide a budget. He presented insufficient evidence about what he has done 
over the last several years to pay his SOR debts or his other debts. Except for two 
debts, he did not provide any of the following documentation relating to the SOR 
creditors: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of 
checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the 
creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to establish maintenance of contact 
with the creditor;4 (3) a credible debt dispute; (4) attempts to negotiate payment plans, 
such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve 
these SOR debts; (5) evidence of financial counseling; or (6) other evidence of progress 
or resolution of his SOR debts. In short, Applicant’s FORM lacks specifics and 
documentation and an administrative judge’s decision is limited to the evidence 
contained in the FORM.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to prove that he has made more substantial steps to resolve 
his debts shows a lack of judgment and responsibility that weighs against approval of 
his security clearance. There is insufficient evidence that he was unable to make 
greater progress resolving his delinquent debts, or that his financial problems are being 
resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, 
he failed to establish that financial consideration concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
                                            
4
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
honorably served 20 years in the Army and most of his post-Army career has been as a 
government contractor. There is no evidence of security violations or of any misconduct.  
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. His SOR alleges 
11 collection accounts $7,511. He failed to provide sufficient documentation of progress 
to resolve his financial problems. His failure to provide more corroborating 
documentation shows lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raises 
unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts or 
documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security concerns. 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of reform necessary to justify the award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may well be 
able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness.  
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on a 
limited explanation without sufficient corroborating evidence, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
  
One additional comment is worthy of note. Applicant’s loyalty and patriotism are 
not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of the Executive Order 10865 specifically 
provides that industrial security decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
loyalty and patriotism. Nothing in this decision should be considered to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied decision as to 
an applicant’s loyalty or patriotism.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
