1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-03126
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on January 1, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 25, 2014, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Item 5; AE A.1
Item 7; AE B; AE C.2
2
Applicant received the SOR on August 29, 2014. He submitted a notarized,
written response, with attachments, to the SOR allegations. Through recently retained
counsel, he requested a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on February 19, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on
March 6, 2015. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a response dated April
16, 2015. DOHA assigned this case to me on May 12, 2015, which I received on May
19, 2015. The Government submitted nine exhibits, which have been marked as Items
1-9 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to the SOR has been marked as
Item 3, and the SOR has been marked as Item 1. With his written response to the
FORM, Applicant submitted additional documentation, which is marked and admitted as
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through O.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for the debts alleged
in allegations in ¶¶ 1.a - 1.f of the SOR, but denied that the debts had not been
resolved. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After
a complete review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 41 years old, works as a senior systems engineer for a DOD
contractor. He began his current employment in August 2010. Coworkers and managers
praised his skills and work. Many have worked with Applicant for a number of years.
They described him as highly competent, reliable, trustworthy, and a man of integrity.
He follows security procedures. They support the grant of a security clearance for him.
None indicate an awareness of the issues raised in the SOR.1
Applicant graduated from high school then attended a bible college, receiving an
associate’s degree in pastoral theology. He worked as a youth pastor in a new church.
To provide financial support for himself, he also worked delivering pizza before
becoming the assistant store manager. In 2001, Applicant changed careers. He
attended a technical college and received several certifications in information
technology (IT). He has worked in the IT industry since 2001, and he has received
awards for his skills.2
Item 5; AE B.3
Item 3; AE B; AE F.4
The denial letter sets forth at least six different reasons for the denial, but does not indicate which reason5
applied to Applicant. AE N.
Item 3; AE B; AE N.6
Item 6; Item 8; and Item 9; AE I; AE J.7
Item 1; Item 3; AE H.8
3
Applicant married his first wife in 1999, and they divorced in 2009. He has a 15-
year-old son and 12-year-old daughter from his marriage. His children live with him. He
married his present wife in 2013. She has a daughter, who also lives with him.3
Applicant initially developed financial problems when he and his first wife
divorced, leaving only his income to support his family and pay his bills. Prior to their
marriage in 2013, Applicant’s current wife was entangled in a tumultuous divorce, which
caused significant financial strain for her. She and Applicant combined their finances to
help pay her legal expenses to obtain full custody of her daughter, a decision which
impacted their finances. After they married, his wife’s work schedule was reduced to
part time in March 2014. Her employer laid her off in June 2014, causing a loss of her
income of $88,000. She returned to work in September 2014, earning $60,000 a year.4
The SOR alleges six debts. Allegation 1.a concerns Applicant’s past-due
mortgage on his home. In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he had
applied for a loan modification of his mortgage. He provided a copy of a letter, dated
April 17, 2014, from the mortgage lender advising that he had been approved for a trial
payment program. The trial program required Applicant to make three payments of
$1,017.38 beginning on June 1, 2014. He provided documentation showing that he
made these payments as required. On March 6, 2015, the mortgage lender denied his
request for a permanent loan modification without a clear explanation of the reason for
the denial.  To avoid foreclosure and with the approval of the mortgage lender,5
Applicant has retained a real estate agent and listed his home for sale on March 26,
2015, as a short sale .6
SOR allegation 1.b concerns a credit line with a bank, which is past-due for
$14,192. He denied that the debt was charged off as listed on the January 26, 2013,
April 7, 2014, January 26, 2015, March 25, 2015, and April 13, 2015 credit reports.7
Applicant contacted the creditor in 2014 and developed a monthly payment plan. He
agreed to pay the creditor $250 a month through an automatic deduction from his
banking account until the debt was paid. He made his initial payment in April 2014 and
continues to make his monthly payment. His balance on his debt, as of March 1, 2015,
was approximately $11,950.8
Item 3; Item 9; AE I; AE J.9
Item 1; Item 3; AE L.10
Item 1; Item 3; Item 9; AE I.11
Item 1; Item 3; AE J.12
Item 9; AE K; AE M; Supplemental Response to SOR.13
Item 6; Item 9; AE D.14
4
The $2,318 debt in SOR allegation 1.c relates to a credit card. The three 2015
credit reports show this debt as paid.  SOR allegation 1.d concerns a $1,131 past-due9
line of credit. Applicant verified that this debt is paid in full.10
The $7,677 debt in SOR allegation 1.e relates to a time-share property. Applicant
and his first wife purchased a time-share property in 2001. After their divorce, they
returned the property to the time-share corporation. Applicant advised that he received
a 1099 tax form on this property. The January 26, 2015 and March 25, 2015 credit
reports show a zero balance on this debt.11
The final SOR debt of $1,392 concerns an athletic club membership. Applicant
denies membership in this club at any time and advises that the club does not show a
record of him belonging to it. He did not provide any letter from the club confirming that
he was not a member. The debt is listed on the January 26, 2013 and April 13, 2015
credit reports.12
Although not alleged, the January 26, 2015 credit report shows an unpaid phone
debt of $81, a tax lien of $705 filed in March 2014, and a charged off student loan for
$10,493. In his response to the form, Applicant addressed these debts. He provided
proof that his state tax refund for the tax year 2014 was used to pay the tax debt and
that the remainder of the tax refund was mailed to Applicant. He contacted the bank
holding the student loan and reached an agreement to repay this loan at the rate of
$286 a month through automatic payments from his bank account until paid as shown
by a letter dated March 19, 2015. In his supplemental response to the SOR, Applicant
indicated that he paid the $81 phone bill.13
The credit reports of record reflect that Applicant paid two additional state tax
liens and three other past-due accounts. Applicant provided documentation indicating
that he recently completed financial credit counseling courses.14
Applicant submitted an undated personal financial statement. He indicated that
his net household monthly income is $8,994. His monthly expenses include $2,100 for
rent, $1,000 for food, $750 for utilities, including phones, $670 for car expenses, $250
for medical expenses, and $300 for miscellaneous expenses. His monthly expenses
total approximately $5,070. He listed seven debts on which monthly payments are
made. These debts included the $286 monthly payment on his student loan and his
AE E.15
5
$250 monthly payment to the creditor in allegation 1.b. The monthly payments totaled
$1,755. After payment of his bills, Applicant has a net remainder of $2,169 for
unanticipated expenses.15
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.  
 
6
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems when he and his first wife
divorced, and his second wife lost her job. He failed to pay taxes owed when he filed his
state income tax return in 2013. Most of the debts had not been resolved at the time the
SOR had been issued. These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
7
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s financial problems began when he and his first wife divorced, and his
income provided the only financial support for his family. His finances were further
compromised by his second wife’s divorce and custody battle, and the loss of her work
hours, followed by the loss of her job in 2014. These are circumstances beyond his
control. He paid several small debts before the issuance of the SOR. In 2014, he sought
a modification of his mortgage payment, and he negotiated a payment for a line of
credit. He paid one SOR debt sometime ago and received a 1099 for the timeshare in
2013. More recently, he resolved two other debts. Applicant has not ignored his debts;
rather he has taken action to regain control of his finances and debts. Applicant had
financial counseling and has sufficient income to pay his customary and usual living
expenses. Applicant initiated contact with his creditors in an effort to resolve his debts.
Through his efforts, he developed payment plans for two of his largest debts, and he
paid several smaller debts. AG ¶¶ 20(b), (c), and (d) apply.  
Applicant has legitimate reasons to dispute the athletic club debt. I find his denial
of membership is creditable even though he did not provide a letter from the athletic
club because he has been straight forward about his debts throughout this process. AG
¶ 20(e) is applicable.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
  (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
8
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
financial problems arose when he divorced, after his second wife’s work hours were
reduced, and she subsequently lost her job. Applicant has taken responsibility for his
debts and worked to resolve them. His efforts to modify his mortgage loan were rejected
by his lender. With the lender’s authorization, his is now selling his home. He worked
with his creditors to resolve his debts. He past-due debts are resolved or in payment
plans. He has shown a track record for debt resolution, and he has a plan to resolve his
remaining debts. He is not required to be debt free to hold a security clearance. Rather,
he must establish that he can live within his income and that he is responsible about his
finances. Applicant has done so. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
9
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for a security clearance is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
