 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-04556   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 2, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated seven delinquent debts totaling $22,431. He also had a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing dismissed in 2008. He has not resolved any of his 
delinquencies. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 28, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). On October 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on November 5, 2014, and requested 
that his case be decided by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) on the written record without a hearing. (Item 4.) Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on January 9, 2015. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing ten Items, was received by 
Applicant on January 30, 2015. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
the FORM. He provided additional information in response to the FORM within the 30-
day period, marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. Department Counsel had no 
objections to AE A, and it was admitted into the record. DOHA assigned the case to me 
on April 27, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He has been employed with a Government contractor 
since January 2014. He is married and has four children, ages 37, 31, 20, and 15. He 
has a high school diploma. (Answer; Item 5.) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant owes approximately $22,431 in delinquent debt to 
seven creditors. He filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2007, but later had it dismissed in 
2008. In his Answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. Applicant 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, and 1.h. (Item 4.) His debts are documented in the record 
credit reports dated February 21, 2014 and September 11, 2014. (Item 6; Item7.) His 
bankruptcy dismissal is documented in public records entered into evidence. (Item 9.) 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant attributed the delinquent debts to his unemployment and 
underemployment from 2003 to January 2014. (Item 4.) He was unemployed from 
January 2004 to March 2005. He then worked a series of part-time jobs, until he was 
hired into his current job in January 2014. (Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy on November 26, 2007. On February 
27, 2008, his case was dismissed due to his failure to file a feasible plan, an income 
and/or budget statement, and make all required pre-confirmation payments to the 
Trustee. Applicant indicated that he intentionally withdrew the Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
because “it was the wrong thing to do.” (Item 4; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on a federal tax lien entered against him in 
the approximate amount of $15,371, as listed in SOR ¶ 1.b.  This tax lien was filed in 
approximately March 2008. Applicant indicated in AE A that he has submitted a 
proposed payment plan to begin to satisfy this debt; however, he failed to produce 
verification of that proposal or its status. This debt is still outstanding. (Item AE A.) 
           
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on a judgment entered against him in 2007 in 
the approximate amount of $1,119, as listed in SOR ¶ 1.c.  Applicant claimed that “this 
bill was paid five years ago and is about to be removed from my credit report by the 
credit bureau.” (Item 4.) However, he failed to submit documentation to substantiate his 
claim. It was listed on his February 21, 2014 credit report as having been verified by two 
credit reporting agencies. This debt is unresolved. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on a medical debt in the approximate amount 
of $155, as listed in SOR ¶ 1.d.  In his Answer, Applicant stated, “This bill is active and 
is about to be paid.” However, he did not produce any documentation to show that it has 
been resolved. It has been past due since January 2013. (Item 4; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on a medical debt in the approximate amount 
of $491, as listed in SOR ¶ 1.e.  In his Answer, Applicant stated, “This bill is about to be 
paid and before now I did not have adequate income.” However, he did not produce 
documentation to show that it has been resolved. This debt has been delinquent since 
May 2012. (Item 4; Item 6.)  
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on a student loan in the approximate amount 
of $4,671, as listed in SOR ¶ 1.f.  In his November 5, 2014 Answer, he indicated he was 
“Re-negotiating monthly payment amount.” However, in AE A, submitted after April 30, 
2015, Applicant stated he was still attempting to negotiate a payment plan on this debt. 
This debt is unresolved. (Item 4; AE A.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on a charged-off credit card in the 
approximate amount of $418, as listed in SOR ¶ 1.g.  Applicant denied this debt and 
indicated he had asked the credit reporting agencies to remove it from his credit report. 
He failed to present documentation to substantiate the basis of the dispute or evidence 
of actions he has taken to resolve the issues related to this debt. This debt appears on 
his most recent credit report. It is unresolved. (Item 4; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on a collection account in the approximate 
amount of $206, as listed in SOR ¶ 1.h.  Applicant denied this debt and indicated he 
had asked the credit reporting agencies to remove it from his credit report. He failed to 
present documentation to substantiate the basis of the dispute or evidence of actions he 
has taken to resolve the debt. This debt appears on his most recent credit report. It is 
unresolved. (Item 4; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife have attended weekly financial literacy sessions 
sponsored by their church for the past six months. (Item 4.) Applicant failed to submit a 
budget or income statement. He submitted no evidence concerning the quality of his 
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record 
with respect to protected information. He provided no character references describing 
his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. 
  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $22,431 in delinquent debt that he was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy. He has had delinquent debt that he could not satisfy since at least 
2007, when he filed the Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was  dismissed in 2008. The 
evidence raises security concerns under both conditions, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
  
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has incurred substantial delinquent debts, totaling over $22,000, which 
remain unpaid to date. He offered no evidence from which to establish a track record of 
debt resolution. While his periods of unemployment and under-employment may have 
been conditions beyond his control, he failed to show that he acted responsibly after 
finding full-time employment in 2014. Similarly, he failed to show that financial 
counseling is helping him bring his finances under control, as he has not resolved even 
one of the alleged delinquencies. MC 20(e) requires documented proof to substantiate 
the basis of a dispute concerning an alleged debt, and Applicant failed to provide such 
evidence. Accordingly, the record is insufficient to establish mitigation under any of the 
foregoing provisions. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable 
adult, who is responsible for his voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the security 
concerns expressed in the SOR. His SOR-listed delinquent debts arose over the past 
seven years and remain unresolved despite his employment during the period involved. 
He offered insufficient evidence of financial rehabilitation, better judgment, or 
 
 
7 
 
 
responsible conduct in other areas of his life to offset resulting security concerns. The 
potential for pressure, coercion, and duress from his financial situation remains 
undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
