1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04289 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He is delinquent on two 
charged-off accounts, which total more than $55,000. There is no showing of payments 
having been made on the debts. He was also charged with a felony possession of 
hydrocodone without a prescription. The charge was dismissed after treatment. 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on October 10, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
November 21, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), dated April 1, 2015. The FORM contained nine attachments (Items). 
On May 11, 2015, Applicant’s response to the FORM was received. DC did not object to 
the submission of the letter, which was marked and admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ex.) 
A. On May 21, 2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted his delinquent financial 
obligations from a failed partnership. He also admitted misusing OxyContin while 
holding a secret clearance and being charged with felony possession of hydrocodone 
without a prescription. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old subject matter expert who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2008 and seeks to retain a security clearance. (Item 2) 
 
 In 2004/2005, Applicant entered into a partnership to invest in residential real 
estate. He purchased vacant land on which to build property. The land was purchased 
before Hurricane Katrina, which raised home building insurance rates, and prior to the 
crash of the housing market in 2008. (Item 1) The sale of two lots did not assist with his 
financial difficulties. He borrowed from his Individual Retirement Account (IRA) in an 
attempt to make payments on the investment property. Additionally, his partner was 
unable to continue investing in the partnership.  
 
 Applicant states that in July 2013, he filed for bankruptcy protection. However, he 
failed to provide any documents related to that filing. A letter from his bankruptcy 
attorney dated in November 2014, states they anticipate fling on or before November 
30, 2014. In response to the FORM, the same attorney submitted a letter dated May 11, 
2015, stating they anticipated filing on or before May 31, 2015. (Ex. A) No filing 
documents were received. He did pay a $271 energy bill (SOR 1.c). 
 
 Applicant suffered pain from a bone spur to his toe, which was not relieved by his 
2004 surgery. He periodically self-medicated with hydrocodone and oxycodone he 
received from a friend. He had no prescription for the prescription drugs. In March 2010, 
he reported to an emergency room believing he was suffering from food poisoning. 
When he checked into the hospital two prescription pills were discovered. The police 
were contacted, but due to the nature of Applicant’s illness he was unaware an arrest 
warrant had been issued. He was in the hospital four days. He was charged with felony 
possession of hydrocodone without a prescription.  
 
 A traffic violation resulted in the discovery of the arrest warrant. Applicant spent 
eight days in jail before being extradited to another state to appear in circuit court. At a 
treatment center, Applicant received Naltrexone therapy. He entered into a pretrial drug 
3 
intervention treatment diversion program and was required to do 50 hours of community 
service. The charge was dismissed after he met the terms of the pretrial diversion 
program. Applicant satisfactorily completed a drug rehabilitation program, routinely sees 
a psychiatrist, and receives Naltrexone therapy. 
 
In January 2014, in a Personal Subject Interview (PSI), Applicant was asked 
about his delinquent debts and drug arrest. He said he was filing bankruptcy to address 
the charged-off accounts. He fully explained what had happened with his arrest and the 
treatment he received thereafter.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
4 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant owes more than $55,000 on two charged-off accounts. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
5 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the mitigating factors for financial considerations extenuate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. In January 2014, 
he was made aware of the Government’s concerns about his delinquent debt. At that 
time, he indicated the debts would be addressed through bankruptcy. In response to the 
SOR, his attorney indicated they planned on filing for bankruptcy protection in 
November 2014. In response to the FORM, his attorney stated they planned on filing for 
bankruptcy protection in May 2015. No evidence of a filing was submitted. He has 
provided no documentation showing payment on any of his debts except for the energy 
bill he paid.  
 
Applicant provided no evidence he has received credit or financial counseling. He 
has not demonstrated that his financial problems are under control or that he has a plan 
to bring them under control. He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. It has been almost a year and 
a half since Applicant was asked about his delinquent debts. Given sufficient 
opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, Applicant has failed to act timely or 
responsibly under the circumstances. Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. Applicant entered into a real estate investment 
partnership that failed. Hurricane Katrina’s impact on the home building industry and the 
crash of the real estate market contributed to the failed partnership. These are factors 
beyond his control. However, he indicated an intent to file for bankruptcy protection to 
address his delinquent obligations, but has provided no documentation he has done so. 
By failing to show any payments or filing bankruptcy he has failed to act responsibly 
under the circumstances. 
 
6 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There has been no 
evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. Additionally, there is no clear 
showing that his financial obligations are being addressed. The mitigating condition 
listed in AG ¶ 20(d) applies only to the $271 energy bill he paid. The mitigating condition 
listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant has not disputed any of the 
delinquent debts. He admitted all of the debts.  
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The three most pertinent conditions are: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
  
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant’s 2004 surgery for a bone spur did not relieve his pain. He periodically 
self-medicated with the use of prescription drugs provided by a friend. He did so while 
holding a security clearance. In May 2010, he was discovered with two prescription pills 
when he sought emergency medical treatment. He was charged with felony possession 
of hydrocodone without a prescription. The charge was dismissed when he met the 
terms of a pretrial diversion program.  
 
AG ¶ 25(a) drug use, AG ¶ 25(c) purchase, and AG ¶ 25(g) illegal drug use after 
have being granted a security clearance apply.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
7 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
 Applicant’s self-medication was occasional to address the pain caused by the 
bone spur. AG ¶ 26(a) has some application. AG ¶ 26(c) does not apply. The use did 
occur after a severe or prolonged illness and the abuse has since ended. However, he 
was never prescribed the drugs. AG ¶ 26(d) applies because he has satisfactorily 
completed a drug rehabilitation program, routinely sees a psychiatrist, and receives 
Naltrexone therapy.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The reasons the debt became 
delinquent are beyond Applicant’s control, but he has failed to document any payment 
on the debts or file for bankruptcy. He has been aware of the Government’s concern 
about his delinquent debts since his January 2014 PSI, which was reinforced in the 
October 2014 SOR and April 2015 FORM. Only the $271 energy bill has been paid. 
There is no documentation Applicant has recently contacted his creditors.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances and facts which would mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. He failed to provide such 
information and failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
8 
Applicant suffered pain from a bone spur for which he occasionally took a 
prescription pain medication. He did so while holding a clearance. He did not have a 
prescription for the medication. However, he has received treatment, continues to see a 
psychiatrist, and takes Naltrexone. The drug use is no longer a security concern.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed his past-due 
obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. 
However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance due to the unaddressed delinquent 
debts. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Subparagraphs 1.c:   For Applicant   
 
 Paragraph 2 Drug Involvement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant  
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
