 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03627 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 9, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 7, 2014, and November 19, 2014, 
and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The 
Government’s written case was submitted on March 2, 2015. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
2 
 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 26, 2015. As of May 12, 
2015, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on May 21, 2015. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM (Items 4-8) are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2010. He served in the U.S. military from 1996 until he was 
honorably discharged for medical reasons in 2003. He married in 2001 and divorced in 
2009. He married for the second time in 2012. As of 2013, he had two children, ages 19 
and 13.1   
 
The SOR alleges 16 delinquent debts with balances totaling about $16,600. It 
also alleged that Applicant was charged with uttering a worthless check in 2010. 
Applicant denied being charged with uttering a worthless check in 2010, and he 
essentially denied owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($1,026), 1.h ($140), 1.i 
($300), and 1.k ($3,912). He admitted owing the remaining debts. He also submitted 
information in mitigation. Each debt is listed on at least one credit report.2    
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to several factors, including his 
unemployment for about a year after he was discharged from the military in 2003. He 
also stated that his first wife did not pay her share of the marital expenses after their 
divorce. He had multiple medical procedures that generated a large amount of medical 
bills.3   
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $6,289 deficiency owed to a collection company on an auto 
loan after the vehicle was repossessed and sold. During his background interview in 
March 2013, Applicant stated that he bought the vehicle in about 2000, and he returned 
it to the dealership about five months later because the vehicle kept breaking down. In 
his response to the SOR, Applicant stated the vehicle was voluntarily returned because 
the military transferred him overseas, and he was unable to bring the vehicle with him. 
The debt is listed on credit reports from March 2013 and April 2014 as opened in 2007, 
with a date of last action of 2008. Applicant has not paid the debt.4   
 
The SOR alleges medical debts of $1,178 (SOR ¶ 1.b), $530 (SOR ¶ 1.d), $284 
(SOR ¶ 1.f), $168 (SOR ¶ 1.g), $156 (SOR ¶ 1.n), $137 (SOR ¶ 1.o), and $100 (SOR ¶ 
1.p). Applicant stated that he had multiple medical procedures in 2011 and 2012 that 
                                                          
1 Item 4.  
 
2 “Credit reports are generally sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case of Guideline F 
security concerns.” See ISCR Case No. 10-03668 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2012). 
 
3 Items 3.  
 
4 Items 3, 5-7.  
 
 
3 
 
resulted in more than $38,000 in medical bills. He indicated that he will continue to 
attempt to resolve his medical debts.5   
 
Applicant denied owing the $1,026 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. He stated the loan 
was paid in 2003. The debt is listed on both the 2013 and 2014 credit reports. Both 
reports also listed a debt to the same creditor in the same amount as paid.6   
 
Applicant admitted owing the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($386), 1.i 
($300), 1.j ($830), and 1.l ($804). Regarding the $804 debt, he told the background 
investigator in March 2013 that he applied for a credit card with the creditor in 2010 but 
he never received the card. In his SOR response, he stated the account was “a credit 
card secured for [his] previous wife who upon divorce left unpaid, thereby remaining on 
[his] credit report.” That debt was listed by TransUnion on the March 2013 credit report 
as an individual account. It was not listed on the April 2014 Equifax credit report. No 
payments have been made on the debts in this paragraph.7   
 
Applicant denied owing the $130 debt to a utility company as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.h. He stated the loan was paid in 2003. The debt is listed on the 2013 credit report 
with the annotation “dispute resolved – consumer disagrees.” It is listed on the 2014 
credit report with the annotation “outstanding balance; consumer disputes after 
resolution.”8   
 
SOR ¶ 1.k alleges a $3,912 debt to a collection company on behalf of an 
apartment landlord. Applicant stated that he had to break a lease in 2010 due to 
unemployment and relocation in search of employment. He stated he discussed it with 
the property manager before he departed. The property manager told him he would not 
be held liable for breaking the lease.9   
 
Applicant admitted owing the $365 debt to a collection company on behalf of a 
telephone services company (SOR ¶ 1.m). Applicant stated the account was opened for 
his ex-wife “who upon divorce left unpaid, thereby remaining on [his] credit report.” The 
debt was listed by Experian and TransUnion on the March 2013 credit report as an 
individual account. It was not listed on the April 2014 Equifax credit report.10    
 
Applicant denied being charged with uttering a worthless check in 2010. The 
Government submitted records indicating he was charged. Applicant’s name and date 
of birth is correctly listed in the records. The address for Applicant in the records does 
                                                          
5 Items 3, 5-7.  
 
6 Items 3, 5-7.  
 
7 Items 3, 5-7.  
 
8 Items 3, 5-7.  
 
9 Items 3, 5-7.  
 
10 Items 3, 5-7.  
 
4 
 
not coincide with any address Applicant listed on his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). The records do not indicate that Applicant was ever served and there 
is no disposition listed.11 
 
Applicant discussed his financial problems during a background interview in 
March 2013. Since then he has made little to no payments toward his delinquent debts. 
There is no evidence of financial counseling.12   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
11 Items 3, 6, 8.  
 
12 Items 3, 5-7.  
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant attributed his financial problems to unemployment, divorce, and 
multiple medical procedures. His medical debts resulted from events beyond his control. 
They do not raise security concerns. SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.p are 
concluded for Applicant. I have doubts about the legitimacy of the uttering a worthless 
check charge (SOR ¶ 1.q) as well as the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.k. Those 
allegations are also concluded for Applicant. 
 
  There remain seven delinquent debts totaling about $9,100 that are unresolved. 
Applicant and his first wife divorced in 2009, and he has been working for his current 
employer since 2010. He has known of the debts for more than two years, and some of 
the debts are of modest amounts. There is no evidence that Applicant made any effort 
to pay the debts.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 
20(e) are not applicable to the unresolved debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find 
that financial considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. However, he has unresolved 
financial problems.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.q:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
