 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 14-01943 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. She is delinquent on 2 
judgments that total approximately $12,000, 5 charged-off accounts totaling 
approximately $17,000, and 16 delinquent accounts totaling approximately $63,000. 
The delinquent debts remain unpaid. Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on July 14, 2014, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
In an undated response, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), dated March 12, 2015. The FORM contained three attachments 
(Items).  
On March 25, 2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of 
her opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. In a letter postmarked March 20, 2015, five letters as 
to Applicant’s character were received. DC had no objection to the submissions, which 
were marked and admitted as Applicant Exhibits (Ex.) A through E. On May 1, 2015, I 
was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admits owing 2 judgments, 16 collection 
accounts, and 5 charged-off accounts. (Item 1) I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as 
facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and submissions, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old senior systems administrator who has worked for a 
defense contractor since March 1998 and seeks to retain a security clearance. (Item 2) 
Applicant’s coworkers, friends, and associates state Applicant makes a habit of helping 
others, is trustworthy, reliable, respectful, supportive, honest, “highly professional,” “a 
stickler for rules and regulations,” proactive in the community spending six hours every 
two weeks volunteering at her church, willing to work weekends and evenings to 
complete projects, and is a leader. (Exs. A – E) 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) in November 2013. Applicant listed nine delinquent accounts, which totaled 
approximately $38,500. On her e-QIP she stated, “I take full responsibility for the debt 
and have been working with as many creditors as possible to pay them. Many were not 
willing to establish payments I could make. I have learned my lesson from this and will 
not allow this to happen again.” (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant incurred debt while remodeling her home. At that time, she found the 
amount of debt to be manageable. (Item 1) Shortly after the remodeling the home’s air 
conditioning/heating unit had to be replaced. Compounding her debt problems was the 
financial assistance she had to provide to her mother whose own home was in much 
need of repair. The expenses to her mother’s home were kept low by much of the work 
being done by Applicant and her nephew, but she had to hire the work done beyond 
their skill level.  
 
 After the repairs had been made, Applicant was able to make the minimum 
payments on her credit cards. However, she was late on one payment resulting in the 
interest rate on all of her cards being increased. (Item 1) She could no longer make the 
 
3 
minimum payments. She contacted her creditors in hope the creditors would reduce the 
monthly payment amounts to the previous level. The creditors were not willing to work 
with her. She hired a debt-management firm that did not help her financial picture. She 
states the money sent to the debt-management firm would have been better spent 
paying her creditors. (Item 1) Applicant did not provide documentation showing payment 
on any of the debts.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
 
4 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his or her finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has more than $92,000 of delinquent debt including 2 judgments, 5 
charged-off accounts, and 16 collection accounts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant does not fully meet any of the mitigating conditions for financial 
considerations. Her financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. Her financial 
problems were contributed to by unexpected home repairs to her home and to her 
mother’s home coupled with the increase in interest rates incurred when she missed a 
payment. She attempted to work with her creditors, but her efforts were unsuccessful. 
Even the four smaller debts of less than $200 each remain unpaid. She provided no 
evidence she has received credit or financial counseling. She has not demonstrated that 
her financial problems are under control or that she has a plan to bring them under 
control. There is no showing of a good-faith effort to satisfy her debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid, and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. There is nothing in the record 
supporting that conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual. Applicant 
would like to pay her bills, but has not done so. Failing to pay the debts casts doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. There is a limited showing of circumstances beyond 
her control. The home repairs were unexpected as was the increase in interest rate 
when a payment was missed. However, AG & 20(b) requires the individual to act 
responsibly under the circumstances. There is no showing of any payment having been 
made. She has not acted responsibly.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant has not received financial counseling. 
Additionally, there is no clear showing that her financial obligations are being 
addressed. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because 
Applicant has failed to document payment on any of the delinquent accounts. The 
mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant has not 
disputed any of the delinquent debts. All of the debts are admitted.  
 
 
6 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debt set forth in the SOR was 
not incurred on luxuries, but mainly for home repairs. This is not the type of debt that 
indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. However, Applicant has failed to 
document any payment on those delinquent obligations. She has been aware of the 
Government’s concern about her delinquent debts since the July 2014 SOR. No 
delinquent debts have been paid and there is no documentation that Applicant has 
recently contacted her creditors.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her 
circumstances and facts which would mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. She failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding her past efforts to address her delinquent debt. She failed to provide such 
information, and by relying solely on her paragraphs of explanation in response to the 
SOR, she failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. In the future, if Applicant has paid her delinquent obligations, 
established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially addressed her 
 
7 
past-due obligations, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security 
worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.w:  Against Applicant   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
