 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04293 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, and  
Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally purchased and used drugs between 1985 and 2013. Part of his 
illegal drug-related behavior occurred after he was granted a security clearance in 2009. 
Moreover, he falsified both his 2009 and 2011 security clearance applications (SCA) to 
conceal his history of drug-related behavior and criminal record. He failed to mitigate the 
drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns. He mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns. Clearance denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted SCAs on August 25, 2009, and March 31, 2011. The 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement), Guideline E (personal 
conduct), and Guideline F (financial considerations) on October 23, 2014.1 Applicant 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
answered the SOR (undated), and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
The case was assigned to me on March 4, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 13, 2015, scheduling a hearing for 
April 7, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered eight exhibits (GE 1 - 8), which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but did not submit documentary 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 14, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.e and 2.a through 2.h. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.a 
through 3.d. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old desktop support engineer employed with a federal 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 1988, and received an associate’s degree 
in 1992. Applicant married in 2001 and divorced in 2005. He is not currently married. He 
has four children, ages 13, 21, 24, and 26.  
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer in August 2009, and shortly 
thereafter, he was granted a secret-level security clearance. His clearance was 
upgraded to a top secret clearance in 2011, and it has been in effect through the date of 
his hearing. (Tr. 7-10)  
 
Between 1985 and May 2013, Applicant illegally purchased and used 
phencyclidine (PCP) on at least a weekly basis. He also illegally used marijuana from 
about 1985 until the 1990s. He illegally used PCP after he was granted a security 
clearance in 2009. (Tr. 30, 36-38; SOR response to SOR ¶ 1.a; GE 3) 
 
 Section 23 of Applicant’s August 2009 SCA asked him to disclose whether in the 
last seven years he illegally possessed or used any controlled substance, including 
marijuana and hallucinogenics, such as PCP. Applicant deliberately answered “No” to 
this question and failed to disclose his prior illegal drug use. (GE 2) 
 
 In January 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with: (1) Driving/Attempting 
to Drive Vehicle While Impaired by Controlled Dangerous Substance; (2) Driving Wrong 
Way—One Way Street; and (3) Attempt by Driver to Elude Uniformed Police by Failing 
to Stop Vehicle. In May 2011, the court fined Applicant $300. (Response to SOR ¶ 1.e) 
 
In April 2013, Applicant drove recklessly while under the influence of PCP. He 
was arrested and charged with: (1) Driving/Attempting to Drive Vehicle While Impaired 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
by Alcohol or Controlled Dangerous Substance; (2) Driving Under the Influence .08 or 
Higher; (3) Possession of Marijuana; and (4) Unsafe Operation of Vehicle. In September 
2013, he was convicted of Driving/Attempting to Drive Vehicle While Impaired by 
Alcohol or Controlled Dangerous Substance and Possession of Marijuana. The other 
offenses were dismissed. He was sentenced to 18 months of probation and a fine, and 
he was required to complete substance abuse treatment. He completed his probation in 
March 2015. 
 
Applicant participated on a drug rehabilitation program from April 2013 to March 
2015. He claimed that he now avoids any places where illegal drugs may be used. He 
also claimed that he ended his association with his illegal drug-using friends.  
 
Section 23 of Applicant’s March 2011 SCA asked whether in the last seven years 
he (1) illegally possessed or used any controlled substance, including marijuana and 
hallucinogenics, such as PCP; and (2) whether he illegally possessed or used any 
controlled substances while holding a security clearance. Applicant answered “No” to 
both questions and deliberately failed to disclose his illegal drug-related behavior 
between 2002 and 2011, and that he illegally used drugs while possessing a security 
clearance between 2009 and 2011. 
 
Section 22 of Applicant’s March 2011 SCA also asked whether he had ever been 
charged with an offense related to alcohol or drugs. Applicant answered “No” to this 
question and deliberately failed to disclose that he was charged with alcohol or drug 
related offenses in the late 1990s, in 2007, and 2010.  
 
Applicant acknowledged that he read the questions about his drug and alcohol 
history and knew he was required to disclose the information. He explained that he did 
not disclose his drug and alcohol-related history and offenses because it would have 
drastically affected his chances of being employed. (Tr. 32-33; GE 3) He had arrests for 
driving under the influence of alcohol in the 1990s, February 2007, and in January 2010. 
Additionally, he was arrested for driving under the influence of drugs (DUI—drugs) in 
April 2013 (Tr. 33-34, 47)      
 
Applicant testified that he understood that he made mistakes when he falsified 
both security clearance applications. (Tr. 41) However, he wanted to move on beyond 
that mistake, and he committed to honesty and compliance with rules and legal 
requirements in the future. (Tr. 42) 
 
 Applicant’s SOR and his April 2011 credit report indicate he had child support 
accounts placed for collection in the amounts of $2,652 (SOR ¶ 3.a) and $4,580 (SOR ¶ 
3.b). Applicant’s February 2015 credit report shows a child support collection and a 
monthly payment of $526. (GE 5) Applicant testified that he is current on his child 
support responsibility, and that his child support payment is made using a direct 
payment from income. His child support shortage may have been paid through the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) interception of his income tax refund. (Tr. 52)  
 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Applicant’s SOR lists two parking tickets for $100 each. He said his tickets are 
paid. Applicant’s February 2015 credit report does not include any delinquent accounts 
for parking tickets. (GE 5)   
 
Applicant’s annual salary is about $72,000, and he has an available monthly 
remainder of about $1,000 after paying his expenses. His car payment and a credit card 
are paid directly from his bank account. Applicant believes all his accounts are current. 
He puts $200 monthly into a 401(k) account.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes three drug-involvement disqualifying conditions that raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug abuse;” 
“(c) illegal drug possession;” and “(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance.” AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) apply because Applicant has a history of 
purchasing and using illegal drugs from 1985 to 2013, and he purchased, used, and 
possessed PCP while holding a security clearance. He disclosed his illegal drug-related 
behavior during his November 21, 2013 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
interview, in his responses to DOHA interrogatories, in his SOR response, and at his 
hearing.  
  
  AG ¶ 26 provides potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or do not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows “a significant 
period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative 
judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.” 
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
Applicant frequently purchased and used PCP (he estimated on a weekly basis) 
from 1985 to May 2013. His security clearance was approved in 2009 and he has 
retained it through his hearing date. Applicant claimed that he now recognizes the 
adverse impact on his life of drug abuse. He averred that he will not use illegal drugs in 
the future. AG ¶ 26(a) partially applies to his illegal drug-related offenses.    
 
Applicant claimed that he has disassociated from his drug-using associates, 
friends, and contacts; that he has broken his pattern of drug abuse; and that he has 
changed his lifestyle with respect to illegal drug use. However, he has only abstained 
from drug abuse for about 24 months and his drug abuse while holding a security 
clearance is recent. AG ¶ 26(b) partially apples.  
 
AG ¶ 26(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not abuse prescription drugs 
after being prescribed those drugs for an illness or injury. AG ¶ 26(d) is partially 
applicable. He satisfactorily completed a drug treatment program; however, he cannot 
receive full credit because he did not provide a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Applicant ended his drug-related misconduct in May 2013, about 24 months 
before his hearing. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. He 
understands the adverse results from drug abuse.2 He has demonstrated some track 
record of no drug abuse to partially mitigate his drug involvement.  
 
Nevertheless, Applicant illegally purchased and used drugs for a period of 28 
years. The security concerns in his case are aggravated by Applicant’s drug-related 
behavior while possessing a security clearance. The passage of time so far is 
insufficient for me to conclude that Applicant has been fully rehabilitated, that he has 
made permanent lifestyle changes to prevent any future illegal drug abuse, and for him 
to demonstrate his ability and willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
                                            
2Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The SOR alleges two disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations. 
  
 Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his illegal drug-related behavior, and his 
1990s and 2007 arrest for DUI—alcohol, on his 2009 SCA. He failed to disclose the 
same information, and an additional January 2010 arrest for DUI—drugs, on his 2011 
SCA. Applicant did not disclose the requested information because he believed it would 
have drastically affected his chances of being employed. His falsifications were 
intentional and designed to conceal information from the Government to obtain or retain 
a security clearance. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (d) are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 describes seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
For the same reasons discussed above under Guideline H, incorporated herein, 
none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant engaged in a 28-year pattern of illegal 
drug purchase and use, which continued after he was granted a security clearance in 
2009. He deliberately falsified both his 2009 and 2011 SCAs to conceal his illegal drug-
related behavior and his criminal record (1990s, 2007, and 2010 arrests and charges). 
While his disclosure of his history of drug involvement and ending his illegal drug use in 
2013 are important positive steps, his falsifications (which constitute felony offenses) 
raise unresolved questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated.     
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) 
a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is 
documented in his 2011 credit report, which alleges four debts placed for collection 
totaling $7,432. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for and took reasonable actions to resolve his 
SOR debts. He resolved all four of the collection accounts. He does not have debts that 
are currently delinquent. His past delinquent debts do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. His finances are under control. He has a 
$1,000 monthly remainder available after paying his expenses and debts. Applicant’s 
conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d). 
He mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H, E, and F in 
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under 
those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 44-year-old desktop support engineer, who is an employee of a federal contractor. 
He disclosed his illegal drug-related behavior during a 2013 background interview, in his 
responses to DOHA interrogatories, in his SOR response, and at his hearing. His 
admissions are a positive sign that Applicant is taking responsibility for his drug-related 
misconduct and falsifications. He stopped using illegal drugs in May 2013, and 
successfully participated in a drug-treatment program. I am encouraged with Applicant’s 
sincerity and commitment to change, his promise to continue to refrain from using illegal 
drugs, and his decision to be honest in security matters.  
 
Notwithstanding, the evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial. Applicant, 44, has illegally purchased and used drugs during 28 years of his 
life. He illegally used drugs after possessing a security clearance. He was arrested for 
DUI—alcohol in 2007, and for DUI-drugs in January 2010, and April 2013. Each time he 
possessed illegal drugs, he committed both a state and a federal crime. His poor 
judgment placed himself and others at risk. Moreover, he deliberately falsified his 2009 
and 2011 SCAs to cover his illegal drug-related behavior and criminal record.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate 
the security concerns pertaining to drug involvement and personal conduct. He 
mitigated security concerns relating to financial considerations. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a through 3.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
