 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06090 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2011 through 2013. He is delinquent on his child support obligations, taxes, and other 
debts. His evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, that he does not have a current financial problem, or that his financial 
problem is being resolved or is under control. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F 
security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 20, 2014. 
On December 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
January 5, 2015, and elected to have his case decided on the written record.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated April 6, 2015, 
was provided to him by transmittal letter dated April 20, 2015. Applicant received the 
FORM on April 27, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the 
FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM or submit any information.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a review of the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old ship fitter employed by a federal contractor. He has 
never been married. He has a nine-year-old son. This is his first security clearance 
application. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his March 2014 SCA five periods of unemployment since 
October 2007. Most of his unemployment was due to his employers downsizing or 
losing their contract. He was employed from October 1999 to October 2007; 
unemployed from October 2007 to December 2008; employed from December 2008 to 
March 2009; unemployed from March 2009 to August 2009 (terminated for losing tools); 
employed from August 2009 to September 2012; unemployed from October 2012 to 
December 2012; employed for one month, and unemployed from January 2013 to May 
2013. He was employed from May 2013 to August 2013 (left the job for medical 
reasons); unemployed from August 2013 to December 2013; and employed from 
December 2013 to present. He was hired by his current employer, a federal contractor, 
in March 2014.  
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2014 SCA that he had 
financial problems, which included his failure to timely file federal and state income tax 
returns for tax years 2011 and 2012, and that he owed taxes for those two years. 
Applicant disclosed no reasons for his failure to file his federal and state income tax 
returns. He stated that he was planning to file his delinquent income tax returns in 2014. 
Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR, that he failed to file federal and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2011 through 2013. Applicant presented no evidence to 
show that he has filed his delinquent income tax returns. 
 
Additionally, Applicant disclosed that he was $1,700 delinquent on his court-
mandated child support obligations. He changed jobs in September 2012, and stopped 
his wage attachment. He failed to notify proper authorities of his new job to continue the 
wage attachment to pay his child support. As of March 2013, he had taken no action to 
pay his past-due child support obligation. Applicant also indicated he underwent eviction 
proceedings in 2005, 2007, and 2013. 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant provided no information about his current earnings and financial 
position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day 
living expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether he participated in 
financial counseling or whether he follows a budget. He presented no evidence of any 
payments made, efforts to contact creditors, establish payment plans, or efforts to 
otherwise resolve his financial problems. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for three 
consecutive tax years and his delinquent debts raise the applicability of the following 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(g) 
“failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the 
fraudulent filing of the same.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant 
provided no reason for his failure to timely file his federal and state income tax returns. 
Additionally, he provided no documentary evidence to show that he filed the delinquent 
tax returns. 
 
5 
 
 
 I considered Applicant’s periods of unemployment, which could establish 
circumstances beyond his control that may have contributed or aggravated his financial 
problems. Notwithstanding, Applicant submitted no evidence to show he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances to warrant applicability of AG ¶ 20(c). 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and 
financial position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day 
living expenses and debts. There is no information to show that he participated in 
financial counseling or that he follows a budget. The available information is insufficient 
to establish clear indications that he does not have a current financial problem, or that 
his financial problem is being resolved, or is under control. Applicant failed to establish 
that he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant failed to submit evidence to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, that he does not have a financial problem, or that his financial problem is 
being resolved or is under control. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
