The Government submitted six items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02471
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On September 5, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 28, 2015.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated April 17,
2015 . Applicant received the FORM on April 22, 2015. Applicant submitted1
documentation in response to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all SOR allegations under Guideline
F (financial considerations) with the exception of 1.h. (Item 1)
Applicant is 49 years old. He  received his undergraduate degree in 1996 and his
graduate degree in 1998. Applicant is single and has one child. He has been employed
with his current employer since April 2010. (Item 3) He has held a security clearance
since 2003.
The SOR alleges five collection accounts, and failure to file federal income tax
returns for tax years 2011 and 2012. In addition, the SOR alleges a federal tax lien
entered in 2010 in the amount of $24,882, and a state tax lien from 2010 in the
approximate amount of $11,684. Applicant filed a petition for a chapter 13 bankruptcy in
2001. (Item 1)
Applicant states the failure to file Federal and state tax returns for the years
mentioned is the result of his father’s death in 2006. (Item 3) In his 2014 investigative
interview, Applicant stated that he filed for an extension but forgot to file the taxes. He
explained that he became involved with his father’s estate and the probate process.
Applicant filed his 2011 and 2012 federal income tax returns in January 2014
and provided documentation to support the claim. (SOR 1.b)
Applicant explained that the 2001 Chapter 13 bankruptcy was dismissed, due to
defaulting on payments when he became unemployed. He stated that he told his
security officer in 2003 that he had defaulted on the payments and that the petition was
dismissed. He presented two checks in the amount of $1,015 and $1,257 payable to
the IRS, which he stated paid the remaining balance on the bankruptcy debts. (SOR
1.a) He referred to the fact that this was a condition precedent to getting a security
clearance. (Answer to SOR)The checks that he submitted do not establish that the
bankruptcy debts were discharged.
As to SOR 1.c, Applicant states that he has been making payments on the
federal tax lien from 2010 in the amount of $24,882. He reports that an April 2015
statement reflects that there is a balance of $16,886 and that he is currently paying the
remaining balance. He refers to documentation that proves that he has been paying on
the lien. However, there is nothing in the file to reflect this payment plan.
As to SOR 1.d, Applicant’s 2010 state tax lien in the amount of $11,684, he
states that he has a balance of $3,344.43. He submitted a January 21, 2015 notice
showing that for tax year 2006, payments were made in the amount of $12,660 and the
balance due is $3,344.43. He did not submit any current payments or receipts.
3
As for the collection accounts in 1.e and 1.f, Applicant denied them because they
were delinquent accounts in his father’s estate. Applicant assumed responsibility for the
accounts but in response to the FORM, he states that both are paid in full. He referred
to documents that were not in the record to prove that he paid them.
Applicant states that he now has two tax liens, totaling approximately $20,230
that he has been making payments and will continue to do so. He did not provide
sufficient evidence to confirm his assertion.
Applicant claims that the medical account ($1,800)  in 1.g has been paid in full.
He submitted bank statements that he paid $450 and $1,400 in February 2014. He
stated that he was unaware of the bill.
Applicant admitted that he owed the debt in 1.h and arranged for two payments
of $1,000 on October 31, 2014 and a payment of $928 to pay the account in full. There
was no additional documentation in the file or response to FORM to corroborate.
Applicant denied that he owed an account in 1.i. However, he stated that it has
been paid in full as of February 7, 2014. He provided his bank statements from 2014 to
confirm that the account has been paid.
Applicant states that he submitted documents with his answer to the SOR in May
2015. He submitted some documents but none that correspond to the payments that he
noted for the accounts as listed above. The record is incomplete to show that Applicant
has made some payments as he claimed.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that he  did not file his taxes for a number of years. His credit
reports confirm delinquent debts. He filed for a 2001 bankruptcy. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations) apply.  FC DC 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax
returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same) is also applicable. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant still has unresolved
debts. He filed his tax returns in 2014 after the Government’s investigative process. He
has not provided evidence of satisfaction or recent payments for some accounts.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant has given his father’s death in 2006 as a reason for not filing
his taxes and having delinquent debts. His father’s death was beyond his control.
However, he presented no evidence that he has acted responsibly. He just filed the
2011 and 2012 tax returns. He states that he intends to continue to make payments on
accounts, but provided no supporting documentation. He has not acted responsibly.  
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has some application.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
6
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 49 years old. He is single and has one child. He has been employed with
his current employer since 2010. He has held a security clearance since 2003 The
record does not provide any details about his duty performance.
Applicant filed his 2011 and 2012 income tax returns in 2014. He said he
requested an extension and then forgot to file. He did not do so until after the security
clearance process began. Applicant provided some information on accounts that he
paid. He has not provided sufficient documentation concerning the tax liens. I have
doubts about his judgment and reliability. Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the
Government. Applicant did not persuade me that he refuted or mitigated the
Government’s case concerning the financial considerations security concerns.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
