 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-04385   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. She filed a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in 2000 resulting in a discharge of debts. In 2012 she filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, which was dismissed because she failed to make payments on a 
repayment plan. She subsequently continued to accumulate delinquent debts and 
judgments. She failed to provide sufficient evidence that she is resolving 17 of the 19 
alleged delinquent debts. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Ruling on Evidence 
 
Item 6 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of 
Applicant. The six-page document is a summary of an interview of Applicant the 
Government conducted on February 5, 2014. An ROI may be received and considered 
as evidence when it is authenticated by a witness.1 Although Applicant, who is 
                                                 
1Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal 
Board restated existing case law that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible).  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
representing herself, has not raised the issue via an objection, I am raising it sua 
sponte. While it is clear that Department Counsel is acting in good faith, having 
highlighted the issue in the FORM,2 Exhibit 6 is not authenticated. Applicant’s failure to 
reply to the FORM is not a knowing waiver of the rule.3 Accordingly Item 6 is not 
admissible and is not considered in this Decision.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 5, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86) for an investigation. On October 29, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), effective in the DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 21, 2014, and requested that her 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On March 12, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, 
was provided to Applicant on April 10, 2015, and she was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
her receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of her copy of the FORM 
on April 16, 2015, and timely returned the receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). She provided four documents in response to the FORM within the 30-
day period. I marked those documents as Appellant Exhibits (AE) A through D and 
admitted them into the record without objection from Department Counsel. DOHA 
assigned the case to me on June 8, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for 20 of the 21 SOR 
allegations and denied one: ¶ 1.k. (Item 1.) Those admissions are incorporated into 
these findings of fact.  
 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
2 Department Counsel Brief at 2, n 1. 
3 Wavier means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right 
and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. She is married and has three children. In September 
2013 she began a position as a painter for a defense contractor. Prior to this job, she 
worked from August 1994 to August 2013 for a national retailer. (Item 5.)  
  
 Applicant attributed some of her financial problems to inconsistent hours with the 
national retailer and her husband’s periodic employment in construction. She stated that 
she is working with a credit repair company to help resolve debts. (AE B.) She provided 
a monthly budget. She and her husband’s net monthly income is $2,633. Her expenses 
are $2,326, leaving about $307 remaining. She is making about $237 in payments to 
other creditors, including a hospital, automobile loan company, and the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) on a $767 balance for tax year 2011.3 (AE A.)     
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated January 2014, and September 
2014, the SOR alleged two bankruptcies, and 19 delinquent debts totaling over 
$12,000, which accumulated between 2009 through 2013. They included ten judgments 
owed for unpaid rent, medical bills, cell phone services, and to other creditors. (Item 1.) 
Applicant provided proof that she paid or resolved the $466 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, 
and the $1,198 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. (AE D, AE E.) 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant obtained credit or budget counseling. She 
submitted no evidence concerning the quality of her performance, or the level of 
responsibility her duties entail. She provided no character references describing her 
judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. The 
protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires 
that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
                                                 
3The SOR did not allege this unpaid Federal tax debt as a security concern. Hence, it will not be 
considered in the analysis of disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in the analysis of mitigating 
conditions or the whole-person concept. 
 
 
4 
 
 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts accumulated between 2009 and 2013. She has 
been unable or unwilling to satisfy or resolve them until recently. The evidence raises 
both security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. She accumulated delinquent debts 
prior to filing a 2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and subsequently accumulated more  before 
filing a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2012, which was later dismissed because payments 
were not made. Her delinquent debts continue to date. Because she failed to sufficiently 
address 17 of the 19 SOR-listed debts, she did not demonstrate that such problems are 
unlikely to continue or recur. Her reliability and trustworthiness in managing delinquent 
debts remain of concern. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant provided some evidence that her financial problems arose because she 
and her husband experienced periods of insufficient work. Those facts may be the result 
of circumstances beyond her control. However, she did not provide sufficient proof that 
she acted responsibly or attempted to resolve the debts while they were accumulating, 
either prior to either bankruptcy or subsequent to them. AG ¶ 20(b) has limited 
application.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant did not present evidence that she participated in financial, budget, or 
credit counseling, and there are minimal indications that her delinquent debts are under 
control. She said she engaged a credit company to resolve debts, but she did not 
submit proof of that engagement, the date on which she hired the company, or the 
debts included in the program. Thus, AG ¶ 20(c) has limited application. She provided 
documentation that she made a good-faith effort to resolve two of the 19 SOR-listed 
debts. Hence, AG ¶ 20(d) has application to those debts. Applicant did not provide 
evidence that she had a reasonable basis to dispute any delinquent. AG ¶ 20(e) has no 
application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 42 years old.  She 
has a long history of financial problems, dating back to 2000, and including current 
unpaid Federal taxes. She has been employed with a defense contractor since 
September 2013, and was also employed for the previous 19 years. She provided 
evidence that she resolved two of the 19 SOR-listed debts, but provided no proof that 
she has a solid plan for resolving the remaining 17 debts. Although she has taken a 
step to address her financial obligations by hiring a company to assist in the resolution 
of debts, her budget has little room for addressing the unpaid debts. At this time she has 
not established a track record of managing and resolving debts. The likelihood that 
similar problems will continue is significant, and the potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress is undiminished.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. She did not meet her burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.l through 1.u:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
