1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-03643
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by financial problems that arose
around 2009. He also mitigated concerns about his illegal use of drugs because he is
unlikely to repeat his abuse of prescription painkillers and anti-anxiety drugs to which he
became addicted in 2009. However, he did not mitigate the security concerns raised by
his use of alcohol. He has received extensive counseling and treatment for his alcohol
use and was diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 2009. He also has four alcohol-related
arrests between 2008 and 2012. Applicant still consumes alcohol. His request for a
security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On February 12, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for
his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of Applicant’s
background investigation, which included his responses to interrogatories from
 See DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended, E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive at E3.1.1.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were published in3
the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Department Counsel’s discovery letter (see Directive E3.1.13), dated March 4, 2015, is included in the record4
as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. An index listing each exhibit is included in the record as Hx. 2.
 Department Counsel’s forwarding email and Applicant’s list of documents forwarded are included as Hx. 3.5
 Ax. B consists of documents forwarded as “Exhibits 1, 2A - C, 3A - D, 4A - B, 5, and 6.” These documents6
pertain to Applicant’s finances and taxes.
 Ax. C consists of documents forwarded as “Exhibits 7 - 10." They contain “whole person” information such7
as awards, evaluations and reference letters.
2
adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD),  it could not be determined that it is1
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified
information.  2
On November 26, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guidelines
(AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F), alcohol consumption (Guideline G), and3
drug involvement (Guideline H). Applicant timely answered the SOR (Answer) and
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March
10, 2015, and a hearing was scheduled for April 30, 2015. On April 28, 2015, the case
was transferred me and I convened the hearing as scheduled. Department Counsel
presented Government’s Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 8.  Applicant testified and presented4
Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. These exhibits were admitted without objection. I held the
record open after the hearing to receive additional relevant information from the
Applicant. DOHA received a transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on May 8, 2015. The record
closed May 11, when I received Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. They were
admitted without objection  as Ax. B  and Ax. C.5 6 7
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged under Guideline F that Applicant owes $30,570 for four
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.d). Applicant admitted SOR 1.a - 1.c, but
denied SOR 1.d.
Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that Applicant was arrested and
charged with driving under the influence (DUI) in 2008 (SOR 2.a); with driving while
intoxicated (DWI) in 2009 (SOR 1.c), in 2011 (SOR 1.d), and twice in three days in April
2012 (SOR 1.d and 1.e). It was also alleged that he was diagnosed as alcohol
dependent in July 2009 but continued to consume alcohol (SOR 2.b). Applicant
admitted SOR 2.a and 2.c - 2.e, but denied SOR 2.b. (Answer)
3
The Government alleged under Guideline H that Applicant was diagnosed in July
2009 as dependent on opiates and anxiolytic (anti-anxiety) drugs (SOR 3.a). Applicant
admitted SOR 3.a. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.
Having reviewed the response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I make the
following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 48 years old. Since July 2012, he has worked as a program analyst
for a defense contractor. Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from May 1987 until retiring
with an honorable discharge as a chief petty officer in February 2008. From then until he
was hired by his current employer, Applicant attended school and held various full-time
and part-time jobs, including a brief stint at another defense contractor beginning in
January 2008, while he was on terminal leave from the Navy. He resigned from that job
in January 2009, because he had injured his back and felt he could no longer do the
work for which he was hired. Applicant received several personal awards and
decorations while in the Navy. His civilian work performance and his reputation in the
workplace are excellent. (Gx. 1; Ax. B; Ax. C; Tr. 34 - 34)
Applicant has been married twice. His first marriage in November 1987 ended by
divorce in February 1997. Applicant has one child, now age 25, from that marriage.
Applicant remarried in March 1998, but again divorced in May 2011, after having
separated in 2009. Applicant has cohabited with his girlfriend since April 2012. (Gx. 1;
Tr. 34)
Applicant’s departure from the Navy was unexpected. Over the last few years of
his career, he had developed several serious health problems. When he reported to his
last assignment, an afloat combatant command, an intake medical evaluation resulted
in his immediate return to shore duty before being medically discharged with a sixty
percent disability. His adjustment to civilian life was difficult and was compounded by
the death of a close friend and the end of his second marriage. Applicant’s health is now
much improved. Most of the health and pain problems that plagued him while in the
service have been resolved. Most notably, Applicant has lost a significant amount of
weight, thereby correcting the cause of most of his ills. (Answer; Gx. 1; Tr. 86)
Applicant began abusing prescription pain medications around the time he left
the Navy. Initially prescribed for lower back pain, Applicant quickly developed a high
tolerance for those medications and began to take more than the prescribed dosage
without consulting with a physician. Around 2002, Applicant began an extramarital affair
with a woman who eventually also became his source of various prescription pain
medications. Applicant became addicted to a variety of opiate-based pain medications.
In July 2009, he was admitted to an inpatient substance abuse rehabilitation facility for
25 days. While there, he was diagnosed as being addicted to opiates and anti-anxiety
medications. He also was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. His diagnoses and aftercare
recommendations are contained in a July 30, 2009 discharge summary, which Applicant
signed. It was recommended, inter alia, that he abstain from all mood-altering
chemicals, including alcohol. (Gx. 1; Gx. 5; Tr. 34 - 37, 61 - 63)
Applicant has a history of alcohol abuse. He first consumed alcohol at around
age 9, and his father was an abusive alcoholic. Applicant testified that he did not
4
consume alcohol in large amounts until after he joined the Navy. Records from his 2009
inpatient treatment show he had a .29 blood alcohol content (BAC) when he was
admitted. Applicant’s alcohol consumption at that time consisted of between three and
eight mixed drinks five times weekly, or four to six beers once a week. Applicant also
reported  consuming an entire fifth of tequila on one occasion. Records further reflect
that in the 30 days before he was admitted to rehabilitation in July 2009, he drank on 20
of those days and was intoxicated on 15 of those days. Applicant also estimates he
spent between $1,500 and $2,000 on alcohol during those 30 days. (Gx. 5)
In 2008, while still living in State A, Applicant was arrested and charged with
driving under the influence (DUI) and refusing a breathalyzer test. Applicant avers he
had about three or four beers at a restaurant before driving home. At trial, he pleaded
no contest and was placed on probation. He was also required to complete an alcohol
safety awareness program (ASAP). In September 2011, after moving to State B,
Applicant was again arrested for driving while intoxicated (DWI) and refusing a
breathalyzer test. He was convicted of the latter offense, his driver’s license was
suspended, and he was ordered to complete ASAP again. On April 5, 2012, Applicant
was arrested and charged with DWI in State B. He had a .17 BAC. He also was charged
with driving on a suspended license. He was convicted of both offenses. Two days after
being released from jail for his April 5 arrest, and while a court date for that arrest was
pending, Applicant was arrested in State B and charged with DWI 3  offense (a felony).rd
Applicant was held for 60 days in jail pending trial, at which he was found guilty and
sentenced to time already served. Applicant was ordered to undergo intensive
outpatient alcohol treatment, which he completed in June 2012. No records of that
treatment were produced for this hearing, but Applicant acknowledged that he again
was told he should abstain from alcohol. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4 - 8; Tr. 53 - 55, 57 - 65, 93)
In denying SOR 2.b, Applicant did not directly respond to the allegation that he
was diagnosed in 2009 as alcohol dependent. Instead, he claimed that he went to
rehabilitation solely for his opioid and anxiolytic medication dependence. He averred
that the only reason alcohol problems were mentioned in the treatment records was
because his insurance would only pay for alcohol treatment, not for drug treatment.
Applicant continued to consume alcohol after his 2012 outpatient treatment. He stopped
drinking between April 2012, after his second DWI arrest that month, and October 2012.
In at least one instance since then, Applicant has consumed five or more beers. At
hearing, Applicant testified that he has not consumed alcohol since January 2015.
(Answer; Tr. 38 - 45, 55 - 56, 82)
In 2009, Applicant started to experience financial problems. The debt alleged at
SOR 1.a is for a credit card he allowed his former mistress to use during their affair.
When Applicant ended the relationship in 2009, she reacted by running up a large
balance on the card. However, Applicant paid off that debt in March 2015, after initiating
a repayment plan in November 2013. The debts alleged at SOR 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d are
also for credit cards Applicant misused around the time of his military discharge and the
end of his second marriage. He disclosed all of his debts in his EQIP. As to these credit
cards, he stated that he used them for “food, rent, and booze.” Applicant settled the
debt at SOR 1.d in April 2013. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. B; Tr. 47 - 52) 
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).8
 Directive. 6.3.9
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
5
Applicant is being assisted in the resolution of his debts by his girlfriend, who has
lent him as much as $13,000 since April 2012. Much of that money was used for travel
to see Applicant’s father in 2014, when he was sick. Applicant made another trip in
February 2015, when his father died and Applicant had to arrange for a funeral.
Applicant is repaying his girlfriend through a structured agreement, but this has
hindered his ability to resolve his other financial problems. Applicant also presented
information showing he is methodically resolving other financial problems not alleged in
the SOR. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 4; Ax. B; Tr. 47 - 51, 71 - 82)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent  with the national interest for an applicant to either receive or continue to8
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies9
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  10
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).11
6
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.11
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Available information supports the allegation at SOR 3.a. Applicant became
addicted to opioid painkillers, which contain controlled substances, and to anti-anxiety
medication late in his Navy career. This occurred because he abused prescription pain
and anxiety medications that were initially prescribed to him for properly diagnosed
medical conditions. Before entering a rehabilitation facility, he was illegally obtaining
prescription drugs from a woman with whom he was having an extra-marital affair. This
information raises a security concern articulated at AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; and
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, information about Applicant’s drug use requires application of
the following AG ¶ 25 disqualifying conditions:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence.
7
I also have considered the following AG ¶ 26 mitigating conditions, which may be
pertinent to these facts and circumstances:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; and
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
Applicant completed a drug treatment program, and he has not illegally obtained
or used prescription medications in nearly six years. Taken in context with the record as
a whole, I conclude he has mitigated the security concerns raised under this guideline.
Financial
Available information supports the allegations at SOR 1.a - 1.d. Applicant
experienced significant financial problems starting around the time he was discharged
from the Navy. Through irresponsible use of his personal credit, he accrued about
$30,000 of delinquent or past-due debt. The largest of his debts resulted from the
actions of a former mistress, whom Applicant allowed to use his credit card and from
whom he illegally bought prescription pain medications. This information is sufficient to
raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed at AG ¶ 18 as
follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts. 
8
Specifically, the record requires application of the following AG ¶ 19 disqualifying
conditions:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
By contrast, the record also requires application of the following AG ¶ 20
mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
The circumstances surrounding Applicant’s financial problems have changed
significantly. He paid one of the alleged debts two years ago and recently completed a
repayment plan for his largest debt that he began two years ago. I also have considered
information about other debts and financial issues not raised in the SOR because his
actions show good judgment and support a conclusion that he will resolve his remaining
debts and will be able to avoid similar problems in the future. Applicant has mitigated
the security concerns about his finances.
Alcohol
This record supports the allegations about Applicant’s abuse of alcohol and his
alcohol-related misconduct at SOR 2.a - 2.e. In 2009, Applicant was diagnosed by
competent medical professionals as alcohol dependent. It was recommended at that
time that he abstain from all mood-altering chemicals, including alcohol. Applicant has
continued to drink and was arrested for DWI three times after completing his 2009
9
rehabilitation. This information raises a security concern that is expressed at AG 21 as
follows:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.
More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶
20 disqualifying conditions:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence; and
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program.
The following AG ¶ 21 mitigating conditions have been considered:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
10
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
I conclude the record does not support application of any of these mitigating
conditions. Applicant’s denial of the SOR 2.b allegation of alcohol dependence is based
on his claim that the only way his medical insurance would pay for his drug treatment
was if it was classified as treatment for alcoholism. This is simply not credible. It may be
that the primary concern when he was admitted was his addiction to prescription
medications. However, the record of treatment makes clear that Applicant has a history
of alcohol abuse and was diagnosed by medical professionals as alcohol dependent. 
Applicant knows he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent because he signed the
discharge summary listing the diagnoses at issue here. He knows he was advised, both
in 2009 and in 2012, to stop drinking. Yet, Applicant continued to drink and was arrested
three times for DWI after completing his 2009 treatment. Applicant also continued to
drink after a second course of alcohol treatment in 2012. Applicant claims he has not
consumed alcohol since January 2015, but his continued use of alcohol despite
extensive in-patient and out-patient treatment undermines my confidence that
Applicant’s alcohol-related problems will not recur. Available information precludes a
finding that Applicant has mitigated the Guideline G security concerns.
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines F, G, and H. I have also reviewed the record
before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is
now 48 years old and has made significant changes in his personal and professional
life. Aside from his relationship with alcohol, he has improved his health and his financial
condition. I have considered his honorable service in the Navy, as well as his good
reputation in the civilian workplace. It is encouraging that he has resolved his finances
and has put his prescription drug abuse behind him. However, the adverse information
about his alcohol dependence and his alcohol-related misconduct clearly require that he
establish a reliable track record of his commitment to sobriety. Until he does so, doubts
will remain about his suitability for access to classified information. Because protection
of the national interest is the principle purpose of these adjudications, those doubts
must be resolved against the individual.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.e: Against Applicant
11
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for a security
clearance is denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
