                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------                   )       ISCR Case No. 14-00719
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding her criminal conduct and finances. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On April 29, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make a preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 7, 2014, and elected to have her
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 23, 2015, and responded to the FORM with
a two-page updated response within the time permitted. Her updated response was
admitted as Item 5. The case was assigned to me on May 21, 2015.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant allegedly was arrested (a) five times in her state of
residence from 2010 to August 2013 for driving on a suspended license and (b) once in
April 2012 for failure to appear on a warrant. Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly
accumulated 16 debts that are either past due or in collection. These debts exceed
$3,000 and remain unpaid. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the alleged traffic-related
arrests between 2010 and August 2013 and admitted each of the alleged debt
delinquencies. She claimed she experienced numerous unfortunate events in her life
after losing her job and accepting much lower paying work that did not enable her to
afford the simple necessities of life. She acknowledged her mistakes and claimed she
has paid $600 on her accrued tickets and expects to have them all paid off by
September 2015. She provided no documentation of her payments or evidence of her
work and civic contributions in her community.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 26-year-old secretary for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Applicant is single and has no children. (Item 3) She attended some college
classes between September 2008 and January 2009 but did not earn a degree or
diploma. (Item 3)  Applicant claimed no military service. 
Between 2010 and August 2013, Applicant was arrested five times for driving on
a suspended license. She was fined in excess of $2,000 for the offenses covered by
the five tickets in two different jurisdictions. After she lost her job in March 2013, she
was unemployed for almost six months and could not address the outstanding fines and
other accounts. When Applicant returned to work in October 2013, she accepted a
secretarial position that paid much less than her former employer. (Items 2 and 5) As a
result, she continued to encounter difficulties addressing her outstanding debts. 
Applicant’s delinquent debts listed in the SOR include six outstanding fines
exceeding $1,200, eight medical accounts exceeding $1,400, and two consumer debts
exceeding $1,000. (Item 2) Each of these debts remains outstanding. 
While Applicant claims to have paid over $600 on her outstanding fines, she
provided no documentation of her payments. (Items 2 and 5) She provided no evidence
3
of payment plans or financial counseling. Further, she did not provide any
endorsements or performance evaluations on her behalf. Nor did she provide any
proofs of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” 
These AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is
to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following guidelines are
pertinent in this case:
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment
reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, t calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
4
                                    Financial Considerations
 The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and meet fin-
ancial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts. AG
¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
5
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully-employed secretary for a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of traffic-related citations between 2010 and 2013 covering
driving on a suspended license and failure o appear on a warrant. She remains
obligated on 16 delinquent debts exceeding $3,000. Most of the debts involve unpaid
traffic fines, which she claims to be addressing. Her remaining eight debts cover
delinquent medical accounts.
Criminal conduct concerns
Applicant’s traffic-related citations on charges covering driving on a suspended
license and failure to appear on a warrant create security concerns that warrant the
application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the guidelines: DC ¶ 31(a), a
single crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and DC ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted.”
Applicant’s series of traffic citations covering driving on a suspended license
and failure to appear on a warrant represent serious offenses and disregard of laws
designed to ensure safe and responsible driving and compliance with laws governing
state law enforcement. Her offenses are cumulative and include fines that remain
outstanding. While Applicant’s employment circumstances are unfortunate,  they do
not excuse her recurrent traffic offenses and failure to exercise more financial
responsibility in addressing her fines. While she acknowledges her mistakes and
expresses remorse, her actions do not warrant application of any of the mitigating
conditions. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations
covered by Guideline J.
Financial concerns
Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulated debts,
many of which are related to her unpaid fines. Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent
debts and her past inability or unwillingness to address these debts warrant the
application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligation,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to most of the debts covered in
the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, §
262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in her latest
credit report and provide ample corroboration of her debts.
Some judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s unexplained
delinquencies and her failure to demonstrate she acted responsibly in addressing her
listed debts once she returned to work. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep.
24, 2004). Her listed debt delinquencies remain outstanding. Although she claims to
6
have addressed her fines, she did not provide any documentation of her payments, or
any arrangements to pay.
.                                          
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
In Applicant’s case, her debts are attributable in part to income losses and
unemployment. Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay or otherwise resolve her
debts. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Without
documentation of financial counseling and steps she has taken to address her debt
delinquencies, mitigation credit is not available to Applicant based on the evidence
developed in the record.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by her accumulation of delinquent debts. Since returning to
work in October 2013, she has not shown any documented effort in addressing any of
her covered debts to mitigate her still delinquent accounts. Resolution of her
delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to her regaining control of her  finances.
While income losses and unemployment conditions might have played a
considerable role in her accumulation of her unpaid fines and medical accounts over
a relatively short four-year period, Applicant failed to provide documentary material as
to how she has addressed her debts. Endorsements and performance evaluations
might have been helpful, too, in making a whole-person assessment of her overall
clearance eligibility, but were not provided. Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of
Applicant based on the limited amount of information available for consideration in
this record does not enable her to establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to
overcome security concerns arising out of her accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations and lack of payment documentation, it is still soon to
make safe predictive judgments about her ability to repay her debts and restore her
finances to stable levels commensurate with the minimum requirements for holding a
security clearance. More time is needed to facilitate’s Applicant’s making the
necessary progress with her finances to facilitate conclusions that her finances are
sufficiently stabilized to permit her access to classified information. Unfavorable
conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs
1.a through 1.p.  
7
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT):                  AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas: 1.a-1b:      Against Applicant
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.p:                Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
