 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-03450  
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86). On September 2, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a statement of reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H and E. The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 1, 2014 and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 31, 2015, was 
provided to him by letter dated May 4, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on 
May 8, 2015. He was given 30 days to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant timely submitted additional 
information and by memorandum dated June 10, 2015, Department Counsel 
indicated she had no objections to Applicant’s FORM response. The case was 
assigned to me on June 19, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the 
record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old systems engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since October 2004. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which 
he has held since November 2006. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor’s degree in May 2004. (Items 2, 4) He 
has never married and has no dependents. Applicant did not serve in the armed 
forces. (Item 2) 
 
Drug Involvement/Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant listed the following drug use on his July 2013 SF 86, “I was at a 
friend’s house and I inhaled from a joint. This was more of a joke than anything, 
as I am not a regular or recreational user of any type of drugs” estimating the use 
occurred in January 1996. Applicant added that his most recent drug use occurred 
in January 2013 stating, “Only a handful of times since I first experimented in my 
teens. I have never been a regular user of any type of drug.” (Item 2) 
 
On a previously submitted SF 86 on November 30, 2005, Applicant 
indicated that he used marijuana three times during the approximate timeframe of 
August 1997 to September 1997. (Item 4) 
 
During Applicant’s Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
interview on September 3, 2013, he stated that he used marijuana “a handful of 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
times” since approximately 1996. Within the last seven years, Applicant used 
marijuana one time in approximately January 2013 while at a party claiming that 
he took one puff from a marijuana joint as the joint was being passed around. At 
the time of this marijuana use, he held a secret security clearance. (Item 3) There 
is no record evidence that Applicant disclosed his 2013 marijuana use to his 
employer or that his employer was aware of it. (Item 3) 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant expressed remorse for his past marijuana 
use and stated that he has no intention using any drugs in the future. He 
recognizes the adverse implications of drug use, especially as it pertains to his 
employment. Applicant focused on the infrequency of his drug use over the past 
ten years and noted that his most recent use occurred 21 months from the time of 
his SOR answer. (Item 1) 
 
In Applicant’s FORM response, he provided extensive information 
regarding a June 2005 driving under the influence (DUI) charge for which he was 
selected for the pretrial diversion program. He successfully completed the 
program and the charge was dismissed. While this DUI charge was listed on his 
July 2013 SF 86 and discussed during his September 2013 OPM PSI, it was not 
alleged as a security concern on his SOR. Additionally, Applicant rebutted an 
assertion made by Department Counsel in her FORM that he failed to disclose his 
2005 DUI to his employer. His security officer stated that Applicant disclosed his 
2005 DUI arrest to him, but was not required to do so as he did not have a 
security clearance at the time of this arrest. I have not considered Applicant’s 
2005 DUI arrest in reaching my final decision regarding Applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance. (FORM response) 
 
Furthermore in his FORM response, Applicant submitted a signed 
statement of intent not to use marijuana in the future with the understanding that 
any further drug violation would result in the automatic revocation of his 
clearance. (FORM response) There is no record evidence of a current drug and 
alcohol assessment.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted a reference letter from his supervisor. His supervisor 
has known him professionally and personally since 2005. Applicant has been 
rated highly in the company’s engineering organization and has received three 
promotions in less than ten years. Applicant’s supervisor also noted that he has 
received 23 awards for outstanding performance adding that he is highly regarded 
by senior engineering management. (Item 1) 
 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national 
security emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of 
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have 
access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the 
Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting 
the criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole 
person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
with access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty 
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 
12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or 
implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, 
conditions in the personal or professional history of the applicant that may 
disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information. The 
Government has the burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 
1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 
2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
                                                  
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three of those drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions are applicable in this case: (a) any drug abuse, defined as 
the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from the 
approved medical direction; (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, or sale or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia;1 and (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance. The Government established its case through Applicant’s admissions 
and the evidence presented.  
   
                                                          
1
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and 
other similar substances. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such 
as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has 
since ended; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional. 
  
None of the drug involvement mitigating conditions are fully applicable. 
Applicant claims that, in the last seven years, which is the time span covered by 
his SF 86, he used marijuana only one time in January 2013 at a party as a joint 
was being passed around. He depicted this one-time use as an “isolated incident” 
that was “more of a joke than anything.” Of note, Applicant acknowledged that he 
held a secret clearance at the time of this party. Applicant was no stranger to the 
Government’s position on drug use while holding a security clearance having 
completed an SF 86 in November 2005.  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply because Applicant’s illegal use of marijuana, 
most notably while holding a security clearance, raises serious questions about 
his ability to exercise good judgment, which encompasses his willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Applicant is able to derive some 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
mitigation from AG 26 ¶ (b) as a result having submitted a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. However, it is 
unclear from the record regarding his willingness to disassociate from drug-using 
associates and contacts. Further corroboration is required regarding Applicant’s 
ability and commitment to refrain from further drug use and that he is drug-free. 
Finally, and assuming that Applicant’s most recent drug use was more than two 
years ago, that passage of time is countered by Applicant’s decision to use 
marijuana while holding a security clearance after a reported 10-year abstinence.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process. 
 
            AG ¶ 16 describes seven personal conduct concerns that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. One of those disqualifying conditions 
is applicable in this case: “(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information 
about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing….“ The Government established 
this condition through Applicant’s admissions and the evidence presented.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven potential conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or 
instructing the individual specifically concerning the security 
clearance process. Upon being made aware of the requirement to 
cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully 
and truthfully; 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased 
or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Applicant’s security violation is cross-alleged under Guideline E. None of 
the mitigating conditions under this concern are applicable for the reasons 
discussed under Guideline H.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge 
should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). My 
comments in the Analysis section are incorporated in the whole-person 
discussion. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for 
his excellent work record and 11 years of employment as a defense contractor, 
essentially his entire working life since graduating from college. Apart from his 
statements of remorse, he provided insufficient evidence corroborating 
rehabilitation. If other favorable evidence exists, Applicant did not provide it. Drug 
use, especially while holding a security clearance, is inconsistent with the 
standards required of those entrusted with holding a security clearance.  
 
Lastly, in requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to 
rely on the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient 
information or evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, sufficiently articulate his position, and mitigate the 
security concerns. By failing to provide such information, and in solely relying on 
the evidence presented in the FORM and precluding a credibility assessment, 
security concerns remain. 
   
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the 
adjudicative process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
adjudicative guidelines. Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the 
Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
