 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03496 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 30, 2015, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on April 22, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 4, 2015, setting the hearing for May 
19, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
 
2 
 
offered exhibits (AE) A and B (p. 1-20), which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. 
He submitted AE C through E in a timely manner. Those exhibits were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 27, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old and has worked for a government contractor for about 
27 years. He has taken some college courses, but does not have a degree. He is 
married for a second time and has one adult son from his first marriage. He still 
provides about $300 monthly to his son who lives in Germany. Appellant served in the 
Air Force for six years. He has held a security clearance since becoming a contractor 
employee.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was delinquent on multiple accounts. The debts were 
listed on credit reports from February 2013, March 2014, and December 2014. 
Applicant did not admit or deny any of the allegations, but rather stated the current 
status of each account. His responses will be treated as denials.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted from some student loan debt that he 
improperly managed and buying a home for $170,000, right before the real estate 
market collapsed. The property decreased in value to about $74,000. He sought a 
mortgage modification, but was not able to qualify. The property was ultimately 
foreclosed. He went through a divorce in 2007 that also impacted his finances. The 
status of the debts is as follows:3 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b ($137; $348): 
 
 These are medical debts that Applicant was unaware of until receiving the SOR. 
He provided documentation showing both debts were paid in April 2015. These debts 
are resolved.4  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c though 1.e ($396; $3,422; $61): 
 
 These are three student loan debts. Applicant provided documentation showing 
he set up a payment plan and has been making $200 monthly payments since 
December 2014. These debts are being unresolved.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 26-28; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer; GE 2-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 29, 33, 36-37; GE 5. 
 
4 Tr. at 52; AE A, B (p. 1), C.  
 
5 Tr. at 50-52; AE A, B (p. 2-4). 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f ($295): 
 
 This was an educational debt that Applicant was unaware of until receiving the 
SOR. He paid this debt in April 2015 and supplied supporting documentation. This debt 
is resolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g though 1.k ($6,884; $5,942; $1,191; $9,021; $1,099): 
 
 These are five student loan debts. Applicant provided documentation showing he 
paid all these accounts in August 2014 (one was paid in March 2015) by taking a loan 
against his retirement account (401k) payment plan. These debts are resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l ($10,837 past due, loan balance of $184,551): 
 
 This is the mortgage account referred to above. This property was foreclosed in 
2010. Applicant received an IRS Form 1099-C, cancellation of debt, in the amount of 
$95,630 for the same year. He reported that amount on his 2010 tax return. He has no 
further obligation for this property. This debt is resolved.8 
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.m though 1.o ($769; $361; $232): 
 
 These are three consumer debts. Applicant provided documentation showing he 
paid all these accounts in April 2015. These debts are resolved.9 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p: 
 
 This is Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy that was discharged in 2000. He 
provided documentation showing that his total liabilities subject to discharge were 
approximately $20,000. This issue is resolved.10 
 
 Applicant testified that he currently has disposable income of about $1,200 at the 
end of each month. He has $90,000 in a retirement account. He borrowed $25,000 from 
that account to pay his student loans. He is repaying that loan with $300 monthly 
payments, which will pay off the loan in 2018 or 2019. He has no federal or state tax 
issues and is not overextended on any other debts.11 
 
                                                          
6 AE A, B (p. 5).  
 
7 Tr. at 49; AE A, B (p. 6-18). 
 
8 Tr. at 29, 36-38, 64-65; AE A, D.  
 
9 Tr. at 55-56; AE A, B (p. 20), C. 
 
10 Tr. at 58; AE E.  
 
11 Tr. at 35, 66-67, 69. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts that he failed to pay over an extended 
period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both disqualifying conditions stated in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant are recent, except for the 2000 
bankruptcy. He has paid all but three of the listed debts, which were combined into a 
 
6 
 
single payment plan on which he has been making regular payments since December 
2014. His mortgage foreclosure has been resolved and he met all of his legal 
requirements. Since he has made a concerted effort to repair his financial position, it is 
reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant’s home foreclosure, because of a bad real estate market, and his 
divorce were conditions beyond his control, however, his inaction to timely resolve his 
delinquent student loans was not responsible action on his part. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received credit counseling. He made a good-faith 
effort to resolve the debts by either paying them or setting up a payment plan. AG ¶ 
20(c) partially applies and ¶ 20(d) fully applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and his 27 years of federal contractor 
service. I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to 
his debts. He took action to resolve his debts. I find it unlikely that Applicant will find 
himself in a similar future situation.  
 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
