 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03508 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 23, 2014, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On April 6, 2015, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
on April 17, 2015, and was received by him on May 10, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
 
2 
 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
There were no objections and all documents were admitted into the record. Applicant 
submitted additional information. Department Counsel had no objections, and those 
documents were admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on June 5, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He served in the military from 1971 to 1992 when he 
retired with an honorable discharge. He married in 1972 and divorced in 1989. He 
remarried the same year. He has four children, ages 39, 37, 23, and 19. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 2005 and a master’s degree in 2007. He continues to take college 
courses. He did not disclose any periods of unemployment and has worked for different 
federal contactors since 2004.1  
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts and one judgment totaling approximately 
$31,897. Credit Bureau Reports (CBR) dated January 2013; June 2014; and April 2015, 
support the SOR alleged debts.2 
 
 Applicant was taking college courses to further his career opportunities. He 
miscalculated the effect student loan payments would have on his finances when they 
became due. He was unaware of the defaults on his accounts as they occurred 
because his wife handled the family finances, and she was reluctant to tell him they 
were having financial difficulties. When Applicant became aware of the financial 
problems, he was able to refinance his house, secure a lower monthly payment, use his 
2013 tax refund to pay some debts, and obligate the remainder to address  other 
delinquent debts.3. 
 
 Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he paid or settled all of the 
alleged SOR debts either with a lump sum payment or through monthly installment 
payments. He made these payments from March 2013 through January 2015. He 
provided a detailed log showing each alleged SOR debt; the type of debt; the loan or 
account number; the current status of the debt; when it became delinquent; the year 
and month it was expected to be resolved; and a description of action he had taken to 
satisfy the debt, such as withdrawals, and frequency and amount of payments.4 
Applicant also provided a spread sheet showing each monthly payment and the amount 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 4, 5, and 6. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Item 2, enclosure 2. 
 
3 
 
 
made toward an SOR debt; the amount and date a lump sum payment was made on an 
SOR debt; and when the final installment payment was made and the debt was 
satisfied.5  
 
 Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he paid the full amount owed or 
completed installment payments on the full amount owed as follows: SOR ¶1.a, paid 
$3,622, full amount, March 2013 with 2013 income tax refund; ¶ 1.c, made installment 
payments from February 2013 until April 2014, paid in full $3,114; ¶ 1.d, made 
installment payments from July 2013 to October 2014, paid in full paid $4,871; ¶ 1.e, 
made installment payments from December 2012 to November 2014, paid in full 
$10,218; ¶ 1.f, made installment payments from February 2013 to January 2014, paid in 
full $1,582; ¶ 1.g, made $95 installment payments from February 2013 to February 
2014, paid in full $1,142; ¶ 1.h, made installment payments from January 2013 to 
January 2015, paid in full $3,945;6 and ¶ 1.i, made installment payments from February 
2013 to December 2014, was to complete final payment in January 2015 and have paid 
full amount $5,053. 
 
 Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that he settled and paid the debt in 
SOR ¶1.b ($296 was the amount requested by the creditor and was satisfied in 
February 2013).7 This debt remains on his most recent credit report dated May 2015. 
He disputes the debt because he paid the amount that the creditor agreed to accept to 
satisfy the debt, but the creditor did not acknowledge his payment and sold the debt to 
another company. He provided a copy of his February/March 2013 bank statement to 
show he paid the amount he said was agreed upon. 
 
 Applicant’s recent credit report shows he does not have any collection accounts 
on his credit history. He credibly indicated in his response to the SOR that many 
creditors did not provide written statements of resolutions of the debts. The bank 
statement he provided verified automatic monthly payments made to some creditors 
and other lump sum payments to creditors.8 A further review of Applicant’s credit report 
shows his student loans are being paid timely. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
5 Item 2, enclosure 3.  
 
6 Item 2, enclosure 4. 
 
7 Item 2, enclosure 4. 
 
8 Response to SOR.  
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had eight delinquent debts and one judgment totaling approximately 
$31,897 that remained unpaid for a period. I find the above disqualifying conditions 
have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems arose because he miscalculated the effect 
repaying student loans would have on his budget, and he was unaware of his financial 
problems because his wife, who managed the finances, did not tell him. Since learning 
 
6 
 
 
of the delinquent debts, Applicant refinanced his home, so as to have more monthly 
expendable income and used his income tax refund to resolve delinquent debts. He has 
either made lump sum payments or used installment agreements to satisfy the debts. 
He provided a detailed log of his actions and a current credit report to document that the 
debts are no longer included on it. Applicant is current on repaying his student loans. 
Applicant’s financial problems occurred under unique circumstances and are unlikely to 
recur. He aggressively addressed his debts, and they do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
Applicant’s miscalculation of the effect repaying his student loans would have on 
his ability to pay his other expenses was within his control. His wife handled the 
finances and did not tell him of their financial problems. This was somewhat within his 
control. For AG ¶ 20(b) to be fully applicable, Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Once he learned about the delinquent debts he began to 
repay and resolve them. AG¶ 20(b) has some application. Applicant made good-faith 
lump sum payments or monthly payments to resolve delinquent debts. He has no 
collection accounts on his most current credit report. There are clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved and under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. 
 
Applicant disputes one debt, claiming he negotiated a settlement, paid the 
settlement amount, but then the creditor sold the debt after Applicant completed the 
payment. He provided proof of the payment and his attempt to resolve the debt. I am 
satisfied that he acted on the agreement with the creditor and completed the terms. AG 
¶ 20(e) applies to this debt, and it is resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He retired from the military after 21 years of service. He 
has worked for federal contractors since 2004. Applicant got behind on paying his bills 
when he miscalculated his student loan repayment plan. He was unaware his wife was 
withholding information about the problematic state of their financial affairs. Once he 
learned it, he took aggressive action and resolved his delinquent debts. He is paying his 
student loans on time. He provided a stable and consistent track record to show his 
finances are under control. Applicant has met his burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
