 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02632 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s foreign family contacts create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and an unacceptable 
security risk. Moreover, Applicant exercised his Taiwanese citizenship after becoming a 
U.S. citizen. The mitigating information is insufficient to fully overcome the foreign 
influence and foreign preference security concerns. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline C (foreign 
preference) and Guideline B (foreign influence).1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
December 1, 2014, and elected to have his case decided on the written record.  
 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated January 27, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated February 19, 2015. Applicant 
received the FORM on April 13, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections 
to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM or submit any information. The case was assigned to me on May 
21, 2015.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Government requested that I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
the government of Taiwan (the Republic of China) based on documents published by 
the federal government and reported federal-court criminal cases. Applicant did not 
object, and I granted the request.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old engineer employed by a government contractor. He 
was born in Taiwan to Taiwanese parents. He immigrated to the United States at age 
three in 1983. He has one brother born in the United States. Applicant became a U.S. 
naturalized citizen in 1993. He has never been married and has no children. Applicant 
was hired by his current employer in 2001. He was granted a secret-level security 
clearance in 2004. 
 
Applicant’s most recent U.S. passport was issued to him in 2010, and it will not 
expire until 2020. Applicant disclosed in his 2013 SCA travel to several European 
countries, Canada, and Mexico between 2007 and 2013. I assume he travelled to those 
countries using a previously issued U.S. passport. However, there is no evidence 
showing what passport he used to travel to those countries. 
 
Applicant requested and was issued a Taiwanese passport in November 2006, 
which will not expire until November 2016. He travelled to Taiwan in 2007, 2010, and 
2013 using his Taiwanese passport to visit family and friends living in Taiwan. 
Applicant’s grandmother and extended family members (uncles, aunts, and cousins) are 
residents and citizens of Taiwan. He claimed that he used both his U.S. passport and 
his Taiwanese passport to travel to Taiwan, and that both passports were stamped by 
the Taiwanese and U.S. customs officials upon his entry and exit of both countries. 
Applicant also claimed that he destroyed his Taiwanese passport. He submitted no 
documentary evidence to support his claims. 
 
Applicant provided no information on whether he has financial and property 
interests in Taiwan, in any other foreign country, or in the United States. Concerning his 
relatives who are residents and citizens of Taiwan, Applicant provided no information 
concerning their jobs, whether they served in the Taiwanese military, worked for, or 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
received pensions paid by the Taiwanese government. Applicant also provided little 
information concerning the manner and frequency of his contacts with his relatives in 
Taiwan, or whether they travel to the United States to visit with him. 
 
Applicant noted that he has been living in the United States since age three. He 
considers the United States his home and he considers himself an American. He 
believes that his contact with his relatives in Taiwan is infrequent because he does not 
visit them often, and if he does, it is only for short periods. He stated that his relatives 
have no influence on his sense of loyalty to the United States.  
 
  Taiwan has a multi-party democracy with universal suffrage. It is the 21st-largest 
economy in the world, and its high-tech industry plays a key role in the global economy. 
Taiwan is ranked highly in terms of freedom of the press, health care, public education, 
economic freedom, and human development. 
 
  Taiwan is one of the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information. Since 2000, Taiwan has been repeatedly involved in criminal espionage 
and export control violations of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology with military 
applications. Illegal technology transfers, even to private Taiwanese entities, are a 
significant concern because foreign government entities, including intelligence 
organizations and security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of 
U.S. technology which in turn flows to foreign governments.  
 
Policies 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 explains the concerns about foreign preference stating: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 10 indicates four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
 (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
 (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
 (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
 (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
 (6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
 (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States at age three. He became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 1993, and has been issued U.S. passports since then, the most recent in 
2010. After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant requested and was issued a Taiwanese 
passport in 2006. He used his Taiwanese passport for his travel convenience, and in 
preference of his U.S. passport, to travel to Taiwan in 2007, 2010, and 2013. Applicant 
claimed that he destroyed his Taiwanese passport, presumably in 2014. However, he 
presented no evidence to support his claim.  
 
 Foreign preference disqualifying condition AG ¶¶ 10(a) and (b) are supported by 
the evidence. If these conditions are not mitigated it would disqualify Applicant from 
eligibility to hold a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns for foreign 
preference:  
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 Considering the scant evidence in this case, none of the mitigating conditions are 
reasonably raised by the evidence and do not apply. Applicant exercised his Taiwanese 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
citizenship after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1993. He requested and was 
granted a Taiwanese passport in 2006, and he used it in preference of his U.S. 
passport. He received privileges and benefits reserved for Taiwanese citizens. Although 
Applicant claimed he destroyed his Taiwanese passport, he presented no documentary 
evidence to support his claim. He has not offered to renounce his Taiwanese 
citizenship. He failed to mitigate the security concerns alleged under Guideline C. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying under AG ¶ 7 in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant’s grandmother and his extended family members are citizens and 
residents of Taiwan. The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign 
country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one 
relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information.2  
 
Applicant, directly or through his parents, has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and obligation with his grandmother and his Taiwanese 
extended family members. These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that Taiwanese agents or 
individuals operating in Taiwan may exploit the opportunity to obtain sensitive or 
classified information about the United States. Applicant’s relatives in Taiwan create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly or through his grandmother or family 
members in Taiwan.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these three disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant was born in Taiwan and immigrated to the United States at age three. 
He was raised and educated in the United States. He has lived in the United States for 
32 years. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1993. He has been working for a 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
government contractor since 2001, and was granted a secret-level clearance in 2004. 
Applicant presented no evidence concerning his contact with his Taiwanese relatives 
who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Nor did he present any evidence about 
whether he has financial and property interests in Taiwan, in any other foreign country, 
or in the United States.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with family members living in 
Taiwan. Although there is no evidence that Taiwanese government agents, or other 
entities, have approached or threatened Applicant or his family living in Taiwan, he is 
nevertheless potentially vulnerable to threats, coercion, inducement, and manipulation 
made against him or his family members living in Taiwan.  
 
Considering Taiwan’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
ongoing pervasive espionage practices against the United States, Applicant is not able 
to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with 
his relatives, friends, and associates who are Taiwanese citizens and living in Taiwan] 
could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (d) have limited 
applicability and do not mitigate the foreign influence concerns. 
 
Applicant has been living in the United States for 32 years. He considers the 
United States his home and he considers himself an American. He believes that his 
contact with his relatives in Taiwan is infrequent because he does not visit them often, 
and if he does, it is only for short periods. He stated that his relatives have no influence 
on his sense of loyalty to the United States.  
 
Notwithstanding, the risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress are significant 
because Taiwan has an extensive, pervasive history of engaging in economic and 
technological espionage against the United States.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person 
analysis. I considered that Applicant has lived in the United States most of his life. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1993, his parents are naturalized U.S. citizens, and 
he has a brother who was born in the United States. He has worked for a government 
contractor since 2001. Applicant considers the United States his home and he considers 
himself an American. He believes that his contact with his relatives in Taiwan is 
infrequent, and stated that his relatives have no influence on his sense of loyalty to the 
United States. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s foreign family contacts create a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and an 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
unacceptable security risk. Moreover, Applicant exercised his Taiwanese citizenship 
after becoming a U.S. citizen. The mitigating information taken together is insufficient to 
fully overcome the foreign preference and foreign influence security concerns.  
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not carried 
his burden of persuasion and the foreign influence and foreign preference security 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b:      Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline B:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b:      Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
