 Exhibit 4 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-00447
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. She has a history of financial problems or
difficulties that are unresolved and ongoing. She did not submit sufficient evidence to
rebut, extenuate, mitigate, or explain the concern. Accordingly, this case is decided
against  Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on September 9, 2013.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal Board6
restated existing caselaw that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
 Department Counsel Brief at 2, n. 1. 7
2
(DOD),  on April 18, 2014, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it2
was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her
eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It3
detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for
financial considerations. Applicant answered the SOR in two submissions, dated May
16, 2014, and June 3, 2014, respectively. Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel
requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the written record.4
On November 12, 2014, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material
information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant material5
(FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on November 18, 2014. Applicant did
not reply within 30 days from receipt of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on
May 12, 2015. There is no explanation in the case papers to account for the five-month
delay from December 18, 2014, to May 12, 2015.
Ruling on Evidence
Exhibit 8 is a report of investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of
Applicant. The document is a summary of an interview of Applicant conducted on
October 14, 2013. An ROI may be received and considered as evidence when it is
authenticated by a witness.  Here, Exhibit 8 is not authenticated in any way. Although6
Applicant, who is representing herself, has not raised the issue via an objection, I am
raising it sua sponte. With that said, it is evident that Department Counsel is acting in
good faith, having highlighted the issue in their brief.  Nevertheless, Applicant’s lack of7
 W avier means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or8
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right and
the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9  ed., W est 2009).th
 Exhibit 4 (see responses to Question 27).9
 Exhibits 5, 6, and 7. 10
 Attachment to Answer to SOR. 11
3
response to the FORM does not amount to a knowing waiver of the right to object to the
ROI.  Accordingly, Exhibit 8 is not admissible and I have not considered it.8
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain a security
clearance. She is employed by a federal contractor as a help-desk engineer. She has
been so employed in a full-time capacity since July 2006. Her educational background
includes attending both a community college and an online university program, neither
of which resulted in receiving a degree. Her employment history also includes honorable
military service in a state air national guard during 1988–2009.  
Applicant has a history of financial problems, which she does not dispute. She
disclosed a failure to file a state income tax return for tax year 2009 and a number of
delinquent accounts in her September 2013 security clearance application.  The SOR9
alleged the failure to file the 2009 return as well as eight collection and two past-due
accounts in amounts ranging from $52 to $4,000 for a total of $8,203 in collection
accounts and $808 in two past-due student loan accounts. In her response to the SOR,
she admitted the allegations except for two collection accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.j. In
addition to her admissions, the delinquent accounts are established by credit reports.10
Applicant did not provide documentation showing that the collection accounts are
paid, settled, in repayment, forgiven, cancelled, in dispute, or otherwise resolved.
Likewise, she did not provide documentation showing that the state income tax matter is
resolved or is in the process of resolution. 
Concerning the student loan accounts, Applicant provided documentation
showing that, in April 2014, she entered into a loan-rehabilitation program for the two
loans, which then had a combined balance of $5,067.  She agreed to make monthly11
payments of $75 beginning in April 2014. The loans could be purchased by an eligible
lender after nine timely payments at which time the loans would be considered no
longer in default but rehabilitated. She did not submit documentation showing proof of
payment under the terms of the loan-rehabilitation program or any other documentation
related to the two student loan accounts. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant stated that she would like to pay off her
delinquent accounts, but she has experienced financial hardships that prevented her
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to12
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.13
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 15
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 20
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).21
4
from doing so. She explained that she has two adult children who have incurred various
indebtedness that she has paid. She also a one minor child, and all three children live
with her. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As12
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt13
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An14
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  15
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting16
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An17
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate18
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme19
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.20
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.21
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.22
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 23
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant24
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  25
5
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it22
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant23
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 24
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  25
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly compromise
classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It encompasses
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important qualities. A
person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or
negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. Taken together, the evidence indicates inability or unwillingness
 AG ¶ 19(a).  26
 AG ¶ 19(c). 27
 AG ¶ 19(g). 28
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).29
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 30
6
to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning26 27
of Guideline F. In addition, her failure to file the 2009 state income tax return is
disqualifying.28
 In mitigation, I have considered six mitigating conditions under Guideline F,  and29
I have especially considered the following:
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or death, divorce, or
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties, some of which may be
related to the trouble caused by her two adult children. But that is not sufficient to
resolve the concern given that all the financial matters in the SOR are unresolved and
ongoing. Moreover, she has not submitted documentation showing a good-faith effort to
resolve those matters. 
Of course, the purpose of this case is not aimed at collecting debts or enforcing
tax laws.  Rather, the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and30
trustworthiness consistent with the guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F
cases, the Appeal Board has established the following standard:
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 31
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).32
7
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan
be the ones listed in the SOR.31
Here, the evidence does not support a conclusion that Applicant has established a plan
and taken steps to implement that plan sufficient to mitigate the concern. Actions speak
louder than words, and Applicant has not taken documented actions to resolve any of
the matters in the SOR.    
Because Applicant chose to have her case decided without a hearing, I am
unable to evaluate her demeanor. Limited to the written record, I am unable to assess
her sincerity, candor, or truthfulness. She also chose not to respond to the FORM with
relevant and material facts about her circumstances, which may have helped to explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the concern. 
Given those circumstances, Applicant’s history of financial problems creates
doubt about her reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole
and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I32
conclude that she did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified
information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.k: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
