 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-03574 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 5, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 12, 2015, and requested that her case 
be decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on March 23, 2015. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on April 7, 
2015. Applicant received the FORM on April 17, 2015. She had 30 days to submit a 
response to the FORM. She did not submit any matters in response to the FORM. On 
June 5, 2015, the FORM was forwarded to the hearing office and was assigned to me 
on June 8, 2015. 
    
 
2 
 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a -1.i, 
and denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k. (Item 1 at 3-4) 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to obtain a security clearance.  Applicant has been employed with the company 
since September 1998.  She has a high school diploma and some college. She is 
divorced and has two children. (Item 2)   
 
Applicant completed an electronic questionnaires for investigations processing 
(e-QIP) on February 18, 2013. (Item 2) A subsequent background investigation revealed 
that Applicant had 11 delinquent debts, a total approximate balance of $25,645. (Item 3; 
Item 4)   
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant indicates her three largest debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b. and 1.c) were the result of a divorce. Her answer to the SOR was very brief and  
did not provide much detail. Her e-QIP application indicates that she was divorced in 
March 2010. She remarried in October 2010 and divorced again in December 2012.  As 
to the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.i, Applicant admits that she was delinquent in paying 
these accounts, but she made payments on these debts and they are now current. She 
did not provide additional documentation to corroborate her statement. She denies the 
two medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k, but will research them and pay them if 
they are valid debts. (Item 1 at 3-4, Item 2)  
 
Status of the Delinquent Debts: 
  
SOR ¶ 1.a: $8,735 credit card account charged off in October 2008. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 3 
at 3; Item 4 at 2; Item 5 at 5) Applicant states that she was working with a debt 
consolidation company to repay this debt. She claims the company chose to write these 
debts off rather than arrange that the debts be paid. She did not indicate whether she 
attempted to contact the creditor directly in order to resolve the debt. The debt is 
unresolved. (Item 1 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $8,393 credit card account charged off in November 2008 (Item 3 at 3; 4 at 
2; Item 5 at 4). Applicant states that she was working with a debt consolidation company 
to repay this debt. She claims the company chose to write these debts off rather than 
arrange that the debts be paid. She did not indicate whether she attempted to contact 
the creditor directly in order to resolve the debt. The debt is unresolved. (Item 1 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $7,934 credit card account charged off in October 2008. (Item 3 at 3; Item 4 
at 2; Item 5 at 5) Applicant states that she was working with a debt consolidation 
company to repay this debt. She claims the company chose to write these debts off 
 
3 
 
 
rather than arrange that the debts be paid. She did not indicate whether she attempted 
to contact the creditor directly in order to resolve the debt. The debt is unresolved. (Item 
1 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: a credit card account with a balance of $2,103 that was delinquent in the 
amount of $130. (Item 4 at 2). Applicant claims she brought this account current on July 
16, 2014. She did not provide documentation corroborating this assertion, but the debt  
is not listed as delinquent on her most recent credit report, dated March 20, 2015, which 
was offered by the Government. (Item 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: a credit card account with a balance of $717 that was past due in the 
amount of $65. (Item 4 at 2) Applicant claims she brought this account current on 
August 1, 2014. She did not provide documentation corroborating this assertion, but the 
debt is listed as current on her most recent credit report, dated March 20, 2015, which 
was offered by the Government. (Item 5 at 2)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: a credit card account with a balance of $622 that was past due in the amount 
of $69. (Item 4 at 2) Applicant claims she brought this account current on July 16, 2014. 
She did not provide documentation corroborating this assertion, but the debt   is listed 
as current on her most recent credit report, dated March 20, 2015, which was offered by 
the Government. (Item 5 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: a credit card account with a balance of $620 that was past due in the 
amount of $53. (Item 4 at 2) Applicant claims she brought this account current on July 
16, 2014. She did not provide documentation corroborating this assertion, but the debt   
is listed as current on her most recent credit report, dated March 20, 2015, which was 
offered by the Government. (Item 5 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: a credit card account with a balance of $490 that was past due in the 
amount of $61. (Item 4 at 2) Applicant claims she brought this account current on 
August 1, 2014. She did not provide documentation corroborating this assertion, but the 
debt is listed as current on her most recent credit report, dated March 20, 2015, which 
was offered by the Government. (Item 5 at 3)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: a jewelry store credit card account with a balance of $433 that was past due 
in the amount of $115. (Item 4 at 2) Applicant claims she brought this account current 
on August 1, 2014. She did not provide documentation corroborating this assertion, but 
the debt is listed as current on her most recent credit report, dated March 20, 2015, 
which was offered by the Government. (Item 5 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j: a $52 medical account. (Item 4 at 2) Applicant denied this debt, but said she 
would research it and pay it if she owes the debt. She apparently discovered it was a 
valid debt because the debt is listed as paid on her most recent credit report, dated 
March 20, 2015, which was offered by the Government. (Item 5 at 2)  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: a $38 medical account. (Item 3 at 14; Item 4 at 2) Applicant denied this debt, 
but said she would research it and pay it if she owes the debt. The debt remains unpaid  
on her most recent credit report, dated March 20, 2015. (Item 5 at 2)  
 
 Applicant’s most recent credit report, dated March 20, 2015, also listed two new 
delinquent debts.  The first debt is a $425 judgment for an unpaid medical bill entered 
against Applicant in June 2014. The second debt is a $210 unpaid cable television 
account. The account became delinquent in June 2014. (Item 5 at 2) The two debts are 
not alleged in the SOR. They will be considered when weighing Applicant’s mitigation 
case.  
 
 Applicant did not provide information on her overall financial situation, such as, 
her net monthly income, her monthly expenses, and her monthly debt payments. As a 
result, it is difficult to assess her financial situation. She did not provide any information 
on the status of her debts. However, she is given credit for bringing the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.j up-to-date based on the March 20, 2015 credit report which was 
offered by the Government.  Applicant also did not provide any information regarding 
her duty performance, such as performance evaluations or letters of reference from her 
co-workers and supervisors.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
5 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts 
that she has been unable or unwilling to pay over the past several years.   
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) partially applies 
 
6 
 
 
because most of Applicant’s delinquent credit card accounts are now current. However, 
the three largest debts, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c are not resolved. Applicant 
claims a debt consolidation company that she was working with decided to write these 
debts off rather than work with her. She did not provide a copy of her agreement with 
the debt consolidation company. In addition, Applicant could have contacted the 
creditors on her own to resolve the debts. She did not mention whether she attempted 
to contact the creditors directly to resolve the debts. Her explanation is not plausible. 
For this reason, AG ¶ 20(a) is given less weight. 
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances), partially applies because Applicant’s debts 
were partially caused by divorce. Her past divorces clearly had an adverse impact on 
her financial situation. Applicant is given credit for bringing most of her delinquent credit 
card accounts up-to-date, however, she has not taken steps to resolve her three oldest 
delinquent debts. Perhaps, if Applicant had requested a hearing, she would have had 
an opportunity to further explain her reason for not paying the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a – 1.c. Her explanation that the debt consolidation company would not let her resolve 
these delinquent debts is not plausible. For this reason, AG ¶ 20(b) is given less weight.  
 
     AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. While the 
March 20, 2015 credit report shows Applicant has brought the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d – 1.j to current status, there is no indication that Applicant has taken steps to resolve 
her three oldest and largest debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a -1.c. Applicant provided no 
information regarding her monthly budget. Without a budget, it is difficult to assess 
Applicant’s financial situation. The March 20, 2015 credit report indicates Applicant had 
two additional delinquent accounts, a $425 judgment for a medical debt entered against 
her in June 2014 and a $210 delinquent cable television bill placed for collection which 
became delinquent in June 2014. This indicates that Applicant continues to have 
financial problems. 
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 
1.j, because while all of the accounts remain outstanding, she made sufficient payments 
so the accounts are no longer delinquent. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 
and 1.k remain unresolved. The total balance of unresolved debt is $25,100.  While 
Applicant has an explanation for why she has not attempted to resolve her largest debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c, her explanation is not plausible. Even though the debts 
were charged off, she still could have made attempts to resolve these debts by 
contacting the creditors directly.  Applicant failed to demonstrate that she is making a 
good-faith effort to resolve the delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c, and 
1.k. 
 
 
7 
 
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) does not apply. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant disputed the $38 medical 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. She said that she will research the debt and if it is her debt 
she will pay the debt.  She did not respond to the FORM, so Applicant failed to provide 
proof that her dispute was substantiated or whether she took steps to resolve the issue. 
AG ¶  20(e) does not apply.   
 
While Applicant has brought seven of her delinquent accounts current, a 
significant amount of unresolved debt remains. She has not mitigated the concerns 
raised under financial considerations.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant’s two 
divorces had an adverse impact on her financial situation. However, Applicant has not 
provided information as to the steps she has taken to resolve her remaining delinquent 
accounts. She did not provide any information regarding her monthly budget and 
income. As such, it is difficult to assess her current financial situation. In fact, the most 
recent credit report, dated March 20, 2015, revealed that Applicant has two additional 
delinquent accounts.  
 
The concern under financial considerations is not only about individuals who are 
prone to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Another concern is that failure to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which raise 
 
8 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. In other words, a person who has trouble managing his or her finances, 
raises doubts about his or her ability to handle and protect classified information. 
Applicant’s history of financial problems raises doubts about her ability to handle and 
protect classified information. Applicant did not provide sufficient information to explain 
her financial situation. Mindful of my duty to resolve cases where there is doubt in favor 
of national security, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c, 1.k:  Against  Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                        
 
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
