 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-01256 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant  mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under financial considerations, 
drug involvement, and personal conduct. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations, Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 10, 2014, and requested that her 
case be decided on the administrative record. On April 30, 2015, Department Counsel 
 
2 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on May 7, 
2015.  On June 2, 2015, Applicant responded to the FORM and submitted additional 
matters. Her response to the FORM is marked and admitted as Item 6. In a 
memorandum dated June 8, 2015, Department Counsel indicated no objection to 
Applicant’s Response to the FORM. (Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked as 
Hearing Exhibit A (HE A)). The file was forwarded to the DOHA Hearing Office on June 
10, 2015. The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since September 2013. The highest degree of education achieved 
is high school. She has some college credit. She is single, but is in a committed live-in 
relationship. She has a son. (Item 2) 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
 Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on December 19, 2013, for a position of public trust. (Item 2) A subsequent 
background investigation revealed that Applicant experienced financial issues in the 
past. Applicant failed to pay her 2012 federal income tax returns. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 3 at 
8).  Applicant also had six delinquent debts with an approximate total balance of $3,565. 
The debts include: a $772 medical account placed for collection in January 2013 (SOR 
¶ 1.b: Item 3 at 7; Item 4 at 1; Item 5 at 4); a $721 medical account placed for collection 
in January 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 4 at 1; Item 5 at 4); a $526 account placed for 
collection in September 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 3 at 7; Item 4 at 1; Item 5 at 3); a $532 
account placed for collection in December 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 5 at 3); a $437 
account that was charged off in September 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 5 at 3); and a $577 
medical account that was 120 days past due as of November 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 5 
at 3). 
 
  In response to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the alleged debts. She states that 
she lost a job in 2012 and she was struggling financially. She became financially stable 
when she was hired in her current full-time position. She intends to file her 2012 tax 
returns. (Item 1 at 7-9) She claims the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 
1.g are the same medical debt. (Item 1 at 10-11, 15) The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.c have the same account number. There is strong circumstantial evidence to 
conclude that the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is also the same debt. Applicant 
contacted the creditor alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e, to arrange a payment plan.  She 
agreed to pay $20 a month beginning on December 31, 2014. (Item 1 at 19) Regarding 
SOR ¶ 1.f, Applicant claims she paid this debt and provided a copy of credit report, 
dated December 10, 2014, to show it is no longer on her credit report. (Item 1 at 10-17) 
 
 In her response to the FORM, dated June 2, 2015, Applicant admits to having 
been unable to pay her debts in the past. In 2012, she was employed full-time. She 
commuted one hour each way to her job. She obtained a part-time job to meet 
expenses. One month after starting her part-time job, she was laid off from her full-time 
 
3 
job in May 2013. Applicant was hired in a part-time position by her current employer in 
September 2013. In order to work for her current employer, she moved to an area with a 
lower cost of living.  Her employer offered her a full-time position in May 2014. After 
transitioning to the full-time position, Applicant is able support herself with one job. (Item 
6) 
 
 Applicant provided copies of her credit reports, dated June 2, 2014, from all three 
credit bureaus showing that she has no accounts in collection and she has been making 
timely payments on her student loan for a year. (Item 6 at 7-19)  She also provided 
records of her 2012 income tax returns filed with the Internal Revenue Service. It is not 
clear whether she owes the Internal Revenue Service taxes for tax year 2012. (Item 6 at 
3-6)  She provided a letter from the creditor of the medical account which was alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c and 1.g, indicating that they requested that their account entry be 
deleted from her credit report. (Item 6 at 20) She said other accounts were deleted 
when she disputed them as duplicates with the credit bureaus. Applicant states, “It is a 
good feeling knowing you are on top of all your finances and you are maintaining them.” 
(Item 6 at 1) 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 On January 16, 2014, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator in conjunction 
with her background investigation. During the interview, Applicant volunteered that she 
smoked marijuana on four occasions between 2008 and August 2013. She smoked 
marijuana with friends while in their homes. She purchased a small amount of marijuana 
for $5 on one occasion in 2009. The last time she used marijuana was in August 2013 
while attending a parade with friends. Someone passed a marijuana pipe and she took 
a couple puffs. She never liked how marijuana made her feel. She was never 
dependent on marijuana. She never sold or distributed it. She does not intend to use 
marijuana again because it is illegal and she does not want her use to adversely affect 
any future employment opportunities. (Item 3 at 5-6)  
 
 In her answer to the SOR and her response to the FORM, Applicant states she 
was very ignorant when using and purchasing marijuana. Her use was infrequent. She 
had no problem stopping her marijuana use. She will never use marijuana again. She 
removed herself from the people and environment where she used marijuana. She has 
never used marijuana while employed with the DOD contractor. She would not do 
anything to jeopardize her employment. She now has a family and an amazing son. She 
looks forward to being his role model. (Item 1 at 4; Item 6 at 1-2) 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 In her e-QIP application, dated December 19, 2013, Applicant answered, “No” in 
response to the questions in Section 23 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity. She did 
not list her use of marijuana on four occasions between 2008 and 2013 and her single 
purchase of marijuana in 2009. Applicant told the investigator that she did not list her 
marijuana use because she misunderstood the question. She believed that marijuana 
was legal and that the purpose of the question was to list more serious drugs. (Item 3 at 
 
4 
5). Her answers in the SOR and the Response to the FORM are consistent with this 
explanation. (Item 1 at 5; Item 6 at 2) 
 
 In the same e-QIP application, in response to Section 26 – Financial Record 
….Taxes, Applicant answered “No” in response to the question: “In the past seven (7) 
years, have you failed to file or pay Federal, state, or other taxes when required by law 
or ordinance?” She failed to disclose that she had not filed her income taxes for the 
2012 tax year. Applicant told the investigator that she misunderstood the question. She 
thought she could answer, “No” because she intended to file her 2012 federal income 
taxes with her 2013 federal income taxes. (Item 1 at 8) In her response to the FORM, 
Applicant states:  
 
There were some questions that I misunderstood on the questionnaire but 
before being presented with any evidence by the investigator I told him 
what I misunderstood. I didn’t want him to think I was blatantly lying about 
anything that occurred in my life. I learn from my mistakes so that I never 
make them again. (Item 6 at 2)  
 
 Applicant provided a letter from her supervisor. Her supervisor states Applicant 
was hired in September 2013. She joined her team in May 2014. Applicant is described 
as “organized, efficient, and willing to do whatever is needed to get a particular task 
finished.” Her supervisor notes that Applicant has always displayed a high degree of 
integrity and responsibility. She has a cooperative attitude and creates a good rapport 
with the employees. (Item 6 at 21)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
 
5 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding sensitive information.  
 
Here the evidence supports a conclusion that the Applicant has a history of 
financial problems or difficulties. The guideline notes several conditions that could raise 
trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶ 19. Three are applicable in this case:   
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
6 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
 Applicant accumulated four delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay 
her financial obligations. (The SOR alleged six delinquent debts, but SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 
and 1.g  are the same account.)  The debts total approximately $2,267. She also failed 
to file her 2012 federal income tax returns. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant’s financial problems were the result of being laid off from her full-time 
job in May 2013. She was unemployed for two months. Prior to that time, Applicant 
struggled to make ends meet. She worked part-time jobs in addition to her full-time job. 
Considering the challenges Applicant faced over the past several years, the total 
amount of delinquent debt is relatively minor. This indicates that Applicant did not live 
above her means. She resolved most of her delinquent debts. She filed her 2012 
federal income tax returns. AG ¶ 20(a) applies because Applicant’s past financial 
problems do not cast doubt about her current reliability and good judgment.  
 
  AG ¶ 20(b) applies because Applicant’s financial problems were the result of 
working low-wage positions and being laid off in May 2013.  Although she struggled 
financially, she kept her delinquent debts to a minimum. She subsequently resolved 
most of her delinquent accounts.  She filed her 2012 federal income tax returns. It is 
unclear whether she owes any taxes for 2012.  However, Applicant is likely to resolve 
her tax debt based on her track record of resolving her other delinquent debts. Applicant 
took responsible actions when dealing with her financial situation. 
 
7 
  AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies because it appears Applicant’s financial problems are 
being resolved and are under control. This mitigating condition is given less weight 
because there is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. Finally, AG ¶ 
20(d) applies because Applicant made a good-faith effort to resolve her delinquent 
debts. She provided copies of her credit reports, dated June 2, 2015. There are no 
longer any negative entries in her credit report aside from a student loan. However, that 
entry indicates Applicant is paying her student loans as agreed.   
   
  Applicant is in control of her financial situation. The concerns under financial 
considerations are mitigated.   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (E.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) (any drug abuse); and 
 
AG & 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia). 
 
Applicant used marijuana on four occasions between 2008 to August 2013. All of 
the uses occurred when she was socializing with friends. AG & 25(a) applies. AG & 
25(c) also applies because Applicant purchased a small amount of marijuana on one 
occasion.   
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
 
8 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to the Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
 
AG & 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
   
 AG ¶ 26(a) applies because Applicant’s drug use was infrequent. She used 
marijuana on four occasions over a five-year period. Her last use of marijuana was 
almost two years ago. She never used marijuana while employed with her current 
employer.  She understands the adverse consequences illegal marijuana use will have 
on her career. She is unlikely to return to marijuana use.  
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) applies because Applicant no longer associates with the friends with 
whom she used marijuana. In fact, she lives a different city. It has been almost two 
years since her last use of marijuana. While Applicant did not provide a signed 
statement of intent acknowledging automatic revocation for any violation, she expressed 
an intent to not use marijuana in the future in her answer to the SOR and in her 
response to the FORM.  Applicant is now employed in a responsible position. She 
indicated that she now has a family and a son. She is focused on her future. Applicant 
met her burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement.  
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
9 
 The following disqualifying condition applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
  
 Applicant is alleged to have deliberately omitted her illegal marijuana use and 
purchase of marijuana in response to Section 23 of her e-QIP application dated 
December 19, 2013. She is also alleged to have deliberately omitted that she failed to 
file her 2012 federal income tax return in response to Section 26 of the same e-QIP 
application. Applicant said that she did not give the correct information, because she 
misunderstood both questions. She immediately volunteered the information to the 
investigator who interviewed in conjunction with her background investigation. I find 
Applicant’s explanations credible. This was her first time completing the e-QIP 
application. If a person is not familiar with the trustworthiness process, it can be 
confusing.   
   
 Even if one were to conclude that Applicant deliberately falsified her e-QIP 
application, the following mitigating conditions would apply: AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts) or AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so 
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). Applicant volunteered her 
marijuana use and the fact that she failed to file her 2012 federal income tax returns to 
the investigator during her background interview. Now having completed her first 
trustworthiness determination, Applicant understands the importance of providing full 
disclosure to the Government. Applicant’s omissions on her e-QIP application no longer 
raise questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
10 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered the favorable recommendation of Applicant’s supervisor, and  
Applicant’s candor regarding her drug use and financial issues.  Like many young 
adults, Applicant struggled to find suitable employment for several years in her twenties. 
She worked low-paying jobs and obtained part-time jobs to supplement her income. Her 
financial situation was aggravated when she lost her full-time job in May 2013. She 
finally found suitable employment when she was hired by her current company in 
September 2013 and her position was converted to full-time in May 2014. Applicant 
developed a plan to resolve her delinquent debts. She filed her 2012 federal income tax 
returns. Her current credit reports have no negative entries. She steadily worked on 
resolving her delinquent debts and her financial situation is more stable. She used 
marijuana sporadically over a five-year period. She no longer uses marijuana and 
understands the adverse consequences marijuana use would have on her job and her 
future.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant’s application for a trustworthiness position should be granted.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Erin C. Hogan 
Administrative Judge 
