 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-02074 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstorm, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 11, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 16, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
recommended that her case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether her clearance should be granted, continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 31, 2014 and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated February 23, 2015, was provided to her by letter dated March 
4, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on March 25, 2014. She was afforded a period of 
30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant timely submitted additional information within the allotted period of 30 days 
after receipt of a copy of the FORM. Department Counsel subsequently indicated that 
he had no objection to Applicant’s additional information. On May 5, 2015, the case was 
assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. She did, however, take exception 
to the total loan balance of $4,254 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, but agreed that she was more 
than 120 past-due in the amount of $410. After a thorough review of the record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information1 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old security assistant employed by a defense contractor 
since October 2010. She seeks a security clearance in conjunction with her current 
employment. (Item 4)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 2003. She attended college level 
courses from 2003 to 2005, in 2006, in 2007, and in 2009, and has not yet earned a 
degree. Applicant is unmarried and has no dependents. (Items 4, 8) She did not serve 
in the armed forces. (Item 4) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR contains 13 allegations under this concern alleging one 
judgment, two past-due accounts, and ten collection accounts. Applicant provided little 
information regarding the status of these debts and Department Counsel prepared a 
FORM taking into account an SOR response with little or no mitigating evidence. In 
Applicant’s FORM response, she provided mitigating evidence that supported recent 
and partial efforts to address some, but not all of her long standing debts.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Judgment filed in 2012 in favor of an insurance company for $3,782. 
As of April 2015, Applicant made a $600 payment in September 2013 and claimed she 
made a $600 payment in August 2014, and a $100 payment in March 2015, and would 
make a $100 payment in April 2015. She stated her balance as of March 2015 was 
                                                          
1
The FORM contains limited facts regarding Applicant, precluding the development of a more 
comprehensive Background Information section. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
$2,230. Documentation provided by Applicant supported the August 2014 $600 
payment and the remaining payment information was noted by handwritten notes on a 
February 25, 2015 debt collection letter from the creditor. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. 
(FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – Past-due amount of $410 on student loan balance of $4,254. 
Applicant’s October 2014 credit report shows this account has been delinquent since 
January 2013. Applicant submitted a creditor letter dated March 16, 2015 showing an 
amount of $572 past-due. The letter summarized an agreement between the creditor 
and Applicant that she would make $66 payments for six months and after the 6th 
payment, the creditor would contact her to discuss payment of the remaining balance 
due. The first $66 payment was to be made by April 17, 2015. No documentation of 
payment in the FORM. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. (Item 5, FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – Collection account for a student loan account for $3,125. Account 
paid in full as of January 2015. DEBT RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Collection account owed to a state government for $1,869. 
Applicant’s September 2013 credit report lists this account as having been placed in 
collections. Applicant did not provide any documentation regarding this debt. DEBT 
NOT RESOLVED. (FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – Past-due amount of $500 on student loan balance of $658. 
Applicant’s October 2014 credit report lists this account as having been placed in 
collections with a balance of $708. Applicant did not provide any documentation 
regarding this debt. DEBT NOT RESOLVED. (Item 5, FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – Collection account owed to a local government for $459. Applicant’s 
October 2014 credit report lists this account as having been charged off in the amount 
of $502 having been delinquent since July 2010. Applicant did not provide any 
documentation regarding this debt. DEBT NOT RESOLVED. (Item 5, FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – Collection account owed to an insurance company for $482. 
Applicant’s September 2013 credit report lists this account as having been placed in 
collections for $482 in October 2012. Applicant did not provide any documentation 
regarding this debt. DEBT NOT RESOLVED. (Item 6, FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – Collection account owed to an insurance company for $389. This 
debt appears to be a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. DUPLICATE DEBT. 
(Item 6, FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – Collection account owed to third party creditor for a checking account 
for $383. Applicant’s September 2013 credit report lists this account as having been 
placed in collections for $383 in August 2010. Applicant provided documentation that 
she made two $20 payments in February 2015 and March 2015 with a balance of $228. 
She stated her next payment was due on April 25, 2015. DEBT BEING RESOLVED. 
(Item 6; FORM response) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
SOR ¶ 1.j – Collection account owed to a local government for $250. Applicant’s 
September 2013 credit report lists this account as having been placed in collections in 
July 2012 for $250. Applicant did not provide any documentation regarding this debt. 
DEBT NOT RESOLVED. (Item 6, FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k – Collection account owed to a local government for $250. Applicant’s 
September 2013 credit report lists this account as having been placed in collections in 
June 2012 for $250. Applicant did not provide any documentation regarding this debt. 
DEBT NOT RESOLVED. (Item 6, FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l – Collection account owed to a local government for $205. Applicant’s 
September 2013 credit report lists this account as having been placed in collections in 
September 2013 for $205. Applicant did not provide any documentation regarding this 
debt. DEBT NOT RESOLVED. (Item 6, FORM response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m – Collection account owed to an insurance company for $177. 
Applicant’s September 2013 credit report lists this account as having been placed in 
collections in January 2013 for $177. Applicant did not provide any documentation 
regarding this debt. DEBT NOT RESOLVED. (Item 6, FORM response) 
 
Department Counsel noted in his FORM that Applicant’s October 2014 credit 
report identified three new collection accounts. One account is for a cell phone company 
in the amount of $648, which she disputes; a second account is for a student loan for 
$5,056, which she recently began making payments on; and a third account is for a 
another cell phone company in the amount of $1,050. Applicant did not provide any 
documentation showing that she successfully disputed the $648 cell phone bill nor did 
she provide any documentation that she had resolved the $1,050 cell phone bill. (Item 
5, FORM response) 
 
The FORM contains limited information regarding the circumstances that led to 
Applicant’s financial difficulties. During her December 2013 Office of Personnel 
Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI), Applicant stated that she 
experienced three brief periods of unemployment in 2010, 2008, and 2007. She 
received unemployment insurance in 2010 and was supported by her parents in 2008 
and 2007. (Item 8) The FORM does not contain information about the effect her 
unemployment had on her ability to pay her bills or what steps she took to remain in 
contact with her creditors. I note that Applicant has been working full time since October 
2010. 
 
During her OPM PSI, Applicant stated that was seeking credit counseling in 
December 2013 to restore her credit and initiate a debt payment plan. (Item 8) The 
FORM does not contain any further information regarding financial counseling. She 
further stated in her OPM PSI that she planned to obtain her credit report, contact her 
creditors, and set up payment plans. Applicant added that she had a change of attitude 
about debt because she is getting older, wants to own a home, and her debt is affecting 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
her employment. She did not previously address her debt because she was financially 
irresponsible. (Item 8) The FORM does not contain any character evidence. 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports.  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions above are applicable or partially applicable 
to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern except for AG ¶ 20(d) as it 
pertains to SOR ¶ 1.c. The available information shows that Applicant has taken little 
affirmative action to resolve her delinquent debts until recently and well after she was 
made aware that her financial situation posed a security concern. 
 
With that said, a security clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts.3 Rather 
the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
consistent with the security guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, 
the Appeal Board has established the following standard: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish that [she] has paid off each and every debt listed in the 
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that [she] has 
established a plan to resolve [her] financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the 
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating 
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of [her] 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
                                                          
2
  See ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
3
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR.4 
 
Applicant is to be commended for her recent effort to regain financial 
responsibility at least with regard to some of her debts. Unfortunately, this recent effort 
does not establish a track record especially with a number of debts that have been 
neglected throughout the years. In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant 
chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient 
information or evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding her circumstances, articulate her position, and mitigate the financial security 
concerns. She failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding her past efforts to address a majority of her delinquent debt. By failing to 
provide such information, and in relying on a limited explanation without sufficient 
corroborating evidence, financial considerations security concerns remain. 
  
One additional comment is worthy of note. Applicant’s loyalty and patriotism are 
not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of the Executive Order 10865 specifically 
provides that industrial security decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
loyalty and patriotism. Nothing in this decision should be considered to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied decision as to 
an applicant’s loyalty or patriotism.  
 
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,5 I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the Guideline F security concern. 
Accordingly, Applicant has not met her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
The fformal findings on the SOR are as follows: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
                                                          
4
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotation marks omitted). 
 
5
 AG ¶ 2(a) (1)-(9). 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Subparagraphs 1.d - 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Duplicate 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
