 
1 
 
 
             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05672 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 11, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2004 and discharged his debts on 
December 2004. Applicant is currently delinquent on five debts, in the total amount of 
$48,918. His debts have not been resolved. The security concern raised by Applicant’s 
failure to disclose his debts on his electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) 
was mitigated because the failure to list them was unintentional. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the financial concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 27, 2012, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. On December 31, 2014, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 10, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 24, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 24, 2015, scheduling the hearing for April 22, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5. All were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and offered four exhibits marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through E, which were 
admitted without objection from Department Counsel.1 The record was left open for 
receipt of additional documentation. On April 23, 2015, Applicant submitted a two-page 
fax, marked AE F. Department Counsel had no objections to AE F, and it was admitted. 
The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 30, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 64 years old. He is a high school graduate and earned an 
associate’s degree in 1972. He worked as a Federal civil servant from 1997 until he 
retired in 2010. He was unemployed for ten-to-eleven months. In approximately 
December 2010 he and his wife purchased a restaurant. He financed the restaurant 
purchase through the proceeds from the sale of a home, his credit cards, and personal 
loans from friends. The restaurant failed, and Applicant sought work as a Government 
contractor in 2012. However, he was terminated from several Government contractor 
positions for his failure to obtain a security clearance. He was unemployed all of 2014. 
He was hired by another Government contractor in January 2015 and seeks a security 
clearance in connection with that job. He is married to his second wife and has a 
daughter.2 (GE 1; AE A; AE C; AE D; Tr. 32-40.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Paragraph 1 of 
the SOR alleged that Applicant discharged debt in his 2004 Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and 
is delinquent on five debts, in the total amount of $48,918. Applicant admitted the debts 
alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f. (Tr. 9-12.)  He denied falsifying his e-
QIP as alleged in SOR subparagraph 2.a. The alleged debts were listed on credit 
reports dated July 11, 2012; September 8, 2014; and March 11, 2015. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 
5.) 
Applicant testified that due to his 2003 divorce, he was unable to resolve his 
debts. As a result he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2004. The bankruptcy was 
discharged in December 2004. (Tr. 58.) 
                                                          
1 AE E, ten pages of leave and earnings statements, was returned to Applicant during the hearing for his reference. 
(Tr. 61.) He failed to return it to the Court after the hearing. On June 4, 2015, I called and emailed Applicant to 
request he resubmit AE E, in its entirety. On June 8, 2015, he submitted a five page exhibit. When I inquired further 
about the five additional missing pages, he indicated he wished to withdraw the missing pages. Department Counsel 
had no objection to the withdrawal of the five missing pages, and AE E was amended to a five page exhibit. 
2 Applicant failed to identify any children on his e-QIP, however he testified he has a daughter that is a senior in 
high school. (Tr. 87.) 
 
3 
 
Applicant is indebted for delinquent mortgage payments in the amount of 
$40,985, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. This debt is for the principal mortgage 
on his residence, and is now approximately $507,000 past due. While Applicant had the 
restaurant in 2011 or 2012, he sometimes diverted his mortgage payment money to 
help try to keep the restaurant business operational.  Applicant stopped paying this 
mortgage when he could no longer afford the payments in July 2012. Applicant has 
been in contact with this creditor and hopes to get a mortgage modification. He still 
resides in the home. The home was scheduled for a foreclosure sale on May 18, 2015. 
Applicant still hoped to reach a modification agreement on the delinquent mortgage at 
the time of the hearing. In his post-hearing exhibit, Applicant presented a letter dated 
April 6, 2015, which indicated the mortgage holder had received Applicant’s modification 
application, but no further status was given. This debt is unresolved. (GE 3; AE B; AE F; 
Tr. 33, 44-50, 92.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection company in the amount of $3,170, as alleged 
in SOR subparagraph 1.b. This debt was for a credit card that became delinquent in 
2012. Applicant testified that he sent this creditor a letter a month prior to the hearing, 
offering to settle the debt. He has not received a reply to his letter. He did not provide a 
copy of the letter into evidence. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 53-55.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a bank in the amount of $2,590, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.c. This debt was for a credit card. Applicant testified that he has been 
unable to locate the account holder. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 56-57.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the amount of 
$1,181, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d. Applicant has not attempted to contact 
this creditor. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 57.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a communications company in the amount of $992, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e. Applicant attempted to contact this creditor a month 
prior to the hearing and was told the debt had been placed with a collection company.  
He has not received anything from the collection company. This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 
57-58.) 
 
Applicant has not taken any financial counseling. Applicant’s take-home pay is 
currently $8,300 per month, although he has only been making this amount for the past 
two months. (TR. 63-64.) His expenses are $1,020 per month. He calculated he has a 
surplus of $7,200 per month, although part of that surplus goes toward paying for a new 
vehicle Applicant acquired in 2014 for his daughter. He also anticipates an additional 
monthly expense for his daughter’s college tuition, beginning August 2015. He intends 
to use the remaining surplus to resolve his debts. (AE E; Tr. 83-91, 99.) 
 
In Applicant’s June 27, 2012 e-QIP, section 26 asked “Other than previously 
listed, have any of the following happened?  In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency? . . . In the past (7) years, have you been over 
180 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered? [and] You are currently over 
120 days delinquent on any debt?” He answered, “No,” to these questions, and failed to 
 
4 
 
disclose the debts listed above. He testified that he thought he had listed the debts on 
his e-QIP, and genuinely seemed confused as to why they were not identified. He also 
had other unintentional omissions on his e-QIP like his failure to list his daughter and 
parts of his work history. (GE 1; Tr. 67-77.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
  
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is delinquent on five debts, in the total amount of $48,918. The majority 
of his SOR-listed debt has been delinquent since 2012. He has a history of 
indebtedness that extends as far back as 2004, when he filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
Despite discharging his delinquencies in 2004, he subsequently accumulated a 
significant amount of unpaid debt. He demonstrated both a history of not addressing 
debts and an inability or unwillingness to do so over a substantial period. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following Financial Considerations mitigating conditions (MC) under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant incurred substantial delinquent debt over the past four years, which 
continue to date despite his recent employment status. He offered no evidence from 
which to establish a track record of debt resolution. While the restaurant business’ 
failure was a condition beyond his control and contributed to his financial problems, he 
failed to show that he acted responsibly under such circumstances. He has not received 
financial counseling and his financial problems are not under control. There has been 
no good-faith effort to address his debts. MC 20(e) requires documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of a dispute concerning an alleged debt, and Applicant admitted 
all of the alleged delinquencies. Accordingly, the record is insufficient to establish 
mitigation under any of the foregoing provisions concerning his financial irresponsibility. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to disclose the SOR-listed debts on his e-QIP. However, his 
omissions were unintentional. He testified he thought he had listed his debts on the e-
QIP. Given his demeanor, his long history of Federal service, and other unintentional 
omissions on his e-QIP, I find AG ¶ 16 (a) was not fully established. 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate sufficient mitigating information in this 
case and he has failed to meet that burden. Overall, he has not demonstrated that he 
has acted responsibly with respect to his finances. Applicant’s inability to resolve his 
financial obligations raises concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
follow rules and regulations necessary to protect classified information. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant has not mitigated the 
Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
