 
1 
 
 
             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04226 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 5, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was delinquent on six debts, in the total amount of $106,995. He 
resolved three of them. He failed to document any effort to resolve the remaining three 
totaling $106,698. Additionally, security concerns were raised because Applicant 
intentionally failed to disclose his debts on his electronic security clearance application 
(e-QIP). Applicant failed to mitigate the financial and personal conduct concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2012, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. On December 5, 2014, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 16, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 18, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 6, 2015, scheduling the hearing for April 21, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4. All were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
offered ten exhibits marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through J, which were admitted 
without objection from Department Counsel. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on April 27, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 36 years old. He served on active duty in the Marine Corps from 
1997 to 2002, and received an honorable discharge at the pay grade of E-4. He worked 
for a government contractor from 2002 to 2006. He has been employed in his current 
position with a government contractor since April 2006. He is married to his second wife 
and has one minor child. (GE 1; AE E; Tr. 31, 53.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR alleged 
that Applicant is delinquent on six debts, in the total amount of $106,995. In his Answer, 
Applicant admitted the debts alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b. He denied the 
debts alleged in subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f; and the e-QIP falsification 
concerning these debts alleged in subparagraph 2.a. The alleged debts were listed on 
credit reports dated May 5, 2012; February 11, 2014; and February 2, 2015. (Answer; 
GE 2; GE 3; GE 4.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a mortgage in the amount of $101,160, as stated in SOR 
subparagraph 1.a. In March 2005 Applicant purchased a condominium for $455,000. He 
financed the purchase with a primary loan of $364,000 and a secondary loan of 
$91,000. The secondary mortgage is the subject of this allegation. He claims he was 
lied to about the terms of both mortgages, which included balloon payments that made 
his payments increase from $2,000 per month to $4,000 per month in March 2007. He 
defaulted on both loans in March 2007. The home was foreclosed upon by the primary 
lender in January 2008. Applicant received a 1099-A from that creditor, which he 
submitted into evidence. He presented no documentation pertaining to the second 
mortgage, but claimed it was cancelled. He testified he only keeps financial records for 
three to four years. Applicant failed to meet his burden to show this debt is resolved. 
(GE 3; AE F; AE I; Tr. 32-33, 37-49, 54.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent vehicle loan in the amount of $4,755, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. This was for a vehicle that was repossessed after his 
ex-wife failed to make payments on it. He testified that he was current on the payments 
until the time of their divorce. This vehicle loan was assigned to his ex-wife as part of 
their divorce settlement. He helped the creditor locate the vehicle so it could be 
 
3 
 
repossessed, but made no payments on this debt after the divorce. He presented a 
petition for divorce, but failed to present an order from the court showing the disposition 
of marital property. He understood that he could pay the debt himself and then seek a 
judgment against his ex-wife. He has chosen not to do so. (GE 3; AE G; Tr. 35, 49-53, 
57-58.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection agent for a cellular phone company in the 
amount of $132, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.c. Applicant initially contested this 
debt, but on December 15, 2014, he paid it. Applicant’s February 2015 credit report 
reflects this debt as “paid collection.” It is resolved. (GE 4; AE J; Tr. 34-35, 58-59.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for a medical debt in the amount of 
$783, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d. This debt was incurred when Applicant 
required an ambulance ride in 2006. He believed the ride should have been paid for by 
his health insurance. He testified he called the collection agent and was told that the 
account was no longer active. He stated that the creditor was unwilling to accept 
payment on this charged-off debt. He failed to produce documentation from this creditor 
to substantiate his claims. (GE 2; AE D; Tr. 29-30.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on two delinquent parking tickets in the amounts of $36 
and $129, as alleged respectively in SOR subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f. These debts were 
incurred after Applicant sold the vehicle, but the title transfer was not properly recorded. 
Applicant repaid both debts in full on April 30, 2013, and May 22, 2013. He presented 
two letters from this creditor as evidence these debts were resolved. He also presented 
a letter from the vehicle’s new owner acknowledging that she in fact incurred the debt, 
and repaid Applicant after he resolved the tickets. (AE H; AE I; Tr. 34.) 
 
In Applicant’s April 26, 2012 e-QIP, section 26 asked “Other than previously 
listed, have any of the following happened?  In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency? . . . In the past (7) years, have you been over 
180 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered? [and] You are currently over 
120 days delinquent on any debt?” He answered “No” to these questions, and failed to 
disclose the debts listed above. He testified that he was unaware of the parking tickets 
and he thought his other delinquent debts were older than seven years, so he did not 
need to disclose them. His testimony was not credible. (Tr. 36-37, 55, 62.) 
 
 Applicant has a credit score of 748 out of 818. He testified that he pays his debts 
in a responsible manner. He did not present a budget, account statements, or asset 
statements to further demonstrate his financial status. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant’s performance reviews show he is a valued employee. His supervisor 
and another manager wrote complimentary letters of support on Applicant’s behalf, 
attesting to his dedication, quality of work, and ability to follow procedural guidelines. 
Among his decorations and medals awarded during his military service, Applicant was 
awarded the National Defense Service Medal, the Marine Corps Good Conduct Medal, 
the Navy Unit Commendation, and the Meritorious Unit Commendation. (AE B; AE C; 
AE D; AE E; Tr. 26-28.) 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
  
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was delinquent on six debts, in the total amount of $106,995. The 
majority of his debt has been delinquent for over five years. He demonstrated both a 
history of not addressing debts and an inability or unwillingness to do so over a 
substantial period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following Financial Considerations mitigating conditions (MC) under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant met his burden to show he acted responsibly and resolved three of the 
six debts, identified in SOR subparagraphs 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f. He failed to adequately 
address his three largest debts, identified in SOR subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d. The 
record evidence reflects these debts are recent and ongoing. There is no indication that 
the circumstances under which they arose have changed. He therefore failed to fully 
establish substantial mitigation under MC 20(a).  
 
 Applicant offered insufficient evidence to support significant mitigation under MC 
20(b). He attributed the delinquencies to an unfair mortgage, a divorce, and a medical 
billing issue. His unwillingness to resolve the three remaining debts, and instead rely on 
the charge-off or cancellation of those debts, does not demonstrate responsible action 
under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling. He failed to substantiate 
his claims that the creditors in SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.d are no longer collecting 
those debts. He is still liable for the debt in subparagraph 1.b. These facts preclude full 
mitigation under MC 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
 Applicant claimed to have a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of his 
medical debt. However, he failed to provide documented proof to substantiate the basis 
of his dispute, or provide recent documentation of the actions he has taken to resolve 
those issues. MC 20(e) does not fully apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant failed to disclose the SOR-listed debts on his e-QIP. He clearly knew 
he had mortgage debts that were delinquent within the seven-year time frame. Yet, he 
willfully chose not to include them on the e-QIP. This behavior indicates questionable 
judgment and untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, none were 
established in this case. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct 
his falsification or concealment. He provided no information that indicates he was ill-
advised in completing his SF 86. Falsifying material information is a serious offense and 
Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. 
Further, he failed to take responsibility for his actions. He has not provided sufficient 
evidence to meet his burden of proof for his personal conduct. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is respected by those that wrote letters on his behalf. He served 
honorably in the Marine Corps, and has successfully held a security clearance without 
incident in the past. However, Applicant has the burden to demonstrate sufficient 
mitigating information in this case and he has failed to meet that burden. Overall, he has 
not demonstrated that he has acted responsibly with respect to his finances. He was 
unable to support his claims with documentation. Applicant’s inability to resolve his 
financial obligations raises concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
follow rules and regulations necessary to protect classified information. Further, his 
veracity and personal conduct are a concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations or Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
