1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-03150
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 23, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On October 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992) (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On October 28, 2014, Applicant furnished a reply to the SOR (RSOR) in writing,
and she requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.
(Item 2.) On March 3, 2014, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case.
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In
the FORM, Department Counsel offered five documentary exhibits. (Items 1-5.)
Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on May 1, 2015. Applicant did not
submit additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on May
2
21, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 60 years old. She is married to her second husband. Applicant is
employed as an electronic assembly specialist by a defense contractor, and she seeks a
DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense sector. (Item
3.)
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 21 allegations (1.a. through 1.u.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically a bankruptcy and overdue debts. The debts listed on the SOR total more
than $30,000.
1.a.  The SOR alleges that Applicant filed a Chapter 7 Bankruptcy on or about
April 2006. The bankruptcy discharged Applicant’s debts in September 2006. Applicant
admitted this allegation in her RSOR. (Item 2.)
1.b.- 1.u. The SOR cites 20 overdue debts owed by Applicant, and as discussed
above, totaling more than $30,000. In her RSOR, Applicant admitted each SOR
allegation. She wrote that some of the allegations appear to be duplicates. (Item 2.)
However, Applicant failed to provide any evidence to show that any of these debts ewere
duplicates. Credit reports, dated April 9, 2014, and March 20, 2013, establish that each
of these debts is overdue. (Items 4, 5.)
In her RSOR, Applicant writes that she takes full responsibility for the debts listed
on the SOR. She added that she is not making excuses for not being as financially
responsible as she wishes she could be. She added that the overdue debts did not come
out of her living beyond her means, “but just by living.” Finally, Applicant wrote that she
and her husband are working to repair their past financial problems and not repeat past
mistakes. (Item 2.) There has been no evidence introduced to show Applicant had
contacted any of the creditors, or made any attempt to resolve or reduce any of her
overdue debts. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
3
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
A person wh applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of
the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
4
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, which has not been satisfied. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Since
Applicant provided no explanation for her financial difficulties that would come within this
mitigating condition, and no evidence was introduced to show that she has been
responsible in resolving her debts, I do not find that this mitigating condition is a factor for
consideration in this case.
AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable, since Applicant has not “initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve” all of her overdue debts. I do not find
that any other mitigation condition applies to this case.
Finally, no evidence was introduced to establish Applicant will be able to pay off
her past debts or keep up to date on her current debts and expenses. Therefore, I find
that Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Consideration concerns, which are found
against Applicant. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
5
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and no mitigating conditions are applicable, I
find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1u.: Against  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
