The record  consists of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-3, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-J.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
      )
XXXXXXXXX, Xxxx Xxxxxx  )      ISCR Case No. 14-03688
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Gregory F. Greiner, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 26 September 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued an SOR to
Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations.2
Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 27 March 2015, and I
convened a hearing 20 May 2015. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 28 May 2015.
2
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, except for SOR 1.o. He is a 34-year-old
senior systems engineer employed as a defense contractor since November 2005.
Applicant seeks to retain the clearance he was granted at that time.
The SOR alleges and Government exhibits (GE 1-3) establish 16 delinquent
debts totaling over $44,000. Applicant admits all the debts except for a $34 medical bill,
which he denies because he does not believe that he had any medical expenses during
the time alleged by the debt. Applicant claims to have paid the $78 insurance bill (SOR
1.n) in 2010, and asserts that the company has no record this debt. He paid the January
2005 judgment (SOR 1.p) in July 2012 (AE C).
The remaining 13 delinquent debts are for Federally-guaranteed student loans
incurred by Applicant. Applicant attended a regular university from August 1999 to May
2004, but left school without obtaining a degree. The financial records do not indicate if
Applicant incurred any student loan debt during this time. Applicant then attended a
technical college from July 2004 to December 2006, again without obtaining a degree.
Applicant funded this education through Federal loans, the delinquency of which is at
issue in this case. Applicant also attended a third school from January 2007 to
December 2007, again without obtaining a degree. Applicant appears to have funded
this education with loans, none of which are delinquent.
According to Applicant’s April 2014 credit report (GE 3), Applicant originally
borrowed about $16,000 from Wells Fargo Education Financial Services beginning in
September 2004. He received two loan disbursements in September 2004, two in June
2005, one in October 2005, and one in June 2006. The six disbursements each had a
different account number. Wells Fargo reported the six accounts in a satisfactory
payment status to TransUnion and Experian—two of the major credit reporting
agencies—when the accounts were transferred to another lender. Because the
accounts were reported in good standing, and were transferred to another lender, the
only financial information reported in these entries is the original loan amount (high
credit).
Because Applicant remained in school through the end of 2007, he was eligible
for a series of deferments on repayment of his education loans. Once he finished
school, he would have been entitled to a grace period before beginning repayment of
his loans. By Applicant’s admission, he did not begin repayment on the loans (Tr. 37-
38).
In November 2008, Educational Credit Management Corporation (ECMC)—the
Government’s clearing house agent for delinquent student loans—reported acquiring 11
delinquent student loans for Applicant (GE 3). Five loans were specifically referenced as
being Wells Fargo loans, but with different account numbers than used by Wells Fargo
when it issued the loans. The five loans had an identical account number, coupled with
distinct suffixes. The listed suffixes ran from -51 to -56, apparently omitting account -55.
The five ECMC-W ells Fargo entries repeat on Applicant’s March 2015 credit report (GE 2), which contains3
only entries reported by Equifax. However, the ECMC entries for its ECMC-assigned account numbers have
been deleted. Appearing for the first time are six Navient entries, each with a new account number and
suffixes -012 to -062. Although the balances for each account differ from both the ECMC-W ells Fargo and
ECMC-Only accounts alleged in the SOR, the high credit amounts for each account exactly match the original
high credit amounts initially reported by W ells Fargo in 2006. Similarly, Applicant’s May 2015 TransUnion
credit report (AE A) and his May 2015 Equifax report (AE B) report high credit amounts that exactly match the
amounts originally reported by W ells Fargo.
3
 
ECMC reported these five accounts to Equifax—the third major credit reporting
agency—as 120 days or greater past due as of February 2011. These five delinquent
accounts are alleged at SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.j, and 1.l.
Simultaneously with acquiring the Wells Fargo accounts, ECMC reported
acquiring six other education debts in November 2008, each with an ECMC-assigned
account number, beginning with a base number and suffixes -01 to -06. ECMC reported
these six accounts to TransUnion, Experian, and Equifax in collection as of April 2014.
These six delinquent accounts are alleged at SOR 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, and 1.m.
Although ECMC did not specifically relate these six accounts to the Wells Fargo
accounts, an April 2015 ECMC letter to Applicant (AE F) references disbursements -01
to -06 as reported by ECMC on Applicant’s April 2014 credit report, but reports
disbursement dates that correspond precisely with the origination dates initially reported
by Wells Fargo in the same credit report.  The April 2015 ECMC letter reports to3
Applicant that his six delinquent loans were rehabilitated, repurchased by SLM (Student
Loan Marketing) Trusts and assigned to Navient Solutions—the Government’s clearing
house agent for student loans in good standing—on 30 June 2014. In April 2015 Wells
Fargo confirmed to Applicant that they were not servicing any loans for Applicant (AE
G).
Based on my assessment of the credit reports and Applicant’s exhibits, I
conclude that SOR debts 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.j, and 1.l. duplicate of five of the six SOR debts
1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, and 1.m. As SOR debts 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, and 1.m present a
clearer picture of Applicant’s delinquent loans, I resolve SOR debts 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.j,
and 1.l. for Applicant.
 In addition to his Federally-guaranteed loans, Applicant also took out education
loans directly with the Government (SOR 1.g and 1.I) that later fell delinquent. Applicant
paid these loans in April 2015 (AE E), with money he borrowed from his parents, who
expect to be repaid (Tr. 39, 44).
       Applicant states that when his loans came due in 2008, he was not making
enough money to begin repayment on them, and did not want to tell his lenders that he
could not pay. However, he acknowledges receiving dunning notices from Wells Fargo
and ECMC with instructions about how to contact them and make payment
arrangements on his defaulted loans (Tr. 45-46). He claims, without corroboration, to
have had a repayment plan on one of his loans in 2011 that he was unable to keep up
on. It was not until November 2014, that he got the ECMC loans placed into
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;5
4
 
forbearance with Navient (Tr. 40), and it was not until 2015 that he borrowed money to
pay the direct student loans.
Applicant provided no work or character references. Applicant currently makes
$90,000 annually. Since going to work for his employer in November 2005, he has
received regular promotions and pay raises. Applicant and his wife currently net about
$8,200 monthly, and have a $3,500 monthly budget. He does not know what the
monthly payment on his educational loans will be when the forbearance ends in August
2015.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, disputed facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the
burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Between at least October 2007 and
November 2014, Applicant failed to keep up with his financial obligations to stay current
on his educational loan payments, despite possessing the apparent means to do so.5
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is unlikely to recur . . . ;
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;8
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications9
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
5
 
Even accepting Applicant’s claim that he could not make the required loan payments in
2008 when loan repayment was scheduled to begin, he made no effort to contact his
lenders at that time. When he began to make more money, he did not contact his
lenders. He took no action to address his delinquent loans until after he received the
SOR.
The mitigating factors for financial considerations provide little help to Applicant.
His financial difficulties are recent and not infrequent, and the stated cause cannot be
considered unlikely to recur because Applicant took no steps to remain in contact with
his lenders.  Applicant’s claimed inability to pay in 2007 cannot be considered a6
circumstance beyond his control when he had been employed by his current employer
since November 2005 and made no effort to explain his financial situation to his lenders
when the loans first became due or as his financial situation improved over the years.
This is not responsible action in dealing with his delinquent debts.7
In addition, the payments he made on his direct loans and the reestablishment of
contact with ECMC and Navient do not constitute a good-faith effort to pay his creditors,
coming as they did well after he received the SOR.8
Finally, there is no indication that Applicant has received credit or financial
counseling. His loan payment has yet to be established, and obviously there is no track
record of repayment. Consequently, it is not clear regarding the education loans, that
the problem is being resolved.9
The concern with Applicant is that while he may credibly state his intent to avoid
financial problems in the future, and he may have the means overall to do so, he does
not actually have any track record of doing so. Further, Applicant has provided no
character and employment evidence upon which I could reasonably support a “whole-
person” analysis in favor of granting his clearance. I conclude Guideline F against
Applicant.
6
 
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-b, d, j, and l: For Applicant (duplicates)
Subparagraphs c, e-i, k, and m: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs n-p: For Applicant
Conclusion  
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
