Item 4.1
1
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-03457
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant falsified his 2013 security clearance application concerning his
substantial delinquent debt, which remains unresolved. Resulting security concerns
were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 29, 2013.  On1
October 28, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns
Items 1 and 2.2
Item 3. 3
Department Counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 7 is inadmissible and4
will not be considered or cited as evidence. It is an unsworn summary of an interview of Applicant that was
conducted by the Office of Personnel Management, on June 18, 2013.  This summary was not certified by
him to be accurate.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the
absence of adoption by Applicant or evidence from an authenticating witness. Applicant’s admissions, that
he made in Item 3, also make the contents of Item 7 cumulative.
Item 4.5
2
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  The2
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted a written response to the SOR on November 13, 2014, and
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record
without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on3
January 23, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was4
provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the
FORM.
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on March 23, 2015. He submitted no additional material in response to the FORM,
made no objection to consideration of any contents of the FORM, and did not request
additional time to respond. I received the case assignment on May 22, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 62 years old, and has worked for a defense contractor since May
2013. He is married, with two adult children. He earned a bachelor’s degree in
engineering in 1974, and an associate’s degree in quality assurance in 1983. He served
on active duty as a commissioned officer in the Army from 1974 to 1979, and then for
20 years in the Army Reserve. He was honorably discharged, and held a security
clearance throughout his military service.  5
Item 3.6
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d.7
SOR ¶ 1.e.8
SOR ¶ 1.a.9
Items 3, 4, 5, and 6.10
Items 3 and 4.11
3
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations concerning
his delinquent debts in SOR ¶ 1, but denied the allegation concerning his personal
conduct in SOR ¶ 2.  Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into the following findings6
of fact.
Applicant admitted the five delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, ranging from
$2,676 to $53,325, and totaling $105,395. Four of these debts, totaling just over
$52,000, became delinquent between August and November of 2008. Three of them
are charged-off credit card accounts,  and the fourth is a consumer debt that was7
placed for collection.  Applicant was employed as the Director of Operations for a8
company from September 2000 to March 2009, when he was laid off. He said that he
wanted to refinance his house to pay off credit card and student loan debts in 2008, but
was unable to do so because he had no more equity in the home. The remaining and
largest debt is a defaulted student loan that the record credit reports indicate was
opened in February 2010.  There is nothing in the record to indicate why Applicant took9
out this loan. During February 2010, he was Vice President of Operations for another
company.10
Applicant denied that he deliberately falsified his financial information by
answering, “No,” in response to the questions about delinquencies involving routine
accounts in Section 26 on his 2013 security clearance application. He said that he
believed that response to be true at the time. However, those questions asked about
delinquencies during the preceding seven years, and applicant admitted that he fell
behind on payments to his creditors in 2008 when he was unable to refinance his home
mortgage. He said that he contracted with a debt relief firm, and paid them over $18,000
to attempt to obtain negotiated settlements of his debts. He further said, “In time, I
stopped receiving notices and phone calls from my creditors. I saw this as a sign that
my debt issues were being resolved.”  11
The record does not address whether Applicant obtained financial counseling. He
offered no evidence showing a workable budget, from which his ability to resolve his
admitted delinquencies and avoid additional debt problems could be predicted with any
confidence. The record lacks evidence concerning the quality of Applicant’s professional
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. No character
witnesses provided statements describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or
4
reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Applicant admitted more than $105,000 in unresolved delinquent debts that he
incurred over the past seven years. He provided no corroboration for his claims to have
attempted resolution of these delinquencies through payments to a debt relief firm, or of
his present ability to live within his means. His ongoing pattern and history of inability or
unwillingness to pay lawful debts raises security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), and
shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
6
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant has incurred substantial delinquent debts over the past seven years,
which continue to date despite his recent employment status and claims of solvency. He
offered no evidence from which to establish a track record of debt resolution. He also
failed to demonstrate that conditions beyond his control contributed to his financial
problems or that he acted responsibly under such circumstances. MC 20(e) requires
documented proof to substantiate the basis of a dispute concerning an alleged debt,
and Applicant admitted all of the alleged delinquencies. Accordingly, the record is
insufficient to establish mitigation under any of the foregoing provisions concerning his
financial irresponsibility.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 sets forth one condition that describes security concerns that are
disqualifying with relation to the allegations in this case:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Applicant’s attempt to justify his false denial, on his security clearance
application, of his delinquent debts during the preceding seven years is not credible. He
admitted that he fell behind on numerous debts in 2008, when he was unable to
refinance and increase his mortgage debt in order to pay them. He claimed to have paid
substantial sums to a debt relief firm in an attempt to resolve those debts. He further
admitted receiving “notices and phone calls from my creditors” concerning his
delinquencies that eventually stopped. He is an educated individual with extensive
experience holding and renewing security clearances. This deliberate falsification
7
demonstrated questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security
concerns. Five have potential applicability under the facts in this case:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
Applicant never attempted to correct the falsification on his security clearance
application, and persisted in offering a self-contradictory explanation for it, so mitigation
under MC 17(a) was not shown. Applicant provided insufficient evidence from which to
conclude that this falsification of his financial situation does not adversely reflect on his
current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Nor did he demonstrate steps to
reduce vulnerability to manipulation or duress. Thus, Applicant failed to mitigate security
concerns by establishing any of these conditions.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
8
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable,
educated, and experienced adult. He is responsible for the voluntary choices and
conduct that underlie the security concerns expressed in the SOR. He still has
substantial delinquent debts, which arose over the past seven years and remain
unresolved despite his full employment during the past two years. He offered insufficient
evidence of financial counseling, rehabilitation, better judgment, or responsible conduct
in other areas of his life to offset resulting security concerns. He deliberately falsified
material information concerning his financial problems on his security clearance
application. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress remain undiminished.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations and personal conduct .
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
