Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-6, and Applicant exhibit (AE) A.1
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXX, Xxxxxxx Xxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 14-01537
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 19 June 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the2
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 21
November 2014 and I convened a hearing 6 January 2015. DOHA received the
transcript 15 January 2015.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR financial allegations, except for SOR 1.c. He is a 45-
year-old system administrator employed by a defense contractor since April 2009. He
has not previously held a clearance. However, he previously had favorable background
checks in October 2005 and September 2008 for work through other Government
agencies (GE 1).
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits (GE 1-5) substantiate, six delinquent
debts totaling almost $25,000. Applicant admits one $3,000 debt. Nearly $21,000 of the
debt is for a state sales tax judgment obtained in February 2009 (SOR 1.a) and
delinquent Federal taxes for 2011 (SOR 1.g).
Through a series of voluntary wage garnishments and additional payments,
Applicant and his wife satisfied SOR debt 1.a in June 2014 (Answer). He disputed SOR
debts 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e, and succeeded in having SOR debt 1.d removed from his credit
report in January 2014 (Answer). He filed his 2009 Federal income tax return in July
2014, showing a refund due of $1,600 (Answer). He paid about half of his outstanding
2011 Federal income taxes in early July 2014, with the other half due the end of July
2014 (Answer). He has asked the vendor for SOR debt 1.c to provide him with an
accounting for the amounts owed, but the vendor has not responded.
 From 2005 to 2008, Applicant and his wife ran a restaurant in a vacation
destination. They turned a profit the first year, but did not during the second and third
years as the economy declined. They made a decision to not renew their lease when it
expired in 2008. However, business had been so bad that they were faced with the
choice of paying their employees or paying the state sales taxes owed. They opted for
paying their employees, resulting in the tax judgment at SOR 1.a. SOR debt 1.c is also
related to shuttering the business, as it involves cooking fuel, and a question of whether
Applicant or the new lessee of the restaurant should be responsible for the debt. This is
the requested accounting that Applicant has not received. Finally, Applicant’s failure to
file his 2009 Federal income tax return on time (SOR 1.f) also appears to be related to
shuttering his business, as they were confused about how to reconcile the closing of
their chapter C corporation with the tax requirement of his wife’s limited liability
corporation, which remains in business. The return has now been filed and shows a
refund due. The two disputed debts that Applicant has received no response on (SOR
1.b and 1.e) total $130—an insignificant amount for security concerns.
 
Applicant’s financial problems were largely related to the failure of his restaurant
business. However, he began addressing his debts as soon as he was re-employed at a
significant salary. The state would not allow Applicant to establish a repayment plan for
the delinquent sales taxes, so Applicant and his wife consented to voluntary
garnishment of their wages to satisfy the debt. The only debts not fully resolved are the
two disputed debts for $120 and the cooking fuel judgment. However, Applicant is ready
to pay those accounts if they can be shown to be his.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;4
¶ 20 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the5
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue;
3
The founder and chief operating officer of Applicant’s current company considers
him honest and trustworthy and recommends him for his clearance (AE A). Applicant
presented no evidence that he has received financial or credit counseling.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, he
acquired significant debt.  However, be began to address his debts once he regained4
employment in April 2009.
           Under his current plan, Applicant has resolved SOR debts 1.a (the largest single
debt) and 1.g. He filed his delinquent Federal income tax return, but has a refund due.
One debt was successfully disputed.  Two disputed debts total an insignificant $120.5
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications8
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.9
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. 21 May 2008).10
4
Applicant is ready to pay the one debt he admits when he receives an accounting for
the amount claimed.
The mitigating factors for financial considerations give Applicant substantial aid.
While his financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, Applicant was forced to give
up his business and his employment is now stable; so the circumstances that caused
them are less likely to recur.  Further, his financial problems were due to circumstances6
beyond his control, and he began addressing his delinquent debts once he obtained
stable employment in April 2009. He has continued to address his other delinquent
debts since then.  While there is no evidence that Applicant has had any formal financial7
counseling, he has clearly acted to get his finances under control.  The remaining debt8
is  insignificant, and Applicant has demonstrated the willingness and ability to address
his delinquent debts. Having addressed his other financial obligations, I am confident
these remaining obligations will also be addressed if he receives satisfactory responses
to his inquiries.  Overall, substantial progress has been made addressing his delinquent
debt.9
The Appeal Board has stated that an Applicant need not have paid every debt
alleged in the SOR, need not pay the SOR debts first, and need not be paying on all
debts simultaneously. Applicant need only establish that there is a credible and realistic
plan to resolve the financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement
the plan.  Applicant’s efforts to date constitute such a plan, and his consistent10
payments reflect significant actions. I conclude Guideline F for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-g: For Applicant
5
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                                 
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR.
Administrative Judge
