 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-01321 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: J. Theodore Hammer, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit evidence to show that she has a track record of 
financial responsibility, that she does not have a financial problem, or that her financial 
problem is being resolved or is under control. She failed to mitigate the Guideline F 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility to hold a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire requesting eligibility for a position 
of trust (Application) on October 31, 2013. On May 14, 2014, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) listing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on October 8, 2014, and elected to have 
her case decided on the written record.  
                                            
1 The DoD acted under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
2 
 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 10, 
2015, was provided to her by transmittal letter dated February 20, 2015. Applicant 
received the FORM on April 28, 2015. She was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. She failed 
to respond to the FORM and submitted no documentary information. The case was 
assigned to me on June 17, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d 
through 1.f, 1.h through 1.k, 1.m through 1.q, 1.s, and 1.u through 1.x. She denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, 1.l, 1.r, and 1.t. Her admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, including her answers to 
the SOR, her June 17, 2014 statement, the FORM, and her Application, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She married her first 
spouse in 1978 and divorced in 1985. She married her second spouse in 1998, and 
divorced in 2009. She married her current spouse in 2012. She has five adult children.  
 
Applicant was employed from October 1996 to June 2001. She left work in June 
2001 due to pregnancy, and stayed at home to take care of her son until September 
2005. She was employed from September 2005 to February 2006. She worked as a 
homemaker from February 2006 to August 2008. She was employed from August 2008 
until October 2011, when she was fired.  
 
Applicant explained in her 2013 Application that her husband (then cohabitant) 
fell from the roof of their home and broke his back, both legs, and one arm. She took 
leave to take care of him during his surgeries; however, the leave was denied because 
they were not married at the time. She exceeded the number of absences permitted, 
and she was fired. 
 
Apparently, her husband was receiving Social Security disability benefits while 
convalescing. There is no evidence as to whether that was Applicant’s household’s only 
income. This is her first application for a position of trust. 
 
In her 2013 Application (Section 26 – Financial Record), Applicant disclosed that 
she had financial problems, which included a delinquent judgment filed against her by 
her ex-husband to recover marital property awarded to him during the divorce. She also 
disclosed that she was $1,700 delinquent on her child support obligation. Applicant 
explained that because she was unemployed after her husband’s injury (she was his 
caregiver), she did not have the financial resources to pay her child support obligation. 
                                                                                                                                            
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DoD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
She claimed that she made partial payments when her husband gave her money from 
his disability payments. Applicant failed to disclose in her Application any other 
delinquent or charged-off accounts. 
 
Attached to her Answer to the SOR, Applicant submitted a June 2014 statement 
explaining her financial problems. She stated that she was a stay-at-home mom. All of 
the household utilities, services, and medical accounts were in her name. When her ex-
husband decided to stop paying the household debts, she did not have the financial 
means to pay her debts. She stated that she has not had a good-paying job to start 
paying her debts, and indicated she could use her current job to start paying her debts. 
Applicant believes that she is honest and trustworthy. She averred that she would never 
do anything wrong just because of her credit. 
 
The background investigation addressed her financial problems and revealed the 
22 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling approximately $23,000. All of the 
alleged accounts are established by the FORM’s two credit reports. 
 
Applicant denied five of the SOR allegations, totaling approximately $4,200, 
leaving about $19,000 in unpaid delinquent accounts. Applicant stated no reasons for 
the denial of the five SOR allegations. However, apparently she denied SOR ¶ 1.c 
because it is a duplicate allegation of SOR ¶ 1.a. Similarly, SOR ¶ 1.l appears to be a 
duplicate allegation of SOR ¶ 1.k, and SOR ¶ 1.u appears to be a duplicate allegation of 
SOR ¶ 1.s.  
 
In addition to her delinquent debts, the FORM credit reports established that 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in October 2005, and was 
discharged of all dischargeable debts in February 2006. She acquired the alleged 
delinquent accounts between 2006 and May 2014.  
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.w (alleging that Applicant was charged with Unlawful 
Transactions, a felony), Applicant explained that she had her daughter open an auto 
repair account in Applicant’s name. Applicant and her daughter had a disagreement and 
her daughter filed criminal charges against Applicant to terminate the account and to 
force Applicant to pay off the account. Applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor 
offense.  
 
Applicant provided no information about her current earnings and financial 
position. She provided little information about her and her spouse’s monthly income, 
their monthly expenses, and whether their current income is sufficient to pay their 
current day-to-day living expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate 
whether she participated in financial counseling or whether she follows a budget. She 
presented no evidence of any payments made, efforts to contact creditors, establish 
payment plans, or efforts to otherwise resolve her financial problems. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for a public trust position. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, 
by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing suitability for a 
public trust position. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and common-sense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive information. The 
Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her access to 
sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national security” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[Access to sensitive information] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” AG ¶ 2(b). Eligibility for a public trust position decisions are not a determination 
of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the 
applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for 
issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
 
5 
 
 
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
In 2006, Applicant was relieved of her dischargeable debts after filing for Chapter 
7 bankruptcy protection. She acquired the alleged delinquent SOR accounts between 
2006 and May 2014. She presented no evidence of any payments made, efforts to 
contact creditors, establish payment plans, or efforts to otherwise resolve her financial 
problems. Two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. I considered 
Applicant’s periods of unemployment; that she has been her husband’s caregiver after 
his 2011 accident, and that their household income has been limited to his Social 
Security benefits. I also considered Applicant’s allegation that her ex-husband refused 
to pay the household expenses, presumably leaving her with the responsibility for the 
debts. Some of these events could establish circumstances beyond her control that may 
have contributed or aggravated her financial problems. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s 
evidence is insufficient to show she acted responsibly under the circumstances to 
warrant applicability of AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant provided little information about her current earnings and financial 
position. She did not provide any information about her monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether her current income is sufficient to pay her current day-to-day 
living expenses and debts. There is no information to show that she participated in 
financial counseling or that she follows a budget. The available information is insufficient 
to establish clear indications that she does not have a current financial problem, or that 
her financial problem is being resolved, or is under control. Applicant failed to establish 
that she has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant started working for a federal contractor sometime in 2013, and this is 
her first trustworthiness application. She failed to submit evidence to show that she has 
a track record of financial responsibility, that she does not have a financial problem, or 
that her financial problem is being resolved or is under control. She failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d-1.k, 
   1.m-1.q, 1.s, and 1.u-1.x:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.l, and 1.t:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant eligibility for a position of trust to 
Applicant. Eligibility for a position of trust is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
