 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03454 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 14, 2014, and October 29, 2014, 
and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The 
Government’s written case was submitted on February 26, 2015. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
2 
 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on April 3, 2015. As of May 21, 2015, 
he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on May 26, 2015. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM (Items 2-5) are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2012. He is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. He has a bachelor’s degree. As of 2013, he had never married, and he 
had no children.1   
 
Applicant was hospitalized after a car accident in 2008. He had been drinking 
before the accident. He was charged with driving under the influence (DUI).2 He was 
convicted and sentenced to probation for three years, six months of DUI education 
classes, and $1,800 in fines and court costs.3    
 
The SOR alleges four state tax liens totaling $894; two delinquent debts to a city 
totaling $778; five medical debts totaling $4,983, including one medical debt for $3,224; 
and an unpaid $3,496 judgment from 2012 for a medical debt. Applicant denied owing 
all the debts alleged in the SOR. The judgment, tax liens, and debts are listed on an 
April 2013 combined credit report.4   
 
The $3,224 medical debt appears to be the basis for the judgment. Applicant 
stated the medical debt resulted from his hospitalization after his 2008 car accident. He 
stated that he assumed the bill was paid by his insurance company. He questioned the 
validity of the judgment because he stated that he was not served until after the 
judgment was awarded. Applicant was asked about the medical debts and judgment 
during his background interview in May 2013. He stated that he had retained an 
attorney to help him settle the account with the hospital. He stated that he intended to 
pay the bill once he had an agreement between his attorney and the hospital. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he was willing to pay the hospital but not the 
collection company. There is no evidence that he made any attempt to overturn the 
judgment. The judgment is listed on the February 2015 Equifax credit report; the other 
medical debts are not.5   
 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 The DUI was not alleged in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be 
considered for its effect on Applicant’s finances, in the application of mitigating conditions, and when 
conducting the whole-person analysis.  
 
3 Items 1-3.  
 
4 “Credit reports are generally sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case of Guideline F 
security concerns.” See ISCR Case No. 10-03668 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2012). 
 
5 Items 1-5.  
 
3 
 
The SOR alleges debts of $425 (SOR ¶ 1.i) and $353 (SOR ¶ 1.j) to a collection 
company on behalf of the city where Applicant received his DUI. The debts were 
reported by TransUnion and Experian on the April 2013 combined credit report. 
Applicant denied owing the debts. He stated the debts related to his accident and DUI. 
He stated that he paid all the fines and costs related to the accident, and that he had to 
prove to the court that he made the payments. The debts are not listed on the February 
2015 Equifax credit report.6   
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d allege state tax liens of $253, $220, $213, and $208 that 
were entered in 2009, 2010, and 2012. The liens were reported by LexisNexis on the 
April 2013 combined credit report. Applicant stated the liens were for property taxes on 
his boat. He told the background investigator in 2013 that he did not know where the 
property taxes are mailed or how and where he was supposed to pay the tax, but that 
every year the amount he owes is “taken out of [his] state income tax return.” 
Presumably, Applicant meant his state income tax refund. Applicant did not submit any 
documentation about the tax liens or the status of his state property taxes. The liens are 
not listed on the February 2015 Equifax credit report.7   
 
Except for the issues alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s finances are otherwise 
unremarkable. The only derogatory item on the most recent credit report is the unpaid 
judgment. There is no evidence of financial counseling.8   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
6 Items 1, 3-5.  
 
7 Items 1, 3-5.  
 
8 Items 2-5.  
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $3,224 medical debt, which appears to be the basis for the 
$3,496 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the 
SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in 
Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same 
debt alleged twice). SOR ¶ 1.f is concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant’s financial problems were not related to conditions beyond his control. 
The medical debts, city debts, and judgment were related to Applicant’s car accident 
and DUI. Applicant denied owing all the debts, and only the judgment is listed on the 
most recent credit report. I will give Applicant the benefit of the doubt and consider 
everything but the judgment as mitigated.  
 
  Applicant has refused to pay the judgment. There is no indication that it will be 
resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay the judgment. His 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are no mitigating conditions 
applicable to the unpaid judgment. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.l:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
