1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 14-02707
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for a trustworthiness determination is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on February 26, 2013 and certified it on February 26, 2013. The Department of
Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF), issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 25, 2014, detailing trustworthiness concerns
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.6, Personnel Security Program,
dated January 1987, as amended and modified (Regulation); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG),
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
2
Applicant received the SOR on September 5, 2014, and she submitted an
undated answer. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was prepared to
proceed on February 7, 2015, and I received the case assignment on February 23,
2015. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 4, 2015, and I convened the hearing
as scheduled on March 25, 2015. The Government offered exhibits (GE) marked as GE
1 through GE 7, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified. She submitted exhibits (AE) marked as AE A through AE E, which
were received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on April 3, 2015. I held the record open until   April 27, 2015, for
Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely requested an extension of time
to submit post-hearing documentation. By Order dated April 22, 2015, I extended the
date for Applicant to submit additional documentation until May 22, 2015. Applicant
submitted AE F - AE J. Department Counsel objected to the admission of AG G, her
budget, as not timely submitted. As this is a relevant document, the objection is
overruled. The record closed on June 4, 2015, the date Applicant’s last submission was
received.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the notice of the date, time and place of the hearing less than
15 days before the hearing. I advised Applicant of her right under ¶ E3.1.8. of the
Directive to receive the notice at least 15 days before the hearing. Applicant
affirmatively waived this right under the Directive. (Tr. 12.)
Motions
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to add allegations
1.g through1.j and to change the date in allegation 1.a from July 2007 to December
2009. Applicant had previously reviewed the amended SOR and did not object to the
proposed amendments. The motion was granted. SOR allegation 1.a is corrected, and
allegations 1.g to 1.j are included as part of the SOR. (Tr. 10-11)
       
Findings of Fact
In her answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.d,
1.h, 1.i, and 1.j. of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings
of fact. She denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.c and 1.e-1.g of the SOR.  She1
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
GE 1; Tr. 22-23, 27.2
GE 1; AE A; Tr. 22, 38-39.3
Answer to SOR; Tr. 23, 38-39.4
Answer to SOR; Tr. 23-25.5
3
also provided additional information to support her request for eligibility for a
trustworthiness determination. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of
record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 51 years old, works as a referral coordinator for a DOD
contractor. She began her current position in March 2013. Applicant was unemployed
from October 2008 to October 2010 and from June 2011 to February 2013. Between
October 2010 and June 2011, she worked two mornings a month at a bible church.
Applicant worked from November 2007 until October 2008, when she stopped working
for health reasons. Prior to November 2007, Applicant stayed at home to care for her
children.2
Applicant received a general educational development diploma (GED) and a
word processing certificate. She has attended college, but did not graduate. Applicant
married her first husband in 1989, and they divorced in 1991. She married her second
husband in 1992, and they divorced in 2014. Applicant has two daughters, ages 34 and
26, and a son, age 20. Applicant’s 26-year-old daughter, her daughter’s fiancé, and their
7-month-old daughter live with Applicant. Applicant’s granddaughter suffers from a
serious seizure disorder, making it impossible for Applicant’s daughter to work. Her
daughter’s fiancé recently found work as a roofer.3
At the time Applicant and her second husband married in 1992, they lived in
State A. Applicant’s second husband worked in the housing industry and rose to the
position of vice-president at his company. In November 2005, the family moved to State
B because her second husband obtained a new position. One year later, in December
2006, when the housing industry began to unravel, he lost his job. Sometime later, he
obtained another position. He was laid off from this job after a few months. Applicant’s
second husband obtained a permanent position in State A in August 2010.4
During her husband’s unemployment, Applicant returned to work in November
2007. She developed problems with severe depression, which necessitated her
departure from her job in October 2008 and prevented her from working for a long time.
She and her son remained in State B while he completed his sophomore year of high
school and while determining if her second husband’s job would remain stable. She and
her son returned to State A in July 2011. She continues to reside in State A.   5
AE F; AE G; Tr. 38-39.6
AE G.7
AE A; Tr. 29-34.8
GE 5 - GE 7; AE B; AE D; Tr. 28-30.9
4
Applicant submited a copy of her earnings statements between January 30, 2015
and April 10, 2015. These statements reflect that her current gross biweekly salary is
$1,468 plus overtime. Applicant’s overtime hours vary each pay period. Based on her
earnings statements, her gross monthly pay is $2,736 plus overtime pay of varying
amounts. Applicant’s budget indicates a net pay of $2,400 month plus $1,300 a month
in alimony, and $800 month in rent from her daughter’s fiancé, for a total household
income of approximately $4,500. The rental income started after the hearing.   6
Applicant moved to new residence after the hearing to reduce her housing costs.
Her budget reflects that her monthly housing expenses include $1,375 for rent and $666
for utilities, cable, cell phone, internet, and waste removal. Her car payment plus related
expenses averages $556 a month. She spends approximately $500 a month on food,
$165 on pet food, grooming, and treats, $25 on home insurance, $80 on personal care,
and $27 on entertainment. She listed five monthly loan payments totaling $197,
including $15 a month for her education loan, and an additional $150 a month for taxes.
Her month expenses total $3,741. With the rental income, she has a remainder of
approximately $759 month for debt payment.7
During their marriage, Applicant’s second husband managed the household
finances. Throughout their marriage, she did not involve herself in the household
fiances and remained unaware of how her second husband was managing their income
and expenses. When her husband returned to State A in 2010, he worked as an
independent subcontractor for sometime. He did not properly withhold taxes from his
earnings, and he did not pay the required taxes when he filed their income tax returns.
Her second husband’s actions created tax issues for them for the tax years 2008, 2010,
and 2011. Applicant declined to file joint tax returns with her husband in 2012 and 2013.
In the divorce decree and over her husband’s objections, the court supported her right
not to jointly file tax returns in these years.  8
SOR allegations 1.a, as amended, 1.c, and 1.g concern federal tax liens listed in
the credit reports dated March 5, 2013, March 17, 2014, and February 4, 2015. SOR
allegation 1.a is for a tax lien filed by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in December
2009 in the amount of $12,285. Applicant provided a copy of the IRS tax transcript for
the tax year 2008, which reflected that Applicant and her second husband requested an
extension of time to file their 2008 federal income tax returns; that they filed the return
on June 4, 2009; that the IRS processed the return on July 6, 2009; that the tax period
was blocked from automatic levy; that in 2012, the IRS considered the past due taxes
uncollectable; that in November 2013, the IRS established an installment agreement,
and that as of March 24, 2015, the balance on this tax debt was $3,907.9
GE 5 - GE 7; AE B; AE C; Tr. 29-32.10
AE B; AE E; Tr. 29-30.11
AE A; Tr. 33-34.12
Answer to SOR ; GE 2 - GE 4; Tr. 12-15.13
5
SOR allegation 1.c concerns a $42,693 tax lien filed in July 2007. The credit
reports of record show that the IRS released this lien in 2011. This debt is resolved.
SOR allegation 1.g relates to a $20,253 tax lien filed by the IRS in November 2013 for
the tax year 2011. Applicant provided a copy of the IRS tax transcript for this tax year.
The tax transcript showed that Applicant and her second husband requested an
extension of time to file their federal income tax for this year; that the IRS gave them
until October 2012 to file their income tax return; that the IRS received their income tax
return on October 3, 2012; and that the IRS processed and filed their income tax return
on November 12, 2012. The tax transcript reflected that the IRS established an
installment agreement in November 2014. The transcript indicated that Applicant and
her second husband owed $20,295 in taxes, of which $12,555 was for self-employment
taxes (social security and medicare) not paid by her second husband. When interest
and penalties are included, the total amount of taxes owed is $25,004.10
While not listed in the SOR, Applicant provided an IRS tax transcript for the tax
year 2010. The tax transcript showed that Applicant and her second husband timely
filed their income tax return; that they owed taxes; that the IRS established an
installment agreement in November 2014; and that the IRS placed a lien in January
2015. The tax transcripts showed a total income tax of $5,661, of which $3,214 is self
employment tax, plus penalties and interest for a total debt of $6,691. Applicant
provided a document showing the total tax debt owed for the tax years 2008, 2010, and
2011 that is being paid by her second husband as $35,694.11
When Applicant and her second husband divorced in 2014, the court directed
that he be solely responsible for the payment of the taxes owed from the marriage. The
court incorporated this finding into the divorce decree and final orders. At the hearing,
Applicant acknowledged that the IRS will ignore what the court said about her
husband’s sole responsibility for the tax debts. She understands that if he does not pay
as agreed, her wages could be garnished for this debt. She has obtained the
documents to file for innocent spouse relief. She had not filed this request as of the
close of the record.12
After Applicant’s second husband lost his job, their financial problems reached an
unmanagable level. Applicant and her second husband filed for bankruptcy under
Chapter 7 of the United States bankruptcy code on September 27, 2010. As required for
bankruptcy, Applicant participated in a credit counseling program approved by the
bankuptcy court, which she verified. The bankruptcy court discharged their debts on
January 20, 2011. The debts discharged included the $10,618 debt alleged in SOR ¶
1.e, and the $12,575 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f.   13
GE 5 - GE 7; AE I; Tr. 34-35.14
AE G; AE J; Tr. 35-36.15
6
SOR allegation 1.b concerns a tax lien ($3,769) filed by State B in December
2009. Applicant provided documentation from the revenue board of State B that shows
her second husband paid this debt. SOR allegations 1.h ($109) and 1.i ($117) concern
medical debts. Applicant advised that the one debt arose because of a dispute between
her insurance company and her doctor’s office. She expected workers’ compensation to
pay the other medical bill, but workers’ compensation denied her claim. She
acknowledges that these debts need to be paid, but she has not yet done so.14
The last SOR debt 1.j ($2,479) relates to a student loan debt. The creditor
garnished Applicant’s pay beginning on January 30, 2015. The amount of the
garnishment varied and appears to depend upon Applicant’s earnings each pay period.
The amount garnished for the next five pay periods averaged $220 for a total
garnishment of $1,098. Applicant’s April 10, 2015 earnings statement showed a
garnishment of $2.31 for this debt. From this significant reduction, an inference can be
drawn that the garnishment has ceased. After her pay was garnished, Applicant
contacted the creditor and reached an agreement to rehabilitate her student loan debt,
Applicant is to pay the creditor $15 a month for a period of time beginning April 15,
2015. She provided documentation showing that she made the May payment and did
not owe for April. Applicant currently owes approximated $1,400 on her student loan
debt.   15
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
7
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness
decision. 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
AG ¶ 20(g) “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing16
of the same,” does not apply as Applicant and her second husband filed their federal income tax returns within
the legal time requirements. 
8
Applicant and her second husband incurred significant debt beginning in 2007.
They ultimately filed for bankruptcy and many of their debts were discharged, but not
their tax debts, which remain unpaid. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) are applicable.16
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant and her second husband’s financial problems began when he lost his
well-paying job at the beginning of the housing industry collapse in late 2006. He was
unable to find work providing sufficient income to meet their household bills. She
returned to work to help meet expenses, but severe depression caused her to stop
working after a year. Applicant’s second husband found steady employment about four
years after he lost his job. Her second husband’s job loss and her depression are
circumstances beyond their control. They filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in September
2010, a reasonable means to resolve debts arising under their circumstances. Many of
their debts were resolved in bankruptcy, but not their tax debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies to
SOR allegations 1.d. 1.e, and 1.f.
As part of the bankruptcy process, Applicant took a credit counseling course. She
recently moved to reduce her rent, which decreased her monthly household expenses.
Her daughter’s fiancé is now working and contributing to monthly household expenses.
As a result, Applicant has sufficient income each month to pay her customary living
expenses. The state court determinated that her second husband was solely
responsible for the past-due taxes, not Applicant. While the IRS does not accept this
determination, the court’s ruling is reasonable because much of the actual tax debt
owed relates to her second husband’s failure to file self-employment taxes (his social
security and medicare payroll taxes), not to taxes owed on income earned. Her second
husband has paid the tax debt owed to State B, and he has established a payment plan
for the federal taxes owed. Through his payment plan, he has reduced the tax debt for
9
the tax year 2008. The creditor for Applicant’s education loan garnished her wages,
which resulted in a reduction of her debt. AG ¶ 20(c) applies as there are clear
indications that debts are being resolved, and her finances are under control. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
  (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The
downturn in the economy beginning in 2006 created a serious financial crisis for
Applicant and her second husband which lasted many years because her second
husband was either unemployed or underemployed for four years, and Applicant was
unable to maintain employment because of serious depression. They used bankruptcy
as a means to return to financial stability. Under these circumstances, their decision to
file for bankruptcy protection was reasonable. They resolved many debts, but not the
tax debt problem created by the poor decisions of Applicant’s second husband, not
Applicant. Her second husband was self-employed and did not file his self-employment
taxes, as required, nor did he pay all the income taxes owed. He finally began to take
responsibility for these taxes, after the state family court found him solely responsible
for this debt. The tax debt is his, not Applicant’s under their divorce decree, even though
the IRS will not comply with this determination. To further protect herself, Applicant is
10
filing for innocent spouse relief as the tax debt is the result of the actions of her second
husband. She owes two small debts, which cannot be a source of improper pressure or
duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all her debts are paid: it is whether
her financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a position of trust.
In reviewing all the facts and evidence in this case, the remaining unpaid debts are
insufficient to raise security concerns.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a trustworthiness determination. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from her
finances under Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
