1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 1 )  ISCR2 Case No. 14-02646 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. When Applicant was a 
Bulgarian citizen she obtained a Bulgarian passport, which is now expired. She has 
mitigated the foreign preference security concerns. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,3 on September 24, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s name in the caption for the two SORs and the File of Relevant Material (FORM) are slightly 
different and a variation of her name.  
 
2 This case has been listed as both an ISCR case and an ADP case. There are two SOR, one undated 
listing the case as an ADP case and the other dated September 24, 2014, which lists the case as an 
ISCR case. The heading for both SORs indicate this is an applicant for Public Trust Position. However, 
the FORM lists this case as an Applicant for Security Clearance. The case will be decided as an ISCR 
case due to Applicant’s job position.  
 
2 
 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
On October 24, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), dated December 19, 2014. The FORM contained six attachments (Items). No 
information was received from Applicant in response to the FORM. On April 16, 2015, I 
was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she denies the allegations. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and exhibits I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old software development team lead4 who has worked for 
a defense contractor since July 2005, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. 
Applicant was born in Bulgaria. In July 1998, she entered the United States and, in June 
2011, she became a U.S. citizen. (Item 4) In June 2009, prior to becoming a U.S. 
citizen, she renewed her Bulgarian passport. That passport expired on August 20, 2014. 
 There is an August 2013 letter stating that in July 2013 Applicant was unwilling to 
allow a company employee to destroy her Bulgarian Passport. (Item 6) In her answer to 
the SOR, Applicant stated the passport had been issued by Bulgaria and was the 
property of Bulgaria. (Item 3) She did not believe it was appropriate for an employee at 
her work to destroy or invalidate the Bulgarian passport. She chose instead to invalidate 
the passport by allowing it to expire. (Item 3) Since becoming a U.S. citizen, she has 
exercised only her U.S. citizenship. (Item 3) She denies any allegiance to a foreign 
country over the United States. (Item 3)  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
3 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
4 Applicant’s April 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigation Processing (e-QIP) indicates she was 
working for one company in the position as a software development team lead. However, there is an 
August 2013 letter from a federal health service provider (Item 6), which does not list a position. This 
indicates she may have changed employment. The record is unclear as to by whom she is employed.  
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
4 
 
None of the disqualifying conditions are met. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) describes a condition 
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case, “(a) 
exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. 
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not 
limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport.” This disqualifying condition 
does not apply. Applicant has not renewed her Bulgarian passport since becoming a 
U.S. citizen. Her Bulgarian passport is no longer valid. It expired in August 2014.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant was born in Bulgaria and came to the United States in July 1998. In 
June 2011, she became a U.S. citizen. Prior to becoming a U.S. citizen, she renewed 
her Bulgarian passport. That passport expired in August 20, 2014. When asked by an 
employee where she worked to surrender her passport so it could be destroyed, 
Applicant refused. She believed it was inappropriate for a company employee to destroy 
Bulgarian property. Applicant chose to invalidate the passport by allowing it to expire.  
 
Applicant has renounced her Bulgarian citizenship when she became a U.S. 
citizenship. She chooses only to exercise her U.S. citizenship. AG ¶ 11(b) applies. All 
rights, privileges, obligations of foreign citizenship occurred before she became a U.S. 
citizen. She renewed her Bulgarian passport before becoming a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 11(c) 
applies. The passport has expired, therefore it is “otherwise invalidated.” AG ¶ 11(e) 
applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
5 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Bulgaria and 
had a Bulgarian passport. She did not want a company employee to destroy the 
Bulgarian passport, but chose to allow it to become invalid by allowing it to expire.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
