 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00431 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 26, 2014, and provided additional 
information on July 13, 2014. He elected to have his case decided on the written record. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
 
2 
 
 
February 24, 2015. The FORM was mailed to Applicant who received it on April 8, 2015. 
As evidence, the Government offered Items 1 through 10, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted Item 11-1 through 11-39, which was 
admitted into the record without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 26, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, except for his 
denial of ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He has been married since September 1997. He has 
five children, ages 21, 19, 19, 17, and 8. He has worked for his current employer, a 
defense contractor, since April 2006. He is a high school graduate. He served on active 
duty in the Army from 1993 to 2003 and received an honorable discharge.1  
  
 The SOR lists a federal and a state tax lien, two judgments and five delinquent 
debts that total approximately $49,076. These debts are supported by credit reports 
from June 2013 and February 2015.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began when he was laid off from his job from 
January to April 2006. Additionally, his wife was handling the tax filing responsibility for 
the family because she was laid off from her job for about five years. During this time, 
she failed to timely file 2010 and 2011 federal and state tax returns. When she did file 
the past returns, penalties and interest accumulated that resulted in the lien filings. They 
also over-claimed withholding exemptions, which resulted in underpayment of taxes for 
2007 through 2009. Applicant was unaware of these events because his job required 
frequent travel and he believed his wife was handling these items. He found out about 
the tax liability when he signed for a certified letter in September 2012. The status of the 
debts is as follows:3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a (Federal Tax Lien $34,767): 
 
 Applicant established a voluntary monthly payment plan with the IRS. His wages 
were not garnished. He has consistently made his monthly payments ($250) starting in 
                                                          
1 Items 3-4. 
 
2 Items 1, 6, 9. 
 
3 Items 2, 7-8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
May 2014 through May 2015 and provided documentation of the same. The IRS 
withdrew the lien on the property in December 2014. This debt is being resolved.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b (State Tax Lien $1,478): 
 
 Applicant provided proof that the lien of judgment for unpaid state taxes was 
satisfied in April 2015. This debt is resolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c (Judgment $4,772): 
 
 Applicant admits acquiring the debt, but disputes that it is unpaid. He provided 
documentation showing he set up a payment plan with a collection attorney in January 
2009 to pay this debt. He also documented two payments of $200. He was unable to 
obtain the complete payment history that would show the debt is paid. The most recent 
credit report submitted by the Government does not list this judgment, which 
corroborates Applicant’s assertion that the debt was paid some years ago. This debt is 
resolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d (Consumer debt $3,573): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that a settlement was reached on this 
account when it was in litigation in March 2009 and the resulting civil action was 
dismissed in April 2010. This debt is resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e (Consumer debt $460)(Duplicate account with SOR ¶ 1.f): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing he paid this debt in April 2013. This 
debt is resolved.8 
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h (Medical debts $158, $50): 
 
 These were medical debts incurred by Applicant’s wife. He provided 
documentation showing SOR ¶ 1.h was paid in October 2014. He also paid SOR ¶ 1.g, 
but the documentation is not available. These debts are resolved.9 
 
                                                          
4 Item 11-1 to 11-24.  
 
5 Item 11-1, 11-25.  
 
6 Items 9, 11-1; 11-26 to 11-28.  
 
7 Item 11-1, 11-29 to 11-30.  
 
8 Item 11-2, 11-31.  
 
9 Item 11-2, 11-32.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.i (Judgment $3,331) 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that the debt resulting in this 
judgment was incurred by his wife severally. The resulting judgment was only against 
his wife. He successfully disputed this account. This debt is resolved.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
10 Item 11-2, 11-33. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts over an extended period of time. I find 
both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant were recent. He has resolved his 
state tax debt, established a voluntary payment plan for his federal tax debt, which 
resulted in the IRS withdrawing its tax lien, and paid or successfully disputed the 
remaining debts. His efforts to repair his financial position make it reasonable to 
conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debt when he suffered through a period of 
unemployment and he failed to keep up with his tax obligations. Although his 
unemployment is a condition beyond his control, his actions to timely take care of his 
debt issues were not responsible. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There are clear indications that all but one of the debts have been resolved 
through payment or successful dispute. Applicant made good-faith efforts to resolve the 
taxes and debts listed on the SOR. He supplied documentary evidence showing the 
payments were made and the debts were paid. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. He 
successfully disputed SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to those debts. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There 
is also no requirement that an applicant pay every debt listed in the SOR, only that he 
remove concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness raised by those debts. See 
ISCR Case No. 14-00504 at 3 (App. Bd. August 4, 2014). Applicant has taken 
significant action to resolve his debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past military 
service. The evidence supports his showing that he is again financially stable. He 
resolved his tax issue, is resolving his federal tax issue, and satisfied or successfully 
disputed the remaining debts. The record contains sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
