 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-02283 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 22, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 8, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and referred his case to an 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted or 
denied. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 4, 2014, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated March 11, 2015, was provided to him by letter dated 
March 11, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on March 19, 2015. He was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not submit any information within the time period of 30 days 
after receipt of copy of the FORM. On June 1, 2015, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant constructively denied all of the SOR 
allegations. Applicant’s answer is incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old software engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since August 2008. He seeks a security clearance, which is a requirement of his 
continued employment. (SOR answer; Item 2)  
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor’s degree in May 2001. His e-QIP states that 
he served in the Army Reserve beginning in 1991 to present; however, his SOR 
answer, which is more current, states that he “served in the military for over 20 years.” 
(SOR answer; Item 2) 
 
Applicant was previously married from April 1997 to June 2004. That marriage 
ended by divorce. Per his e-QIP, he remarried in January 2005 and separated in June 
2006. He has three children, ages 18, 15, and 14. (Item 2) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s SOR alleges 11 delinquent, charged-off, or collections accounts and 
one judgment totaling $126,344. (Item 1) Summarized, the debts are a student loan 
collection account for $24,188, a past-due utilities and fuel account for $612, a charged-
off credit card account for $680, an August 2007 state judgment for child support 
arrearages in the amount of $67,531, a past-due student loan for $3,132, a past-due 
student loan for $4,630, a past-due Veterans Administration account for $125, a cable 
company collection account for $162, a past-due student loan account for $23,264, a 
utility company collection account for $258, and a cell phone collection account for 
$1,762. (Item 1) 
 
In Applicant’s SOR answer, he stated that his accounts were either paid or being 
paid providing no documentation to substantiate his claim. (Item 1) A review of his 
February 26, 2015 credit report, however, indicates that he has four collection accounts 
and five past-due accounts. (Item 3) A review of this credit report indicates that the 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
creditors listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f are listed and five debts not alleged in 
the SOR are listed suggesting that Applicant’s financial situation remains problematic. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a failed attempt to start his own 
business without being prepared, stating that he did so to make a better life for his 
family. He is working hard to address his debts and clear his name, but provided no 
details. (Item 1) Furthermore, Applicant did not provide specifics on the nature of his 
business, how his SOR debts were created as a result of his business failure, and what 
if anything, he did or is doing to maintain contact with his creditors. There is no record 
evidence of financial counseling. 
 
Applicant’s FORM repeated the admonition about the absence of corroborating 
documentation and other mitigating information and explained that Applicant had 30 
days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting 
forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you 
do not file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be 
assigned to an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence 
set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 2) Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
 
Applicant stated that he served in the military for over 20 years, was awarded a 
Bronze Star while serving in Afghanistan, led soldiers in battle, and helped them 
through many life situations. (Item 1)               
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit report and SOR response. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and 
                                                          
1
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of his SOR debts except for those listed in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.g,  and 1.h through 1.k. Those SOR debts no longer appear on his 
credit report and it appears they have been resolved as Applicant stated in his SOR 
answer. Application of AG ¶ 1.d is warranted with regard to those debts. 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient information about his finances to establish his 
inability to make greater progress paying his creditors. A failed business may be a 
circumstance largely beyond his control; however, he did not provide any details 
regarding his failed business or how he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He 
claimed in his SOR answer that he had paid or was paying his debts; however, he did 
not provide any evidence corroborating payments to his creditors.  
 
 Applicant did not provide documentation showing his income and expenses, and 
he did not provide a budget. He did not provide any of the following documentation 
relating to the SOR creditors: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account 
statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or 
made any payments to the creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to 
establish maintenance of contact with the creditor;2 (3) a credible debt dispute; (4) 
                                                          
2
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
attempts to negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show 
that he was attempting to resolve these SOR debts; (5) evidence of financial 
counseling; or (6) other evidence of progress or resolution of his SOR debts.   
 
 Applicant’s failure to prove that he has made more substantial steps to resolve 
his debts shows a lack of judgment and responsibility that weighs against approval of 
his security clearance. There is insufficient evidence that he was unable to make 
greater progress resolving his delinquent debts, or that his financial problems are being 
resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, 
he failed to establish that financial consideration concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a software engineer, who worked for a government contractor since 2008. He served 
in the Army Reserve and deployed to Afghanistan and was awarded a Bronze Star. 
Applicant stated his business failed, but as noted above, there are few details 
surrounding that failure.  
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. His SOR alleges 
11 delinquent, charged-off, or collections accounts and one judgment totaling $126,344. 
The Government substantiated four of those long standing debts, debts totaling 
approximately $32,562. He failed to provide sufficient documentation of progress to 
resolve his financial problems. His failure to provide corroborating documentation shows 
lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 18. More information about inability to pay debts or documented financial progress 
is necessary to mitigate security concerns. 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on a 
limited explanation without sufficient corroborating evidence, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary to justify the award of a 
security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his 
past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, he may 
well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness 
  
One additional comment is worthy of note. Applicant’s loyalty and patriotism are 
not at issue in these proceedings. Section 7 of the Executive Order 10865 specifically 
provides that industrial security decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
Security clearance decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than 
loyalty and patriotism. Nothing in this decision should be considered to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied decision as to 
an applicant’s loyalty or patriotism.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c - 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e - 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.k:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
