 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01277 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Notwithstanding his recent bankruptcy that discharged all the Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) debts, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that he has a 
track record of financial responsibility and that his financial problems are unlikely to 
recur. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 5, 
2013. On May 19, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant an SOR 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant 
answered the SOR on June 9, 2014, and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 11, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated February 12, 2015. Applicant 
received the FORM on March 3, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. Applicant 
timely submitted a response, consisting of two pages showing that a U.S. Bankruptcy 
Court discharged him of all dischargeable debts pursuant to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
proceeding on June 30, 2014. The documents, and Department Counsel’s statement 
indicating he did not object to me considering the documents, were marked Appellate 
Exhibit 1, and made part of the record. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Issues 
 
 The SOR allegations, and Applicant’s response to the SOR, did not follow the 
correct alphabetical order. The SOR is not signed and its allegations jump from ¶¶ 1.b 
to 1.e - skipping ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. Applicant’s response to the SOR skipped ¶ 1.g.  
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent accounts. Applicant admitted to eight 
allegations, stating the same comment, that he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection 
and the case was pending. I disregarded all the SOR paragraph identification markings 
and considered all allegations admitted.  
  
 In the FORM, the Government offered as evidence a summary of Applicant’s 
interview (PSI) with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator conducted 
on January 15, 2014. (Item 4) The Government noted that Item 4 had not been 
authenticated by Applicant, and acknowledged that the document was subject to an 
objection to its admissibility on that ground. (Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20 (An ROI 
may be received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible     . . 
. . )) The Government invited Applicant to correct, add, revise, delete, or update the 
information in Item 4, or to object to its admissibility in its entirety. (Footnote 1, pg. 2) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on March 3, 2015, and submitted a 
response to the FORM. I presume Applicant read the FORM and elected not to submit 
an objection to the FORM or to the admissibility of Item 4. When evidence is submitted 
in a case, an Applicant is expected to object to the evidence, if there is a reason to do 
so. As a general statement of the law, failure to object to consideration of evidence 
results in waiver. There is no requirement that Department Counsel discuss the benefits 
or merits of making a rights’ election. 
 
I will presume Applicant relied upon the Government’s inclusion of his PSI (Item 
4) in the record, and he wanted that evidence considered, and chose not to repeat facts 
contained in his PSI in his FORM response. (Section VII of the FORM states that if “you 
do not file any objections, or submit any additional information . . . the case will be 
assigned to an administrative judge for a determination based solely on the FORM.”)  
 
 The Government’s footnote provided Applicant with sufficient knowledge of his 
right to object to the admissibility of Item 4. Applicant received notice that his failure to 
 
3 
 
 
correct Item 4 (the equivalent of certifying or authenticating the document), or to object 
to Item 4, could be considered a waiver of his right to object. The Supreme Court has 
explained that “waiver is the ‘intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known 
right.’ Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U.S. 443, 458, n. 13 (2004) (quoting United States v. 
Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 733 (1993)).  
 
Applicant may have been better “informed” if Department Counsel’s advice in the 
FORM had included a comment that if Applicant objects to consideration of his PSI, it 
will not be accepted as evidence in his case; that if he does not object the PSI will be 
considered as evidence; and that Applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM could be 
considered a waiver of his right to object, and that his waiver would then allow an 
administrative judge to consider the document on its face. Considering the 
circumstances in this particular case, the evidence is sufficient for me to conclude that 
Applicant knowingly waived his right to object. Accordingly, Item 4 was admitted as 
evidence and will be considered. 
Findings of Fact 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations, with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old security officer (guard) employed by a government 
contractor. He graduated from high school in October 2000, and started working as a 
security officer that same year. He was employed full time for several companies until 
July 2007, when he was unemployed for a month. He was employed and worked full 
time between August 2007 and April 2009. In April 2009, he resigned his job and was 
unemployed until June 2009, because he believed the work conditions were not safe. 
Applicant has been working for his current employer, a government contractor since 
June 2009.  
 
Applicant averred that he possessed a top secret security clearance in 2003, and 
a secret-level clearance in 2009, both incidental to his security officer jobs. Applicant 
has never been married, and he has no children. He has lived with his parents since 
1987. 
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 26 (Financial History) of the 2013 SCA that he had 
financial problems and revealed one delinquent credit card account. (SOR ¶ 1.h) He 
stated in his 2013 SCA: “I got behind in paying my bills. I am the only one working at my 
household. I had a history of unemployment periods. I take care of my elderly mother 
and one sister. I pay for most of the household expenses.” He also stated that his sister 
suffered from a medical condition, and was unemployed.  
 
Applicant further stated that a collection company was threatening legal action to 
collect the debt. He acknowledged that with his current income he would not be able to 
bring his debts current. He averred that he was actively trying to negotiate payments on 
 
4 
 
 
some of his debts, and expressed his intent to pay his debts. He claimed that he was 
seeking a second job to generate additional income to pay his debts.  
 
The subsequent background investigation and a December 2013 credit report 
(Item 5), disclosed the seven delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling 
approximately $37,000. The credit report, and Applicant’s response to the SOR, 
established that the alleged SOR debts were Applicant’s delinquent accounts. All of the 
delinquent debts involved credit cards, revolving charge accounts, and consumer 
accounts that became delinquent around 2011 - 2012.  
 
Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing that a U.S. Bankruptcy 
Court discharged him of all dischargeable debts pursuant to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
proceeding on June 30, 2014. (Appellate Exhibit 1) Applicant was released of legal 
liability for any of the SOR debts. 
 
Except for the comments provided in his 2013 SCA, Applicant provided little 
information about when he acquired the debts, why they became delinquent, what 
efforts he took, short of filing for bankruptcy in 2014, to stay in contact with his creditors 
and to pay his delinquent debts. In his 2013 SCA, Applicant alluded to his periods of 
unemployment, that he is the sole provider for his household (which includes is elderly 
mother and unemployed sister), and to not having sufficient income to pay for his day-
to-day living expenses and his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and financial 
position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, his monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day 
living expenses and his debts. Applicant participated in counseling as a result of his 
bankruptcy filing. He provided no information to indicate whether he follows a budget.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant admitted (seven debts), and the credit report established all the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
6 
 
 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Financial considerations mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not fully apply. 
Applicant presented little information to show that his financial problems were resolved 
by his bankruptcy discharge and are unlikely to recur. He stated in his 2013 SCA that he 
did not have sufficient income to meet his living expenses. There is no evidence to 
show that his income has increased, or that he has changed his spending habits. 
Additionally, he did not present sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems 
occurred under unusual circumstances and are unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not fully mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems could have been, in 
part, aggravated or caused by circumstances beyond his control – his periods of 
unemployment (one month in 2007, and three months in 2009) and having to provide 
support for his mother and sister. However, Applicant presented little evidence to 
explain the circumstances that led him to accumulate $37,000 in consumer debt; how 
his two short periods of unemployment prevented him from addressing his delinquent 
debts from the day he acquired them to when they were released by the bankruptcy; 
and what efforts he took to resolve his debts short of the bankruptcy filing.  
 
 In sum, Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to show that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances, and that he made a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors. He presented little documentary evidence of payments made, 
contacts with creditors, or of efforts to otherwise resolve any of the delinquent SOR 
debts, short of filing for bankruptcy.  
 
 I considered that Applicant received financial counseling pursuant to the 
bankruptcy proceeding, and that all of his dischargeable debts were discharged. 
Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to establish that the 
underlying reasons for his financial problems are resolved and are unlikely to recur. AG 
¶ 20(c) does not apply. The remaining mitigating conditions are not applicable to the 
facts in this case. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and 
financial position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day 
living expenses and debts. There is no information to show that he follows a budget. He 
presented no information about any lifestyle changes or about what income or spending 
changes he has made to prevent future financial problems. The available information is 
insufficient to establish clear indications that his financial problems are under control.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Notwithstanding his recent bankruptcy discharge of the debts alleged in the SOR, 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient evidence to establish a track record of financial 
responsibility, and that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. He failed to mitigate 
the Guideline F security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.e-1.i:    Against Applicant 
   (1.c and 1.d were not used) 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
