 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04248 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 17, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 15, 2014, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 5, 2015. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 1-13 and is admitted into the record. The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on February 25, 2015. Applicant was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. She submitted Item 14, which was admitted into the record without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted 39 debts and denied four (SOR 
¶¶ 1.o, 1.ff, 1.ll, and 1.oo). The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a 
careful review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact.1 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. She is twice divorced, the most recent in August 2008. 
She has two adult children. Two other children are deceased, one due to a medical 
reason and one caused by an accident. She has a high school diploma and has taken 
some college courses. She has no military experience, but held a security clearance 
when she worked for a different federal agency.2  
  
 The SOR lists 43 delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,276. The debts 
include five judgments, 36 collection accounts, and one charged-off account. She also 
admitted in her security clearance application to owing over $20,000 in delinquent 
federal taxes for several tax years.3 The debts are supported by credit reports from 
February 2002, January 2014, and February 2015, court records, and by Applicant’s 
interview with a defense investigator in January 2014.4 
 
 Applicant explained that her financial difficulties arose as a result of several 
circumstances in the early 2000s. No specific date is stated in the record, but her oldest 
son died of a medical condition leaving her with extensive medical debts. This led to her 
filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in approximately 2000. Several years later, her 
youngest son was accidentally killed and she paid his funeral expenses. At about the 
same time, her second husband left her. He left behind unpaid taxes and other joint 
debt.5 
 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 4, 14. 
 
3 Since the nonpayment of federal taxes was not specifically alleged in the SOR, I will not consider this 
evidence as disqualifying conduct. I will consider the evidence for determining the applicability of any 
mitigating circumstances and when I weigh the whole-person factors. See Item 4. 
 
4 Items 4-13. 
 
5 Item 14. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e (Judgments for $1,323; $300; $727.106; $981; $2,254): 
 
 Applicant submitted documented evidence that she satisfied the judgements 
listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e, and has made three payments totaling $400 toward the 
judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.c. These debts are resolved or being resolved. She claims 
to have set up a payment plan to satisfy the judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.a starting in 
December 2014, but provided no proof of payment. She also failed to submit proof that 
she was making payments on the judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.b. These two debts are 
unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f – 1.qq (Collection accounts and a charged-off account for $487; $483; 
$165; $182; $586; $243; $764; $484; $105; $643; $263; $57; $36; $34; $54; $577; 
$37; $74; $78; $109; $728; $254; $479; $755; $176; $140; $693; $1,175; $275; 
$1,380; $123; $645; $546; $755; $1,654; $653; $299; $500): 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.cc and 1.mm are duplicate accounts. SOR ¶ 1.mm is resolved in favor 
of Applicant. She provided documentation showing that SOR ¶ 1.ff was paid. This debt 
is resolved. For the remaining debts, she has contacted many of the creditors to confirm 
balances and establish payment plans; however, she failed to provide documentation of 
any established payment plans or proof of payment for these debts. She also failed to 
provide documentation supporting her disputes of SOR ¶¶ 1.o, 1.ll, and 1.oo. These 
debts are unresolved.8 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about her current financial status or a 
budget, other than her statement that she lives “paycheck to paycheck.” There is no 
evidence that she sought financial counseling.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
6 Department Counsel amended the original SOR ¶1.c to change the amount alleged from $72,710 to 
$727.10. See FORM, p. 3. 
 
7 Items 3, 4-9, 10-12, 14. 
 
8 Items 3, 10-12, 14. 
 
9 Item 14. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both the 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. She did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show that financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. Applicant presented evidence that some debts were due to 
circumstances beyond her control. For this mitigating condition to apply, she must also 
show responsible action toward resolving the debts. She resolved or is resolving three 
of the five judgments, however, beyond that; she has done little to resolve the remaining 
 
6 
 
 
debts. AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) do not apply, except as to SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.e., and 
1.ff. She also failed to document her dispute of SOR ¶¶ 1.o, 1.ll, and 1.oo. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply, except as to SOR ¶ 1.mm. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the tragic 
circumstances Applicant has experienced in her personal life over the years. 
Unfortunately, she failed to show a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.e:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.ee:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.ff:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.gg – 1.ll:    Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Subparagraph   1.mm:    For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.nn – 1.qq:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
