1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02386
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 11, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on December 30, 2013.  On August 29, 2014, the Department of Defense
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 29, 2014.  She
answered the SOR in writing on October 29, 2014, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received
the request soon thereafter, and I received the case assignment on January 21, 2015.
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 21, 2015, and I initially convened the
hearing as scheduled on February 18, 2015.  However, Department Counsel amended
2
the SOR at that session; and as a result, the matter was continued until April 14, 2015.
The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, which were received without
objection.  Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A
through C, which were received without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (TR) on April 24, 2015.  I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open
until May 14, 2015, to submit additional matters.  On May 13, 2015, she submitted
Exhibit D, which was received without objection.  The record closed on May 15, 2015.
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Motion to Amend SOR
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding Subparagraph 1.n.,
alleging Applicant is indebted to a state income taxing authority in the amount of $6,800
as the result of a tax lien, which she admits.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in all the
Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations, except for Subparagraphs 1.e., (which is
the same as 1.c.); and 1.i., which she denied.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
Applicant is a 43 year-old “Administrative Secretary,” working in the aerospace
industry.  (TR at page 16 lines 10~15.)  Applicant readily admits that she has a negative
monthly cash flow.  (TR at page 20 lines 6~23.)  She attributes her current financial
difficulties to not having enough federal and state taxes withheld from her monthly pay
check, beginning in 2007.  (TR at page 21 line 4 to page 23 at 21.)
1.a.  Applicant is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service, as the result of a
2011 tax lien, in the amount of about $19,650.  She avers that she had been making
monthly payments of $100 towards this federal tax lien, and increased this amount to
$350 on March 30, 2015.  (TR at page 23 line 22 to page 24 line 13.)  However, despite
having been given a month to do so, Applicant has submitted nothing in support of her
averment.  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.b.~1.e.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor B in an amount totaling about $2,142.
She has been proactive in settling these accounts, and is making a monthly payment of
$89.64 towards the settled amounts.  (TR at page 33 line 1 to page 38 line 6.)  This is
supported by documentation vis-a-vis this creditor.  (TR at page 47 line 18 to page 48
line 20, AppX A at pages 6~7, and AppX C.)  These allegations are found for Applicant.
3
1.f.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor F in the amount of about $395.  She has yet
to address this debt; and as a result, it is found against Applicant.  (TR at page 38 lines
7~16.)
1.g.  Applicant has paid her motor vehicle citation to city G in the amount of about
$185, as evidenced by correspondence with city G.  (TR at page 38 lines 7~16, and
AppX A at pages 1~2.)  This allegation is found for Applicant.
1.h.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor H in the amount of about $86.  She avers
she has “paid” this debt.  (TR at page 39 line 17 to page 40 line 12.)  However, despite
having been given a month to do so, Applicant has submitted nothing in support of her
averment.  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.i.  Applicant disputes the alleged $84 debt to Creditor I, averring that she can
offer a dispute letter in this regard.  (TR at page 40 line 13 to page 41 line 11.)  As this
debt does appear on the Government’s January 2014 credit report; and as Applicant
has submitted nothing further in this regard, this allegation is found against Applicant.
(GX 2 at page 10.)
1.j.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor J in the amount of about $71.  She has yet
to address this debt; and as a result, it is found against Applicant.  (TR at page 41 line
12 to page 42 line 12.)
1.k.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor K in the amount of about $63.  She avers
she has “reached out to them” vis-a-vis this debt.  (TR at page 42 line 13 to page 43 line
5.)  However, despite having been given a month to do so, Applicant has submitted
nothing in support of her averment.  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.l.  Applicant has paid her debt to the U.S. Postal Service in the amount of about
$55, as evidenced by correspondence from the U.S. Postal Service.  (TR at page 43
line 6 to page 44 line 5, and AppX A at pages 3~5.)  This allegation is found for
Applicant.
1.m.  Applicant is indebted to Creditor M in the amount of about $47.  She avers
she is “going to take care of” this debt.  (TR at page 44 lines 6~16.)  However, despite
having been given a month to do so, Applicant has submitted nothing in support of her
averment.  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.n.  Applicant is indebted to a state income taxing authority, as the result of a tax
lien, in the amount of about $6,800.  She is making weekly payments of $50 towards
this state tax lien, as evidenced documentation from the state taxing authority and from
her employer.  (TR at page 24 line 18 to page 26 line 25, at page 30 line 4 to page 32
line 13, and AppX A the last three pages.)  This allegation is found for Applicant.
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  (AG Paragraph 2.)  The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
According to AG Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
5
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has significant admitted past-due
debts, many of which she has not yet resolved.  I can find no countervailing Mitigating
Condition that is applicable here.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Applicant is well thought of both in her
community and at her work place.  (AppX B and D the last two pages.)  However, the
6
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to her eligibility and suitability
for a security clearance.  Applicant has failed to submit documentation in support of her
in-court averments.  For this reason, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns under the whole-person concept arising from her Financial Considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n. For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
