The Government submitted nine items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01281
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On July 11, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under  Guideline E (Personal Conduct),
and Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 21, 2015.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated February 18,
2015 . Applicant received the FORM on March 25, 2015. Applicant did not submit a1
response to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Applicant cut his credit card and stopped making payments because he could not afford it.      2
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the SOR allegation under Guideline
F  and provided explanations. He admitted the allegations under Guideline E, with the
exception of SOR 2.d.
Applicant is 40 years old. He received an associate’s degree in 2006. Applicant
never married and has no children. He has been employed with his current employer
since March 2013. (Item 5) He filed a security clearance application on March 25, 2013.
Personal Conduct
During the course of Applicant’s employment history, he has been terminated
from his job on three occasions. Applicant admitted the three terminations, but he
denied the underlying issue for his 2000 termination. In 2000, he was terminated
because $200 was missing from the night shift cash drawer. He stated that someone
else had “punched in two charitable contributions” of $100 each. He told his supervisor,
but he was terminated. (Item 4)
Applicant does not deny that he was terminated in September 2012 after
violating company policy. The incident involved a time card issue. He also was
terminated in March 2005, after a series of derogatory incidents. He was charged with
insubordination. (Item 8)
When Applicant completed his 2013 security clearance application, he failed to
disclose any financial delinquencies in his application. He answered “no” to the
questions in Section 26-Financial Record, which referred to the past seven years. He
denies that he falsified his application because the account had been delinquent for
more than seven years. 
Financial
The SOR alleges one delinquent debt in the amount of $33,030. (Item 7) In his
answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt because it does not “show up” on his
credit report from August 2014. (Item 4) However, in his explanation, he admits that he
owed a debt to the company for a credit card account. He stopped paying the account
in 1999 or 2000, when he owed about $9,000 or $10,000.  After beginning the process2
for a background check, Applicant tried to settle the account, but he did not have the
required lump sum of about $6,000. Applicant has made no payments since 2000. He
counted on the account dropping off his credit report. (Item 4)
Although Applicant reported various periods of unemployment through the years,
he did not provide a nexus as to his delinquent debt. He was employed from 1996 until
2000. He was unemployed from September 2012 until his current employment in 2013.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
3
He also was unemployed from March 2005 until June 2005. However, these were well
after the period that Applicant stopped paying on his alleged delinquent debt in the
SOR. The file also contains an interview from 2009 in which he speaks about the same
delinquent account as listed in the SOR. In the 2009 interview, Applicant stated that he
contacted the creditor and intended to set up a payment plan. (Item 9)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
4
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(d) credible adverse information in an adjudicative issue area that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.
Applicant has been terminated from his employment on three occasion, 2000,
2005, and 2012. He does not deny the terminations. He denied the underlying issue for
5
the 2000 incident. Applicant answered “No” on his 2013 security clearance application
in response to Section 26-Financial Record. The questions specifically Asked about
“the past (7) years. He did not list the delinquent debt from 2000.
In this case, as to the 2000 termination, it is 15 years old, but it is a part of
pattern. However, since he has had two more terminations, the most recent in 2012, he
shows a pattern of rule violations with respect to the other two terminations. Applicant
did not list the original delinquent debt due to the structure of the questions. I do not find
that he deliberately falsified the security clearance application with respect to the
omission of the debt. Although he did disclose the terminations, I do not find that he has
mitigated the personal conduct concerns. I have doubts about his reliability and
judgment.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
 Applicant has a collection account in the amount of $33,030 that has been unresolved
since about 2000. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC
DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left
to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulty
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant still has unresolved
debt. He stated that he cut up his credit card in 1999 and could not afford payments. In
an interview in 2009, Applicant stated that he intended to arrange a payment plan. He
made an attempt in 2013 to settle the account. This was during the security clearance
investigative process. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC
MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant had periods of unemployment but he provided no nexus with
the failure to pay the delinquent account. He did not act responsibly. He has known
6
about the debt for a long time. I cannot find that he acted responsibly under the
circumstances. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has no application. Promises to pay in the future
or waiting for an account to disappear from a credit report are not good-faith efforts.  FC
MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are  clear indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under
control) does not apply
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 40 year old employee of a defense contractor. He never married and has
no children. He has been terminated from employment on three occasions: 2000, 2005,
and 2012. He also has a delinquent debt that is unresolved and he has no plan in place
to pay the debt.
Applicant did not provide any evidence to persuade me that he refuted or
mitigated the Government’s case concerning the financial considerations security
concerns and the personal conduct security concerns. Any doubts must be resolved in
the Government’s favor. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
7
Paragraph 1, Guideline F  : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.b-2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
