 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04267 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On November 18, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 17, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant on the same day, and it was received on April 25, 2015. Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to any evidence offered, and it is 
admitted into the record. Applicant submitted additional information, which was admitted 
into the record without objection. The case was assigned to me on May 27, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. He denied the remaining 
allegations. I have incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 66 years old. He is a graduate of a service academy and received a 
master’s degree from a prestigious university. He and his wife have been married since 
1972 and have two grown children ages 41 and 37. He served on active duty from 1971 
until he was honorably discharged in 1980. He worked for the same federal contractor 
from 1995 until he was laid off in 2011, and subsequently retired. He held a security 
clearance while in the military and working for a federal contractor. He began working 
for his current employer, a federal contractor, in 2013.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to his wife’s gambling problem. He 
stated that his father-in-law lived with them for a period of 17 years until he passed 
away. During his final seven years he had cancer and diabetes. Applicant’s wife was the 
primary care provider for her father, and during the last couple of years she rarely got a 
full night’s sleep. It was stressful for her and she was exhausted. During that time, 
Applicant spent 60 or more hours a week working and was not available to help his wife. 
Around the same time, their daughter had serious medical problems which exacerbated 
Applicant’s wife’s fatigue. His wife’s father liked to gamble. Beginning in approximately 
2004, his wife took him to casinos, and she also gambled. Applicant believed this was a 
stress reliever for his wife. 
 
Applicant’s wife handled the family finances. In the past, Applicant never had a 
reason to question his wife’s spending. She hid her gambling habit from him. She would 
lose or hide the IRS W-2 forms that showed her winnings. She did not have taxes 
withheld from her winnings. None of her winnings were included in their federal income 
tax returns. Applicant stated at the time, he was unaware of the amount she won or lost. 
She used her winnings to continue to gamble. He estimated she lost about $140,000 
from 2005 to 2012.  
 
In approximately 2008 or 2009, Applicant was contacted by the mortgage lender 
for their home and was told the mortgage was six months delinquent. He was unaware 
until this time of his wife’s problem. Applicant used retirement savings to make the 
account current. He and his wife went to marriage counseling to resolve trust issues 
with regard to her gambling and their finances. Applicant wanted to trust his wife so he 
allowed her to continue to handle the finances. She was again untruthful to him about 
her gambling. He later learned she had misused their assets to gamble in approximately 
 
3 
 
 
2010 when he received notice from the mortgage lender that their house was in 
foreclosure. At that point, Applicant took over handling all of their finances. He and his 
wife maintain separate accounts. He keeps important financial accounts and documents 
in a locked safe. She is required to contribute $1,000 monthly for household living 
expenses.  
 
In 2012 Applicant’s wife acknowledged her destructive behavior and stopped 
gambling. Applicant and his wife attend Celebrate Recovery, a 12-step program for 
compulsive behaviors. His wife is addressing her gambling compulsion, and he is 
addressing his workaholic behavior.1 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($417,000) is a judgment on the foreclosed home. Applicant disputed 
the debt because the property was foreclosed and subsequently sold by the mortgage 
lender. Applicant provided a copy of IRS Form 1099-A regarding the property that he 
filed with his 2011 federal income tax return showing the outstanding balance of the 
principal that was reported to the IRS.2   
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($4,979-tax year 2010); 1.c ($7,316-tax year 2009); 1.d 
($2,784-tax year 2008); 1.e ($3,365-tax year 2007); and 1.f ($4,261-tax year 2006) are 
for delinquent taxes. These are tax debts owed on Applicant’s wife’s income from 
gambling that she failed to tell him about or provide him with the IRS W-2 forms. He has 
an installment agreement with the IRS and pays $500 monthly. His current cumulative 
balance owed is approximately $16,000. He has been making consistent payments.3 
 
The medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($188) Applicant indicated he paid in 2013, and it 
is no longer on his current credit reports.4 Applicant disputed the debt for an automobile 
account in SOR ¶ 1.h ($109). He provided a supporting document showing that he has 
the title to the vehicle in question. The debt is resolved.5 Applicant disputed the credit 
card debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($5,560) indicating that he paid the company that purchased the 
delinquent account a lump sum payment from his 401(k) account. He disclosed the 
account on his security clearance application and indicated he paid the collection 
company. The credit reports indicate the account was purchased by another lender. 
There is no collection account listed in the credit reports from a new lender showing the 
account is delinquent. Applicant intended to dispute the account on his credit report. 
The debt is resolved.6 
                                                          
1 Response to FORM. 
 
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Item 1 at pages 6-9. The documents provided support payment of taxes owed for 2006 and 2007. The 
installment agreement payments are for tax years 2008, 2009 and 2010. Response to FORM. 
 
4 Items 1, 4, 5, 6. 
 
5 Item 1 at pages 3, 28.  
 
6 Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant indicated that his wife is now retired from her job in education. He has 
spent more than 44 years working in support of the DOD. He understands his finances 
became an issue when his wife started gambling. She no longer gambles. He has never 
gambled. They live within their means. Except for the installment agreement with the 
IRS, all of their debts are paid. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts over several years, including federal 
income taxes, because of his wife’s gambling habit. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s gambling habit. He has 
resolved all of the SOR-listed debts, except his tax debt, which is being paid through an 
installment agreement. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant is still resolving 
his delinquent tax debt. 
 
Applicant’s wife’s gambling was the cause of his financial problems and was a 
condition beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), there must be 
evidence that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s wife 
handled the family’s finances. He was unaware there was a problem until his mortgage 
lender contacted him about his delinquent mortgage payments. Applicant and his wife 
attended counseling, and he believed at the time his wife’s gambling problem was 
resolved. He wanted to trust her so he continued allowing her to handle the finances. 
Although this may have been naïve, it is understandable considering their many years 
of marriage. However, he was on notice when the IRS contacted him about the failure to 
declare his wife’s gambling winnings in his taxes. His wife lied to him about her 
gambling, and Applicant should have been more assertive in monitoring his finances 
once notified by the IRS. He eventually took over managing all of their finances and 
resolved all of the delinquent debts, except his past-due taxes that he is paying through 
an installment agreement. I find Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, 
and AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
Applicant’s home was foreclosed and he received pertinent tax documents that 
he filed with his tax returns. He has an installment agreement with the IRS to resolve 
the remaining taxes owed. He provided a copy of the title to a car proving the debt 
alleged was resolved. He disputed the remaining debts indicating he had paid and 
resolved them with money from his 401(k), and they are not on his current credit 
reports. Applicant and his wife attend counseling to address their compulsive behavior 
problems. Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved and are under control. He 
made good-faith efforts to repay his creditors and is resolving his debts. I find AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) apply. Applicant disputed some debts. I find there is sufficient evidence 
to conclude the legitimacy of the disputes and the debts are no longer on his credit 
reports. With regard to the credit card debt he disputed and said was paid, the debt is 
shown as sold and there is no collection account listed on the credit report. I find 
Applicant’s statements credible. AG ¶ 20(e) applies. 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 66 years old. He has spent his entire adult life working for the DOD. 
He admitted he was a workaholic, and his wife was going through a stressful period 
when she became addicted to gambling, which caused their financial problems. He 
resolved the delinquent debts, except for a remaining installment agreement with the 
IRS. Applicant and his wife attend counseling to address their compulsive behavior 
problems. He manages their finances. After considering the whole person, I find there is 
sufficient evidence of mitigation, and Applicant has met his burden of persuasion. The 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  For Applicant 
   
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
