                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------                   )       ISCR Case No. 14-03612
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On December 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 9, 2014, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 14, 2015, and responded to the FORM within
the time permitted. The case was assigned to me on May 28, 2015.
In his response to the FORM, Applicant furnished a statement of explanation and
an updated credit report of April 27, 2015 that reflects the removal of the three listed
debts in the SOR. Applicant’s post-FORM submissions are admitted as Items 5 and 6.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated three delinquent debts
exceeding $25,000. Allegedly, these listed debts remain unpaid. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied each of the alleged debts. He
claimed each of the debts were resolved and no longer appear on his credit report of
December 14, 2014. (Item 2) Applicant attached a copy of his most recent credit report,
along with a letter of explanation. 
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 37-year-old senior technician for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married his first wife in April 2002 and divorced her in August 2011.
(Item 3) He remarried in October 2011 and has no children from either marriage. (Item
1) Applicant attended college classes between March 2005 and April 2007. (Item 3) He
enlisted in the Navy Reserve in October 2001 and served six years in the Navy’s
Inactive Reserve. (Item 3) He received an honorable discharge in October 2007. (Item
3)
Finances
While married to his first wife, Applicant opened three credit card accounts: one
with creditor 1.a in January 2007, one with creditor 1.b in July 2008, and one with
creditor 1.c in October 2006. (Item 4) Between 2010 and 2013, these three accounts
became delinquent. When reported in Applicant’s April 2013 credit report, these three
debts exceeded $25,000 and were charged-off by the respective creditors. 
In both his SOR response and post-FORM submission, Applicant attributed
responsibility for his listed debts to the actions of his first wife who utilized the three
credit cards covering the listed debts in the SOR without his permission. (Items 2 and 5)
He claimed he has since resolved the debts and has had them removed from his
3
updated credit report. He provided no documented specifics, though, of when and how
his debts were settled or resolved. 
Applicant’s April 2013 credit report reveals that the three listed debts were
charged off in 2011 (creditor 1.a), 2012 (creditor 1.c), and 2013 (creditor 1.b) for the
amounts owed. (Item 4) Last payments reported were in 2008 for creditor 1.a, in 2013
for creditor 1.b, and in 2010 for creditor 1.c. (Item 4) While two of the accounts are
listed as individual revolving accounts, creditor 1.b includes an authorized user
(presumably Applicant’s first wife). Whether Applicant’s wife used his credit cards
without his permission cannot be determined from the supplied credit reports or
Applicant’s explanations. Conceivably, assigned responsibility for the listed debts was
covered in Applicant’s divorce decree.  However, his divorce decree was not included in
the record.  Applicant provided no explanations either as to why these three debts were
not addressed with his first wife once he received the monthly bills from the creditors in
issue.  
In his post-FORM statement of response, he claimed he worked with his
creditors in 2013 to settle his debts at a lower balance, and then had the debt entries
removed from his credit report. (Items 5 and 6) For reasons unclear, he could not
retrieve his payment records from his bank to document their satisfaction. (Item 5) 
 Applicant’s three listed debts entail significant amounts. Two of the debts
(creditors 1.a and 1.c) are covered in Applicant’s updated April 2015 credit report as
charged-off accounts. None of his credit reports reveal what 2013 payment actions
Applicant took with his three listed creditors. Without more documented payment
progress, Applicant’s listed debts cannot be considered to be settled or resolved
through voluntary payment initiatives. That one of his listed debts (creditor 1.b) no
longer appears on his latest updated credit report is not by itself persuasive evidence of
his satisfying the debt by payment or other means of resolution. 
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf.
Nor did he provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
4
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
5
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully employed welder for a defense contractor who accumulated
three delinquent debts between 2010 and 2013. These three debts represent
defaulted consumer accounts opened by Applicant and ultimately charged-off by the
individual creditors between 2011 and 2013 for non-payment. Applicant attributed the
debt delinquencies to the actions of his first wife. 
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts and his past inability or
unwillingness to address these debts warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligation,” apply
to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to most of the debts covered in
the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, §
262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his latest
credit reports. Some judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s unexplained
delinquencies and his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in addressing his
listed debts once he became aware his ex-wife was misusing his credit cards. See
ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004).  These debts were charged-off
by the creditors in 2012. Not only are his listed debt delinquencies ongoing, but he
has failed to address them in any tangible way.
                                          
6
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
In Applicant’s case, his debts are attributable in part to the actions of his first
wife who ostensibly misused the three credit cards in issue without Applicant’s
advance approval. Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some
extenuating circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay or otherwise
resolve his debts. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly.” 
What is not clear from this developed record are the specifics of when and how
Applicant’s first wife misused his credit cards and why Applicant was not able to
address the debts earlier before they were charged-off. Whether he acted
responsibility is directly contingent upon his providing documented evidence of how
he addressed his finances. Without documentation of financial counseling and
specific steps he has taken to address his three delinquent debts, mitigation credit is
not available to Applicant based on the evidence developed in the record.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of the three delinquent debts listed in
the SOR.  Since they became delinquent, he has not shown any manifest effort in
addressing any of his covered debts to mitigate his still delinquent accounts.
Resolution of his delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to his regaining control
of his  finances.
While spousal actions might have played a considerable role in his
accumulation of the three delinquent debts in issue, Applicant failed to provide more
specific explanatory material for consideration. Endorsements and performance
evaluations might have been helpful, too, in making a whole-person assessment of
his overall clearance eligibility, but were not provided. Overall, clearance eligibility
assessment of Applicant based on the limited amount of information available for
consideration in this record does not enable him to establish judgment and trust levels
sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of his accumulation of delinquent
debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations and his lack of more specific explanations for his debt
accruals, it is still soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to
repay his debts and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with the
minimum requirements for holding a security clearance. 
7
More time is needed to facilitate’s Applicant’s making the necessary progress
with his finances to facilitate conclusions that his finances are sufficiently stabilized to
permit him access to classified information. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.c:      Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
