 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02518 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 23, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Applicant used marijuana once or twice in 2008 and up to three times in 
2013. His 2013 marijuana use occurred while holding a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 2, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) seeking to upgrade his security clearance level. On 
September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, 
and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on October 13, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 18, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 6, 2015, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on April 21, 2015. The 
Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was left 
open for receipt of additional documentation and, on April 25, 2015, Applicant submitted 
AE E. Department Counsel had no objection to AE E, and it was admitted. The record 
then closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 27, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a government contractor. He has two 
bachelor’s degrees. He is single and has no children. (GE 1; GE 2.) 
 
 Applicant has worked for his present employer since 2010. He applied for, and 
received, a security clearance in May 2012. On April 2, 2013, Applicant submitted an e-
QIP seeking to upgrade his security clearance level. He disclosed marijuana use in 
2008 and 2013 on that e-QIP.1 (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 21.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana in 2008 and 2013, and that his 
2013 marijuana use occurred while holding a security clearance. In his Answer and 
during his testimony, Applicant admitted all of the allegations contained in the SOR. 
(Answer; Tr. 28.) 
 
 Applicant first used marijuana in 2008 while in college. He tried it once or twice 
out of curiosity. He did not like marijuana and did not use it again until a girlfriend 
requested he try it in March 2013. He used it two or three times over a one-week period 
with her in his backyard. He had forgotten he had a security clearance when he used 
marijuana in 2013, because he had not been briefed into any classified or protected 
programs. He was aware marijuana use violated both state and Federal laws. His 
employer is not aware of his drug use. He is no longer in a relationship with that 
girlfriend. He stated that he no longer associates with drug users. (Tr. 28-48.) 
 
 Applicant presented a signed statement of intent in which he vowed “I will not 
abuse any illegal drugs in the future.” (AE E.) He also presented three highly 
complementary letters of recommendation (AE A); copies of three awards (AE B; AE 
C.); and two performance reviews (AE D.) They show that Applicant consistently 
performs above expectations and is a valued employee. (AE D.) He is respected by his 
managers for his professionalism, dedication, and integrity. (AE A.) 
   
 
 
 
                                                          
1 He also disclosed his 2008 marijuana use on his 2012 e-QIP. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). Applicant used marijuana once or 
twice in 2008 and up to three times 2013. His 2013 marijuana use occurred while 
holding a security clearance. The facts established through the Government’s evidence, 
and through Applicant’s admissions, raise security concerns under both of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Only two years have passed since Applicant’s last use of an illegal substance. 
Additionally, five years passed between his first use of marijuana and his second use. 
He was a mature adult employed in the defense industry and possessed a security 
clearance at the time of his multiple uses in 2013. I cannot find that future use is unlikely 
to occur. In this instance, an appropriate period of abstinence has not been 
demonstrated. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 26(a). 
 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) provides limited mitigation. Applicant stated that he does not intend to 
use illegal substances in the future. AE E contains an explicit signed statement of intent 
not to use illegal substances again. He claimed that he no longer associates with drug 
users. These are factors that weigh in Applicant’s favor. Applicant used illegal 
substances in the past out of curiosity or due to social pressure. Despite his assurances 
not to use drugs in the future, based on his past conduct and his age when he made 
those decisions, I am not confident he will comply. As noted above, Applicant has not 
yet demonstrated an appropriate period of abstinence. Applicant has not provided 
sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof to overcome the concerns raised by his 
poor judgment in using illegal substances, especially while holding a security clearance. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, and is an activity that could affect his personal, professional, or community 
standing because he has not disclosed it to his employer. The above condition applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant was honest and disclosed his marijuana use on his e-QIP. He has 
earned a number of awards and certificates, and is highly respected by his employer.  
However, he is embarrassed by his past drug use and has not disclosed it to his 
employer. Applicant made poor, self-serving decisions to violate laws and security 
procedures when he used marijuana while possessing a security clearance. He failed to 
produce sufficient evidence that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur, without 
the passage of more time or other evidence that demonstrates trustworthiness and 
good judgment. He has not obtained counseling or taken other steps to indicate that 
risky or illegal conduct is unlikely to recur. He is still vulnerable to potential coercion. 
The evidence does not support the full application of any of the above mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not used 
marijuana since 2013. He voluntarily divulged information about his drug use on his e-
QIP. He testified that he will not use illegal substances in the future. However, Applicant 
was a mature adult with a high level of responsibility when he knowingly violated laws 
and security procedures. Not enough time has passed since Applicant’s drug use while 
 
7 
 
possessing a security clearance in 2013 to permit a finding that drug abuse is unlikely to 
recur.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
