 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-03956 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was convicted of underage drinking in 1996 and 1997. He was 
convicted of driving while intoxicated in 2007 and 2013. He remains on criminal 
probation until 2017. He failed to rebut or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised 
under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. His 
eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
On June 6, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 2, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DoD 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department 
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On January 5, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) in writing, and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 
9, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 
three Items. She mailed Applicant a complete copy of the FORM on February 23, 2015. 
Applicant received the FORM on March 20, 2015, and had 30 days from its receipt to 
file objections and submit additional information. Applicant did not submit any other 
information. On May 22, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned the case to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in the 
SOR. His admissions are incorporated into the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and unmarried. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2000. 
In January 2009 he began his current position with a healthcare company. Before being 
hired by his employer, he worked as a consultant. (Item 2.)    
  
 Applicant has a history of alcohol abuse. He admitted that in May 1996 and 
August 1997, he was charged and found guilty of underage drinking. In September 
2007 he was charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI) 3rd degree. He plead guilty to 
DWI 4th degree, was fined, and placed on probation for two years. In June 2012 he was 
charged with another DWI. In February 2013 he was convicted of the charge, fined, and 
placed on probation until March 2017. He did not present evidence that he has 
participated in a substance abuse evaluation or treatment program.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
 
3 
 
 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to alcohol 
consumption:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes a condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 On four occasions Applicant consumed alcohol to the point of committing criminal 
violations, the two most recent of which involved impaired judgment while driving. The 
evidence raises the above trustworthiness concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
  
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has a history of abusing 
alcohol, beginning in 1996 and continuing into 2012. He has been convicted of driving 
while intoxicated twice. Given the fact that his misconduct occurred on more than one 
occasion, AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant admits that he 
has an alcohol problem or has taken steps to address it. AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. He 
did not submit evidence that he is participating in an employee assistance program for 
treatment of his problems. AG ¶ 23(c) does not apply. He did not provide documentation 
that he successfully completed treatment for alcohol related issues, and has received a 
favorable prognosis from a duly qualified health care provider. AG ¶ 23(d) does not 
apply.        
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant has been convicted four times for criminal conduct related to alcohol 
abuse. The last conviction was in February 2013, at which time he was placed on 
probation until March 2017. There is no evidence that his probation has been 
terminated early. The evidence raises both disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply for the 
reasons articulated concerning AG ¶ 23(a) above. There is no evidence that Applicant 
was pressured into consuming alcohol to the point of impairment or that he did not 
commit the charges for which he was found guilty. AG ¶ 32(b) and AG ¶ 32(c) do not 
apply. Applicant did not present evidence of participation in substance abuse 
rehabilitation, remorse, good employment record, or any of the other factors listed in AG 
¶ 32(d). It does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 38-year-old man, who 
began working for a defense contractor in 2009. He has a history of alcohol abuse, 
which began while he was underage. Based on the evidence in the case file, in 
particular the fact that Applicant was placed on four years of probation in 2013, it 
appears that Applicant has a serious alcohol problem which he has not addressed. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For these reasons, I conclude 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from 
his alcohol consumption and criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:        Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:        Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
