 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-02718   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to file Federal income tax returns for tax years 2007 through 
2014. He failed to file state income tax returns for tax years 1984 through 2014, except 
one year. He did not provide evidence that he resolved or is resolving the allegations 
raised by the Government. Financial security concerns were not mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 22, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On September 8, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the  Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective in the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 13, 2014, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) 
On March 21, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing three Items was 
provided to Applicant on April 22, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on May 6, 2015, and timely returned the receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). He provided an additional letter in response to the FORM within the 
30-day period. I marked that document as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and admitted it into 
the record without an objection from Department Counsel. DOHA assigned the case to 
me on June 18, 2015. 
 
Ruling on Evidence 
 
Item 3 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of 
Applicant. The four-page document is a summary of an interview of Applicant conducted 
on February 27, 2014. An ROI may be received and considered as evidence when it is 
authenticated by a witness.1 Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has not 
raised the issue via an objection, I am raising it sua sponte. While it is clear that 
Department Counsel is acting in good faith, having highlighted the issue in the FORM,2 
Item 3 is not authenticated. Applicant’s failure to raise this issue in his reply to the 
FORM is not a knowing waiver of the rule.3 Accordingly, Item 3 is not admissible and is 
not considered in this Decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s SOR response admitted both SOR allegations. (Item 1.) His 
admissions are accepted as factual findings and incorporated herein.  
 
 Applicant is 61 years old and unmarried. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1976. 
He has worked as an engineer for a defense contractor since November 1976. He has 
held a security clearance while employed. (Item 2.)  
  
                                                 
1Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal 
Board restated existing case law that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
 
2 Department Counsel Brief at 2, n 1. 
 
3Wavier means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right 
and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009). 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his November 2013 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed 
that he had not filed Federal or state income tax returns for tax years 2007 through 
2013. (Item 3.) In his October 2014 answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he 
failed to file Federal income tax returns for, at least, tax years 2007 through 2012. He 
admitted that he failed to file state income tax returns, for, at least, tax years 2004 
through 2012.  Applicant stated that he was not “financially overextended.” (Item 1, Item 
2.) He said that he opted over the years to meet work obligations rather than personal 
obligations, such as cleaning his house so he could organize financial records. (Item 1.) 
He said he does not believe he owes taxes because his withholding deductions have 
always covered the taxes in those instances when he filed tax returns. (AE A.) 
   
 In his June 2015 response to the FORM, Applicant expanded on his disclosure of 
failure to file income tax returns and further admitted as follows: 
 
1.  Prior to 1984, I filed all my [state] tax forms. Since 1984, I only filed the 
state forms for 2001 (the same year I got my federal form done on time). 
 
2. I had filed Federal income forms for the years 2001-2007 prior to the 
interview in 2008. I did not file for the 2008 tax year. This was the year I 
moved from [one program to another] and my workload became 
exorbitant.4 (AE A.) 
 
He reiterated that his failure to file tax returns to “being overextended at work; and 
letting my house, and particularly my mail, get way out of control leading to the inability 
to find tax records.” (AE A.)  
 
 Applicant did not present evidence that he obtained credit or financial counseling 
to assist in the resolution of his delinquent tax returns. He offered no plan or timeline for 
filing the tax returns. He submitted no evidence concerning the quality of his 
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record 
with respect to handling classified information and observation of security procedures. 
He provided no character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, 
or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
                                                 
4 The SOR did not allege these additional unfiled tax returns as a security concern. Hence, they will not 
be considered in the analysis of disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in the analysis of 
mitigating conditions or the whole-person concept. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted that he did not 
file a Federal return for 2007. Based on his disclosure in SCA and answer to the SOR, this Decision will 
reference 2007 as the year he stopped filing Federal income tax returns.   
 
 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual federal, state or local income tax returns as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to meet his financial obligations, specifically his 
duty to file Federal income tax returns from 2007 through 2012, and state income tax 
returns for the years 2004 through 2012. The evidence raises the above security 
concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant failed to file Federal income tax returns for tax years 2007 to 2014, and 
state income tax returns from 1984 to 2014, with the exception of 2001.  Because he 
 
 
6 
 
 
failed to provide proof that he has filed or is filing the returns, he did not demonstrate 
that such problems are unlikely to continue or recur. His reliability and trustworthiness in 
managing his tax obligations remain a serious concern. The evidence does not support 
the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence that his failure to file income tax returns 
for numerous years were circumstances beyond his control.  AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
He has not participated in financial counseling or sought the assistance of a tax 
consultant to help resolve his tax issues. He presented no evidence from which to 
conclude that there are clear indications that his tax problems are under control. AG ¶ 
20(c) has no application. He did not provide any documentation to demonstrate that he 
made a good-faith effort to file the delinquent returns; thus AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 61 years old. He  
is an adult, who is accountable and responsible for his voluntary choices and conduct 
that underlie the security concerns expressed in the SOR. His failure to file Federal 
income tax returns from 2007 to 2014, and state income tax returns from 1984 to 2014, 
with the exception of 2001, demonstrates an egregious disregard for his legal 
obligations. Proffering excuses of work burdens and a disorganized house for all those 
years lacks credibility, and generates no confidence in his ability to comply with security 
procedures. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet 
his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
