 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-00956 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established his eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
He was unable to meet his financial obligations after his income decreased sharply. He 
resolved some of his delinquent debts through bankruptcy. The only delinquent debts 
that remained post-bankruptcy were student loans that Applicant incurred in attaining 
his undergraduate degree. He submitted documentation that following the bankruptcy 
he paid his student loans on a consistent basis before they were recently placed in 
forbearance status while he pursues a graduate degree. He has not incurred other 
delinquent debt in the five years that have passed since the bankruptcy. He has 
received financial counseling and his overall financial situation appears to now be under 
control. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his conduct and circumstances raised security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 On May 28, 2014, Applicant answered the 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
SOR, waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on the written record 
(Answer). 
 
 On February 2, 2015, Department Counsel issued a file of relevant material 
(FORM) and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains six documentary exhibits, which 
were marked and admitted into evidence as Exhibits (Ex.) 1 – 6. Applicant submitted a 
response to the FORM (Response), which was marked and admitted into evidence as 
Ex. A. On April 13, 2015, I was assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact:2 
 
 Applicant is in his early thirties. He is married with three children. He served in 
the U.S. military from 2000 to 2006, receiving an honorable discharge. He is currently 
employed as a technician with a defense contractor. He held a security clearance while 
in the military, and has had access to and handled classified information since starting 
his current job in 2011.  
 
 Applicant submitted his current security clearance application (SCA) in 2013. He 
voluntarily disclosed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2010. He explained that his pay 
decreased sharply in 2009, and he was unable to keep up with his financial obligations. 
His delinquent debts, except for the student loans he acquired to pursue an 
undergraduate degree, were discharged through bankruptcy. The 2010 bankruptcy is 
referenced in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
Applicant also disclosed on the SCA his delinquent student loans. A credit report 
that was requested as part of his background investigation confirmed the bankruptcy 
and three delinquent student loan accounts. The only other negative entries are for past 
debts that were resolved through the bankruptcy. The credit report also reflects 
numerous accounts in good standing, including several student loan accounts.3 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has several delinquent student loan accounts 
with a balance of nearly $40,000 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant submitted with his Response 
documentation that he was paying his student loans before they were placed in 
forbearance status. Applicant’s student loans were placed in forbearance while he 
pursues a graduate degree. (Ax. A)  
 
The SOR further alleges that Applicant has a separate set of student loans, 
totaling about $10,000, which are also purportedly delinquent (SOR ¶1.c). Applicant 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 In reaching the above findings of fact, I have made only those reasonable inferences supported by the 
evidence and, where necessary, resolved any potential conflict raised by the evidence. 
 
3 The credit report, Gx. 6, is from 2013. A more recent report was not supplied by either party. 
 
3 
 
states that the student loan accounts referenced in ¶ 1.c are loans he co-signed for his 
ex-wife. With his Response, Applicant provided documentation establishing that these 
student loan accounts are not delinquent. He also submitted proof of receiving financial 
counseling. (Ax. A) 
 
 Applicant states in his FORM Response: 
 
Since 2011 I have worked with classified information with Zero 
Discrepancies. I treat classified information with the utmost importance. I 
understand that having access to this information is a privilege, not a right. 
I take this privilege very seriously as I understand the ramifications should 
classified information be leaked or intercepted by persons it is not 
intended for. My position within my company affords me the opportunity to 
help train our nation’s military to be the best in the world. I take great pride 
in doing what I do . . . . 
 
(Ax. A, ¶ 5) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security 
clearance.”).  
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.4 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debt, which led to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
in 2010, raises the financial considerations concern. The record evidence also raises 
the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) 
and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns raised by an individual’s past financial problems. The mitigating conditions 
that are potentially relevant in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
                                                          
4 Security clearance determinations are “not an exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a 
person’s security suitability.” ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004). An administrative 
judge is required to examine an individual’s past history and current circumstances to make a predictive 
judgment about an individual’s ability and willingness to protect and safeguard classified information. 
ISCR Case No. 11-12202; ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013).  
 
5 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were related to a decrease in salary. He 
resolved about half of his past-due debts through bankruptcy. He resolved the 
remainder of his past-due debts, which are all related to student loans he incurred 
pursuing his undergraduate degree, by paying the debt and bringing the accounts 
current. His student loans are now in forbearance while he pursues a graduate degree. 
He received financial counseling through the bankruptcy process. He has apparently not 
incurred any other delinquent debt in the five years that have passed since the 
bankruptcy. In short, Applicant resolved his past financial issues and it now appears that 
his financial situation is under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).5 Applicant served honorably in the military from 2000 to 
2006. He has had access to and handled classified information in the past without 
apparent issue. He has been candid about his financial situation throughout the security 
clearance process. This favorable record evidence, coupled with the passage of five 
years since the bankruptcy without accumulation of additional delinquent debt or other 
financial issues, mitigates the security concerns raised by his past financial problems. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         For Applicant 
 
                                                          
5 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
