 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX    )  ADP Case No. 14-02573 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 14 delinquent debts, totaling 
$20,995. She failed to provide sufficient documentation of her progress resolving her 
financial problems. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. Her eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 31, 2013, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions version of an application for a public trust position (SF 86). (Item 4) On July 
24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended, and modified; DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it 
is consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position, which entails access to sensitive information. (Item 1) 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The DOD CAF recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
access to sensitive information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On August 26, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and she did 
not request a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated February 13, 2015, was provided to her on March 12, 2015.1 Applicant submitted 
information within the time period of 30 days after receipt of copy of the FORM. By 
memorandum dated May 4, 2015, Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s 
post-FORM submissions. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except 
SOR ¶ 1.h She also provided mitigating information. (Item 3) Her admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old claims processor employed by a defense contractor 
since March 2013. She graduated from high school in May 2004. Applicant has never 
married and has a nine-year-old daughter. She has never served in the military. There 
is no evidence of felony or misdemeanor charges, alcohol abuse, or use of illegal drugs. 
There is no evidence of security or rule violations. (Items 4, 5) 
 
From September 2004 to December 2004, Applicant was employed as a 
machine operator. From December 2004 to December 2006, she was unemployed. 
From December 2006 to June 2007, Applicant was employed as a claims analyst. From 
June 2007 to December 2007, she was unemployed. From December 2007 to 
November 2008, Applicant was employed as a document filer. From November 2008 to 
November 2009, she was unemployed. From November 2009 to July 2011, Applicant 
was employed as a customer service representative. From July 2011 to April 2012, she 
was employed as a loan processor. From April 2012 to March 2013, Applicant was 
unemployed. She received unemployment benefits during her last three period of 
unemployment. (Items 4, 5)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges a total of 14 debts -- 13 delinquent medical debts and 1 
non-medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.h), totaling $20,995. The allegations are summarized as 
follows: SOR ¶ 1.a ($161), ¶ 1.b ($14,215), ¶ 1.c ($908), ¶ 1.d ($160), ¶ 1.e ($520), ¶ 1.f 
($598), ¶ 1.g ($160), ¶ 1.h collection account non-medical debt ($136); ¶ 1.i ($2,266), ¶ 
1.j ($240), ¶ 1.k ($210); ¶ 1.l ($1,001); ¶ 1.m ($230); and ¶ 1.n ($190).   
 
                                            
1
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated February 25, 
2015, and Applicant’s receipt is dated March 12, 2015. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant 
that she had 30 days after her receipt to submit information.  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant attributes her financial problems to transportation and medical 
expenses associated with severe injuries she sustained in an automobile accident “in 
2006 or 2007.” She did not have health care insurance at the time of the accident and 
as a result accrued the medical bills listed in her SOR. Applicant has not been able to 
pay these bills as a result of gaps in employment and multiple periods of 
unemployment. (Item 5) She stated in her April 9, 2013 Office of Personal Management 
Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI) that she knew she was responsible for these 
debts and would contact her creditors as necessary and set up payment plans. (Item 5) 
 
In her SOR answer, Applicant provided a document from a medical creditor that 
she would be making $40 monthly payments on a $320 balance. Department Counsel 
correctly pointed out in her FORM that this was insufficient evidence to establish a 
payment plan on her $20,859 total debt. (Item 3) In her FORM response, Applicant did 
provide recent documentation that she paid the non-medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.h for 
$136, and three medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($160), 1.g ($160), and 1.k ($210). 
(FORM response) 
 
 However, with regard to the remaining medical debts, Applicant’s documentation 
falls short of the mark. She provided a self-prepared typed statement listing each SOR 
debt stating that she agreed to pay $40 a month for the remaining unpaid medical 
debts. Her unannotated documentation does not support her assertion that she has an 
approved $40 monthly payment plan in place to address her remaining balance. (FORM 
response) There is no evidence of financial counseling. 
    
The FORM advised Applicant that she had 30 days “to submit documentary 
information in rebuttal or to explain adverse information in the FORM.” (FORM at 7) The 
February 25, 2015 DOHA letter conveying the FORM to Applicant reiterated that 
Applicant had a 30-day opportunity to submit evidence supporting her approval or 
continuation of access to sensitive information.     
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The Government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance [or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity 
clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security and sensitive records is of paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to [sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.” Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a trustworthiness 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s SOR and 
credit reports allege 14 delinquent debts. 
 
  In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. (internal 
citation omitted).  
 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;2 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving her delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions except for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, and 
1.k. With regard to those debts, AG ¶ 20(d) is applies. 
 
                                            
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s 2006 to 2007 accident is a circumstance beyond her control. She also 
sustained several periods of unemployment for which she received unemployment 
compensation. These are circumstances largely beyond her control that adversely 
affected her finances; however, Applicant did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances. She received ample notice of her delinquent debts raising 
trustworthiness concerns. She did not provide sufficient information about her finances 
to establish her inability to make greater progress paying her SOR creditors. There is no 
record evidence of financial counseling.     
 
There is limited financial documentation relating to her showing maintenance of 
contact with SOR creditors,3 establishment of payment plans, disputes of debts, 
payments to creditors, or other evidence of progress or resolution of her SOR debts. 
There is insufficient evidence that her financial problems are being resolved, are under 
control, and will not occur in the future. Financial considerations concerns are not 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 30-year-old claims processor employed by a defense contractor since May 2013. 
                                            
3
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Some circumstances beyond her control adversely affected her finances, including her 
2006 to 2007 automobile accident and periods of unemployment. She is a single parent. 
Applicant is credited with mitigating the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.k. There is 
no evidence of felony or misdemeanor charges, alcohol abuse, use of illegal drugs, or of 
rule violations. She contributes to her company and the Department of Defense.  
 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant’s credit 
reports and SOR allege 14 delinquent debts totaling $20,995. As a result of mitigating 
four debts, she has modestly reduced that amount. She failed to provide sufficient 
documentation of her progress resolving her financial problems, which shows lack of 
financial responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect sensitive information. See AG ¶ 18. 
More financial progress is necessary to mitigate trustworthiness concerns. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s eligibility for 
a public trust position, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
public trust position. Unmitigated financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude 
that grant or reinstatement of a public trust position to Applicant is not warranted at this 
time.  
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances, 
articulate her position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. She failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her past efforts to 
address her delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on a 
limited explanation without sufficient corroborating evidence, financial considerations 
security concerns remain. 
  
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of reform necessary to justify the award of a security 
clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented resolution of her past-due 
debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with her obligations, she may well be 
able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security clearance worthiness 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to classified information at this time. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.e - 1.f:   Against Applicant   
Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider  
Administrative Judge 
