1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-02531
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 24, 2015
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on March 13, 2013. (Item 4.) On July 15, 2014, the Department of Defense issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline H (Drug
Involvement) concerning Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO)
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 11, 2014, and requested a
decision by an administrative judge without a hearing. (Item 3.) Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s written case (FORM) to Applicant on March 9, 2015. The
Item 5 is inadmissible and will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an1
unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on April
1, 2013. It was never adopted by Applicant as his own statement, or otherwise certified by him to be accurate.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an
authenticating witness. Given Applicant’s admission of all of the allegations in the SOR, it is also cumulative.
2
FORM contained six documents.  Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on1
March 18, 2015. He was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit any
additional documentation. Applicant did not submit any additional information. The case
was assigned to me on May 21, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 39, single, and has a bachelor’s degree. He is employed by a
defense contractor and seeks to retain a security clearance that he has held since 2003
in connection with his employment. (Item 6.) Applicant admitted all the allegations of the
SOR, with explanations. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into the following
findings of fact.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H, Drug Involvement)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he used illegal drugs.
The majority of Applicant’s drug use occurred in 2004 and 2005. According to
Applicant, he was working long hours, twelve to sixteen hour days for six to seven days
at a time. This schedule went on for nine months. In his Answer to the SOR he states, “I
was overworked and sleep deprived, and as a result, was not fully accessing my
rational brain to make good decisions.” (Item 3 at 3.)
At that same time he met a “girl” and began hanging out with her. She held
parties, at which drugs were used. Applicant eventually began to partake of the drugs,
using marijuana about four times, cocaine once, methamphetamine seven times, and
opium three times. Applicant states, “I went to a few more of her parties but I eventually
decided these parties, the drugs, and she were not conducive to my well being, so I
ended contact with all. I do not have contact with her or anyone else from those parties
and have not had contact with them since that timeframe.” (Item 3 at 3.)
Applicant’s last use of any illegal drugs was in 2007, when he was visiting a
friend from college who offered him some marijuana. “I have not done or tried any drugs
since, nor do I plan to,” he states. (Item 3 at 3.)
Applicant was fully forthcoming on his e-QIP of March 13, 2013, concerning the
extent of his drug use. (Item 4 at Section 23.)
3
Section 23 also asks, “Provide explanation of why you intend or do not intend to
use this drug or controlled substance in the future.” Applicant stated, “I have no use for
marijuana or drugs in general in my life. I was curious but there are too many negatives
and problems and I don’t want to go down that road.” (Item 4.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
4
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1)
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; and
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
I have studied all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and especially
considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
5
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Applicant used marijuana, cocaine, methamphetamine and opium a total of about
fifteen time times between 2004 and 2007, when holding a security clearance. Both of
the disqualifying conditions have application to this case.
Applicant has, however, overcome the Government’s case. His use was
infrequent, the most recent use happened eight years ago, and it is very unlikely to
recur. He has always been truthful with DoD about his use, and credibly states that he
will not use marijuana or other drugs in the future. He no longer associates with the
people he used drugs with. Guideline H is found for Applicant. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), Applicant’s
conduct is not recent. Based on the state of the record, I find that there have been
permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, at the present time, I
find that there is little potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶
2(a)(8)), and that there is also little likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use. 
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding for Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations
expressed in Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
