 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03678 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to submit evidence to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, that he does not have a current financial problem, or that his financial 
problem is being resolved or is under control. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F 
security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 18, 2013. 
On September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on September 30, 2014, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 20, 
2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated February 24, 2015. Applicant 
received the FORM on March 13, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM or submit any information.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Issues 
 
 In the FORM, the Government offered as evidence a summary of Applicant’s 
interview (PSI) with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator conducted 
on April 4, 2013. (Item 3) The Government noted that Item 3 had not been 
authenticated, and acknowledged that the document was subject to an objection on that 
ground. (Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20 (An ROI may be received with an 
authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible     . . . . )) The Government 
invited Applicant to correct, add, revise, delete, or update the information in Item 3, or to 
object. (Footnote 1, pg. 2) 
 
 Applicant received the FORM on March 13, 2015. He did not provide a response 
to the FORM, and submitted no corrections, clarifying comments, or rebuttal. He did not 
object to the FORM or to Item 3.  
 
The Supreme Court has explained that “waiver is the intentional relinquishment 
or abandonment of a known right.” Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U.S. 443, 458, n. 13 (2004) 
(quoting United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 733 (1993)). I presume Applicant read 
the FORM and elected not to submit a response or objection. When evidence is 
submitted in a case, an Applicant is expected to object to the evidence, if there is a 
reason to do so, and he or she believes the evidence weighs against his or her position. 
As a general statement of the law, failure to object to consideration of evidence results 
in waiver.   
 
There is no requirement that Department Counsel discuss the benefits or merits 
of making a rights’ election. Indeed, Applicant may have relied upon Department 
Counsel’s inclusion of Item 3 in the record, and he may have wanted that evidence 
considered.   
 
Applicant’s election not to object may have been better “informed” if Department 
Counsel’s advice in the FORM had included the comments that: if Applicant elects to 
object to consideration to the OPM summary of his statement (Item 3), it will not be 
accepted as evidence in his case; that if he does not object the PSI will be considered 
as evidence; and that Applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM would be considered 
as a waiver of his right to object, and that his waiver would then allow an administrative 
judge to consider the document on its face.  
 
Because there was no explicit warning that he had a “right” to exclusion of the 
OPM PSI (Item 3), I will not consider any information in Item 3 that weighs against 
approval or reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance in this case.  See Directive ¶ 
 
3 
 
 
E3.1.20; ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (explaining that an OPM PSI 
is inadmissible unless properly authenticated).   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegation. His admission is incorporated as a finding 
of fact. After a review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact:  
 
Applicant is 37 years old. He graduated from high school in 1995. He married his 
spouse in December 2010, and he has two children of this marriage (ages 14 and 12), 
and three step-children (28, 20, and 19). This is his first application for a security 
clearance. According to his 2013 SCA, Applicant has worked as a wireless engineer for 
two companies from 2002 to present. Additionally, he is self-employed as the co-owner 
of a company (apparently a real estate investment and management business) since 
2008. 
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 26 (Financial History) of the 2013 SCA that his 
company had a delinquent debt (not alleged in the SOR). He explained that the housing 
market had been slow and the rental property they have had not been rented and they 
were behind on the payments. Applicant claimed that he set up a payment plan last 
year, but that this year he was not able to afford the payments. He averred that his 
company was working toward getting the debt resolved.  
 
The SOR alleges a $30,000 delinquent judgment, filed against Applicant in favor 
of a bank in August 2012. In his answer, Applicant admitted the debt, but he provided 
no information concerning the delinquent judgment. He provided no information about 
when he acquired the debt, why it became delinquent, what efforts he took to stay in 
contact with the creditor, or of efforts to pay the debt or the delinquent judgment.  
 
Furthermore, Applicant provided no information about his current earnings and 
financial position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, his 
monthly expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-
to-day living expenses and his debts. There is no information to indicate whether he 
participated in financial counseling or whether he follows a budget.  
 
The March 2013 credit report in the FORM (Item 5) shows 17 open accounts, all 
of which are current and in good standing. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
 
4 
 
 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant admitted, and the credit report established, the delinquent judgment 
alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 
19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating condition apply. The judgment 
against Applicant is outstanding and he did not present any evidence to show that his 
financial problem occurred under unusual circumstances and it is unlikely to recur. He 
failed to present evidence to show that he acted responsibly under the circumstances, 
and that he made a good-faith effort to repay his creditor or otherwise resolve this debt. 
He presented little documentary evidence of payments made, contacts with the creditor, 
or of any efforts to otherwise resolve the SOR debt. In sum, he presented no 
information to justify the applicability of any of the mitigating conditions. 
 
 I considered that Applicant’s credit report shows 17 current accounts, and no 
delinquent accounts. This is some evidence of financial responsibility. Notwithstanding, 
Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and financial position. He 
did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly expenses, and 
whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day living expenses 
and debts. There is no information to show that he participated in financial counseling or 
that he follows a budget. The available information is insufficient to establish clear 
indications that he does not have a current financial problem, or that his financial 
problem is being resolved, or is under control.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant failed to submit evidence to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility, that he does not have a financial problem, or that his financial problem is 
being resolved or is under control. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
