 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 14-02502 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Edward R. Leonard and Derek A. Earley, 
Harrington, Foxx, Dubrow & Canter, LLP 
 
 
June 2, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
  Applicant failed to file both his Federal and state income tax returns for the tax 
year 2005. His 2009 Federal income tax return was not filed in a timely manner. The 
circumstances that caused Applicant’s failure to file in 2005 and a delay in filing in 2009 
were unusual, and are unlikely to be repeated. These incidents do not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s judgment, given the unique circumstances under which they occurred. He 
has acted responsibly with respect to his income tax obligations since November 2013. 
Financial security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 1, 2013. On 
July 31, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On August 19, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On March 11, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned Applicant’s case to me. On that same day DOHA issued a hearing notice, 
scheduling the case for April 21, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered  exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and one Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) marked HE I. Applicant offered exhibits (AE) A though F into evidence. All were 
admitted. Applicant and two witnesses testified. The record was left open for receipt of 
additional documentation, and on April 30, 2015, Applicant presented four additional 
exhibits, marked AE G through AE J. Department Counsel had no objections to AE G 
through J and they were admitted. I received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 29, 
2015. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel made a motion to amend the SOR pursuant 
to Directive ¶ E3.1.17, in order to conform to the evidence, by rewording SOR allegation 
1.a,. Applicant had no objections to the amendment. The motion to amend was granted. 
(Tr. 89-91.) The allegation is amended from: 
 
a. You failed to file your federal income tax return as required by law for tax year 
ending 2005 and 2009. As of the date of this Statement of Reasons, the tax 
return remains unfiled. 
 
to: 
 
a. You failed to file your Federal income tax return as required by law for tax year 
ending 2005, and failed to timely file your Federal income tax return as required 
by law for tax year 2009. As of the date of this Statement of Reasons, the 2005 
tax return remains unfiled. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has 
worked for the past 13 years. Prior to working for a government contractor, he served 
on active duty in the Navy for 22 years. He was honorably discharged in 2002, when he 
retired. He has held a security clearance, without incident for approximately 33 years. 
He is married and has two adult children. (GE 1; AE A; AE B; Tr. 57-59.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was alleged to have failed to file both Federal and state income tax 
returns for the tax year 2005. He was also alleged to have failed to file his 2009 Federal 
income tax return in a timely manner. Applicant admitted the allegations contained in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, pertaining to the 2005 tax year, but denied the allegations 
pertaining to 2009, with explanations. His admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
(Answer.) 
 
 Applicant’s job requires him to travel for long periods at a time. He has relied 
upon his wife to manage the family finances. In 2005, Applicant’s son was in a car 
accident that aggravated a congenital condition and left him severely impaired. 
Applicant and his wife provided extensive care for their son throughout his rehabilitation. 
However, during the rehabilitation, Applicant’s son was in a second car accident that 
further complicated his medical condition. Applicant’s son’s medical condition took a 
significant emotional and financial toll on the family. (Tr. 24-33, 35-55, 59-60.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife was heavily involved in their son’s care and testified that she 
“grew lax” in everyday obligations. She initially applied for, and was granted, an 
extension to file their 2005 Federal and state income tax returns late. However, when 
the extension expired, she never filed their 2005 Federal or state income tax returns. 
She testified that she lied to her husband and told him that she filed them. He was not 
aware of her failure to file them for several years. (Tr. 37-43, 46, 52, 61.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife successfully filed their Federal and state income tax returns for 
2006-2008 using Turbo Tax. However, in 2009, there was a transmission error in 
submitting their Federal income tax return. The state income tax return was successfully 
submitted through Turbo Tax, but a pin number error prevented the Federal return from 
being accepted. Applicant’s wife testified that she initially was aware of the error, but 
thought she had successfully reentered and resubmitted the return. Applicant was not 
aware of the problem with the submission. (Tr. 46-48, 61-73.) 
 
 Applicant became aware of his wife’s failure to file their 2009 Federal income tax 
returns in early 2013. He contacted the IRS to rectify the situation. He met with IRS 
representatives at a local office in November 2013. At that meeting, he attempted to file 
his 2005 Federal income tax return, but was told that the IRS had prepared a substitute 
return for him. He was not permitted to file his 2005 state tax return either. The Federal 
and state substitute returns allegedly showed that Applicant was due refunds for 2005, 
although the time allowed for Applicant to collect those refunds had lapsed. He 
successfully filed his 2009 Federal income tax return on November 5, 2013, as 
evidenced by a date stamp on his 2009 Federal tax return that he submitted into 
evidence. (AE G.) He was found to be indebted to the Federal government for the 2009 
tax year, due to a withdrawal from retirement savings used to satisfy medical debt. 
Applicant’s wages were garnished by the IRS to pay his debt.1 He currently is indebted 
                                                 
1 Applicant used the word “garnishment” in his testimony to describe his payments to the IRS, but 
described it as something he voluntarily agreed to so he could be sure that his payments were made. I 
find it was a voluntary garnishment or possibly an allotment from his payroll. (Tr. 71-72.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
to the IRS for approximately $1,224. He is successfully making payments of $100 per 
month to the IRS directly from his paycheck, in accordance with an installment 
agreement. (AE E; AE F; Tr. 46-48, 61-73.)  
 
 Applicant now monitors the family’s financial status. He and his wife completed 
budget counseling offered by the Navy, and he has enrolled in several other financial 
counseling courses. Since 2013 he has actively participated in filing their joint Federal 
and state income tax returns, and plans to continue to actively participate in all financial 
decisions. He acknowledged that he is still recovering from his son’s costly medical care 
and other health-related issues, but he is resolved to pay his bills and remain financially 
solvent. (Tr. 57, 74-79.) 
 
 Applicant’s division manager and supervisor wrote letters recommending that he 
be granted a security clearance. They attested that Applicant is a faithful, valued, and 
trusted member of their team. (AE A; AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
 
 
5 
 
 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant failed to file his 2005 Federal and state income tax returns.  He filed his 
2009 Federal tax return several years late, in 2013. He has a history of not meeting his 
legal financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifications, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial history, including: 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to file his 2005 Federal and state income tax returns, and the 
late filing of his 2009 Federal tax return occurred under unusual circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur, now that he is closely monitoring his family’s finances. He and his wife 
were under a great amount of stress due to their son’s accidents and resulting medical 
conditions. His wife failed to keep up their daily obligations, including the filing of their 
Federal and state income taxes for tax year 2005. She lied to Applicant and told him the 
2005 returns had been filed. Applicant’s 2005 Federal and state income tax returns are 
no longer eligible to be filed. He attempted in good faith to file them with both the 
Federal government and the state, but was not permitted to do so because substitute 
filings had been prepared and the time for amendment had expired. The late filing for 
2009 occurred due to a transmission error, which was eventually rectified in 2013 when 
he met with IRS representatives. Applicant is engaged in financial counseling. He 
completed a budgeting class and is enrolled in additional financial classes to aid him in 
managing his family’s finances. He has served in the Navy honorably, and has had a 
security clearance for over 30 years without incident. He is considered to be trustworthy 
by his management. Applicant can be trusted to continue to resolve his small remaining 
debt to the IRS. These circumstances are unique and do not cast doubt on Applicant’s 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20 (a) and 20 (c) fully apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
According AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 63-year-old 
contractor, who has held a security clearance for over 30 years without incident. 
According to his letters of recommendation, he is a hard-working and highly valued 
employee. The multiple factors that caused his failure to file his Federal and state 
income tax returns in 2005 and the late filing for the 2009 tax year are unlikely to recur. 
He has credibly demonstrated that he intends to comply with Federal and state 
regulations requiring the timely filing of all income tax returns. He is complying with the 
terms of his installment agreement to repay the IRS, and the remaining balance due is 
too small to create any potential for coercion or duress.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                               
                       
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
