                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-------------------------------------               )         ADP Case No. 14-00352
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate trustworthiness concerns regarding her personal conduct. Eligibility to hold
a public trust position is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On May 19, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility to
hold a public trust position, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should be granted, continued,
denied, or revoked. The action was taken under DOD Regulation 5200.2R (Regulation);
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR (undated), and elected to have her case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s File of
2
Relevant Material (FORM) on March 24, 2015, and did not respond to the FORM. The
case was assigned to me on May 28, 2015.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly incurred 13 traffic citations between
September 1994 and July 2013. The citations include charges of operating on a
revoked or suspended license, speeding, non-vehicle registration, and disregarding
posted signs. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the alleged traffic-related
charges without explanations. She denied the allegations in subparagraph 1.a. and
offered no explanations for her denial.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a health adviser for a defense contractor who seeks eligibility to
hold a public trust position. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in July 2010 and has no children from this marriage. (Item 1)
She earned technical school credits in 2013 but claimed no degree or diploma. (Item 1)
Applicant claimed no military service. 
Traffic citations
Between September 1994 and July 2013, Applicant incurred 12 traffic citations.
(Items 1 and 2). Her citations covered charges of operating a vehicle on a revoked or
suspended license, speeding, and disregarding official signs. Several of the charges
resulted in reported fines. For those allegations she admitted, no independent proof is
required to sustain the allegation. Her denial to the allegations contained in
subparagraph 1.a required substantial evidence to sustain the allegation. Without any
evidence of her being charged with operating on a revoked license in July 2013 in her
home state, no adverse inferences may be drawn with respect to these subparagraph
1.a  allegations.
Applicant provided no evidence of satisfying the imposed fines associated with
the charging allegations in subparagraphs 1.d-1.f, 1.j, and 1.l-1.m. Nor did she provide
any evidence of work-related performance evaluations or proof of community and civic
contributions.
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and II are classified as” sensitive positions.”
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3) “The standard that must be met for
3
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . .  assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation
¶ C6.1.1.1)  DoD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures
contained in the directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be
made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1)
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering public trust eligibility cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual
applicant, as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to hold a public trust position. These guidelines include
"[c]onditions that could raise a security [trustworthiness] concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security [trustworthiness] concerns.” The AGs must be considered before
deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a public trust position should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable trust risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Personal Conduct
The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
4
information [hold a position of trust]. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance [trustworthiness] process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance [trustworthiness] process.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position depends, in large part, on the
relevance and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S.
506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only
those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of
record.  Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on
speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a public trust position. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a
trustworthiness determination. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the
cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to demonstrate
good judgment and trustworthiness. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her eligibility to hold a public trust position through evidence of
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  Based on the requirement that eligibility to hold
all public trust positions be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant
has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her public trust eligibility. Like security
clearance determinations, public trust determinations, or decisions involving
trustworthiness “should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully-employed health advisor for a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of traffic-related citations between 1994 and 2013. Her
citations cover charges of operating a vehicle on a revoked or suspended license,
speeding, and disregarding official signs. 
Some of the charges covered in the SOR drew fines imposed by the courts;
with other charges, the record is not sufficiently developed to discern what
5
dispositions were made of the charges. The charges covered by subparagraphs 1.b-
1.m warrant the application of one of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the personal
conduct guideline: DC ¶ 16(c), “credible adverse information in several adjudicative
issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.” 
Holding a public trust position involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the trust position holder. Quite apart from any agreement the trust
position holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the trust position
holder’s duties and access to information protected by the Privacy Laws necessarily
imposes important duties of trust and candor on the trust position holder that are
considerably higher than those typically imposed on Government employees and
contractors involved in other lines of Government business. See Snepp v. United
States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Applicant’s series of traffic citations over an extended period of years, covering
driving on a revoked or suspended license, speeding, non-vehicle registration, and
disregard of posted signs, collectively represent serious offenses and disregard of
laws designed to ensure safe and responsible driving. Her admitted offenses are
cumulative and bear imposed fines in some cases.
                                
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by her accrual of so many traffic-related citations over a
20-year period. Applicant admissions to the allegations set forth in subparagraphs
1.b-1.m excused the Government from offering probative proof of the citations and
dispositions with respect to these allegations. Only with respect to the allegations
contained in subparagraph 1.a was Applicant excused from having to prove her
innocence. Her actions associated with these admitted offenses reflect serious rule
violations that have not been mitigated by time.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s recurrent driving offenses and lack of mitigating considerations, it is still
too soon to make safe predictive judgments about her ability to comply with her
state’s driving laws and restore her overall trustworthiness to levels commensurate
with the minimum requirements for holding a public trust position. 
More time is needed to facilitate Applicant’s making the necessary efforts to
improve her driving record and demonstrate overall trustworthiness in her personal
affairs.  Compliance with traffic laws designed to ensure safe driving and
demonstrated overall trustworthiness are necessary prerequisites to holding a public
trust position. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered
by subparagraphs 1.b through 1.m of Guideline E. Favorable conclusions are
warranted with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraph 1.a
6
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):               AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a:      For Applicant
Subpara. 1.b-1.m:                Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Public trust position eligibility is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
