 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-01936 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by the presence of delinquent debt. 
His past financial trouble was due to a failed business venture. After regaining his 
financial footing, Applicant contacted his creditors and has been resolving his past-due 
debts. His finances are now under control, and his past financial trouble no longer 
raises concerns about his security suitability. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), alleging that his conduct and circumstances raised security 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant timely answered the 
SOR and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for continued access to 
classified information. 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 On December 9, 2014, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed. On December 30, 2014, after coordinating with the 
parties, the Hearing Office issued a notice scheduling the hearing for January 22, 2015. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government exhibits 
(Gx.) 1 – 4. Applicant testified and offered Applicant exhibits (Ax.) A – J. Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open to submit additional material was granted. He timely 
submitted Ax. K – P. All exhibits were admitted without objection. The hearing transcript 
(Tr.) was received on February 2, 2015, and the record closed on February 13, 2015 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is in his mid-forties and married. He and his wife have one minor child. 
He served in the U.S. military for seven years, and was honorably discharged in 1994. 
He holds two associate’s degrees, and has held a clearance for over fifteen years.  
 
 Applicant’s financial trouble started in late 2005, early 2006. He had been 
working for a federal contractor for six years, when he decided to start his own federal 
contracting business. Applicant and his business partner secured a line of credit for their 
new business venture, putting up their homes as collateral for the loan. Applicant 
secured a substantial contract for the business, but within a year lost the contract. 
Applicant and his partner were unable to generate other business. Applicant secured 
part-time work to supplement the meager income he was receiving from the business, 
but his income was approximately half of what he had earned at his previous job. His 
income was insufficient to meet his expenses and he exhausted his savings paying the 
family’s recurring bills and debts. He then started relying on his credit cards. 
 
By the fall of 2008, Applicant’s business was not generating any income and he 
did not have other employment. He was essentially unemployed. His wife unexpectedly 
got pregnant with their only child. Applicant fell behind on the mortgage on his home 
and the lender foreclosed on the home shortly before his child was born. Applicant, his 
wife, and their newborn child moved into a friend’s basement apartment. Applicant 
secured full-time work with his current employer in September 2009.  
 
Applicant incurred three types of delinquent debt while unemployed and 
underemployed: unpaid taxes, past-due credit cards, and past-due student loans. He 
reached out to his overdue creditors after regaining full-time employment. He has either 
resolved or is resolving his past-due debts. He submitted documentation that he 
negotiated a payment plan with the IRS to resolve the delinquent tax debt listed at SOR 
1.a and 1.b. He also provided documentary proof that, since April 2012, he has been 
making monthly payments towards satisfaction of his tax debt.2  
 
Applicant also submitted documentation that the delinquent credit card debts 
listed at SOR 1.c and 1.d were canceled by the creditors. Before they were canceled, 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 48-50; Ax. A – C; Ax. H – J; Ax. O.  
 
3 
 
Applicant contacted both creditors to resolve the debts. He made consistent monthly 
payments, totaling about $3,000, towards the satisfaction of the credit card debt listed at 
1.c until he became unemployed for a year. Applicant included the canceled credit card 
debts as income on his tax returns.3  
 
 Applicant resolved the delinquent student loan debts listed at SOR 1.e and 1.f. 
He rehabilitated his student loans and has been making consistent monthly payments 
through automatic bank withdrawal for about two years. He has decreased the total 
amount owed for three of his outstanding student loans from a high of about $10,000 to 
roughly $3,000 through his monthly payments.4 
 
Applicant has regained his financial footing. His current annual salary is 
approximately $150,000. He contributes to a 401(k) account, with a current balance of 
over $25,000. He has another $5,000 in savings for unexpected expenses. He recently 
purchased a home, putting down about $20,000 and financing the remaining $255,000 
purchase price. His current home’s purchase price was about half of what he paid for 
the home he lost through foreclosure. Although Applicant qualified for a much larger 
mortgage, he made a conscious decision to stay within his family’s fixed budget. 
Applicant has received financial counseling and the family’s written budget, which 
reflects that several recurring expenses and debts are paid by automatic bank 
withdrawal, shows a monthly surplus of over $1,000. His wife does not work outside the 
home, as she cares for their child, who was born with special needs.5 
 
 Applicant testified that seeing his then eight-and-a-half month pregnant wife 
packing their former home was “an extreme wake-up call.” He has taken steps in the 
past few years, namely, agreements with his overdue creditors, financial counseling, 
and budgeting, “to ensure that this would never happen to [his] family again.”6 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 44-45, 53-56, 65-68; Ax. D; Ax. O.  
 
4 Tr. at 51-52; Ax. E – G; Ax. K.  
 
5 Tr. at 56-60, 83-87; Ax. N; Ax. P.  
 
6 Tr. at 45.  
 
4 
 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security 
clearance.”).  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.7 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern regarding an applicant with delinquent debts is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
7 Security clearance determinations are “not an exact science, but rather predicative judgments about a 
person’s security suitability.” ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004). An administrative 
judge is required to examine an individual’s past history and current circumstances to make a predictive 
judgment about an individual’s ability and willingness to protect and safeguard classified information. 
ISCR Case No. 11-12202; ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013).  
 
5 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debt and, of particular concern, his failure 
to pay his federal tax obligation on time, raises the financial considerations security 
concern. The record evidence also establishes the following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The financial considerations guideline also lists a number of conditions that could 
mitigate the concern. The relevant mitigating conditions in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were due to his failed business venture. 
Although his decision to leave a well-paying, steady job to attempt to build a business 
was not a circumstance beyond his control, the resulting business failure was largely 
beyond his control. At the time that Applicant attempted to start his business, it was 
largely unforeseeable that the economy would take a dramatic downturn that would last 
for several years. Notwithstanding his dire financial situation, Applicant did not ignore 
his financial obligations. After regaining his financial footing, Applicant contacted his 
creditors and resolved or is resolving his past-due debts. He submitted documentary 
proof of: (a) contacting his creditors, (b) negotiating repayment plans, and (c) a 
demonstrated track record of debt repayment. He has received financial counseling, 
and has exhibited the self-control and judgment in managing his current financial affairs 
that is expected of those granted access to classified information. For example, he 
decided to purchase a home that he and his family can comfortably afford on his salary 
 
6 
 
alone. This record evidence, as well as Applicant’s credible testimony, provides 
sufficient assurance that he will continue to resolve his remaining debts and not repeat 
the financial missteps of the past. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).8 Applicant’s past financial problems were not a result of 
matters raising an independent security concern. Instead, they were caused by a 
business failure, which was partly due to the downturn in the economy. Applicant acted 
responsibly in trying to manage his finances under the circumstances imposed by his 
financial hardship, to include moving himself, his wife, and their newborn, special-needs 
child into a friend’s small bedroom apartment while he looked for a job. After securing 
full-time employment, Applicant contacted his overdue creditors and either resolved or 
is resolving the past-due debts that he incurred during this period of financial trouble. 
Although delinquent debts, most notably his past-due taxes, remain outstanding, 
Applicant has demonstrated through his words and actions that he will manage his 
finances in the manner expected of those granted access to this nation’s secrets. 
Applicant’s maintenance of a clearance without apparent issue for over 15 years, good 
work performance, and honorable military service provide further evidence mitigating 
concerns raised by his past financial trouble. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
