1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-05534
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s response to his financial problems indicates good judgment and
reliability. His current finances are sound, and the presence of unpaid debt does not
present an unacceptable security concern. His request for access to classified
information is granted.
Statement of the Case
On October 10, 2012, Applicant  submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information.
Based on the results of the ensuing background investigation, Department of Defense
(DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 A list of the Government’s exhibits is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1.3
 Department Counsel’s memorandum forwarding Ax. C - I and waiving objections thereto is included in the4
record as Hx. 2.
2
interest for Applicant to hold a security clearance.   On December 16, 2014, DOD1
adjudicators issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guidelines  for financial2
considerations (Guideline F). 
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. I was
assigned this case on March 4, 2015, and I convened a hearing on March 24, 2015.
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) presented
Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4.  Applicant testified and proffered Applicant’s Exhibits3
(Ax.) A and B. I also held the record open after the hearing to receive from Applicant
additional relevant information. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 2,
2015. The record closed on April 6, 2015, when I received Ax. C - I. All exhibits were
admitted without objection.4
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $49,244 for
eight delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.h). Applicant admitted, with
explanations, the allegations at SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, and 1.g. He denied with explanations
the allegations at SOR 1.c - 1.e and 1.h, and with his Answer, provided information
establishing he has paid or otherwise resolved those debts. In addition to the facts
established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 47 years old and works as an aviation maintenance mechanic for a
major airline subcontracted to perform maintenance at a U.S. military base. This is his
first application for a security clearance. Applicant has worked for his employer since
October 1988. He has an excellent reputation in the workplace. (Gx. 1; Ax. C; Ax. D)
Applicant and his wife were married from April 2005 until they divorced in June
2013. They separated in April 2012. They have no children together and Applicant is not
obligated to pay support for his ex-wife. (Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Tr. 48)
When Applicant submitted his EQIP, he disclosed several past-due or delinquent
debts, some of which were alleged in the SOR. Credit reports obtained during his
background investigation documented all of the SOR allegations. Applicant’s financial
problems began around 2007 or 2008, after his ex-wife was laid off from her job and
 See Directive. 6.3.5
3
she was unemployed until 2009. Applicant was making about $32 an hour, but he also
relied on significant time-and-a-half overtime each month. He admitted that, while he
had overtime and his ex-wife was employed, he was careless with his credit and ran up
too much personal debt. After she was laid off, Applicant’s employer cut overtime and
Applicant began struggling to stay current in his payment obligations. Starting in 2008 or
2009, Applicant began contacting his creditors to make repayment arrangements. The
information provided with his Answer and in Ax. E - G shows a record of consistent
payments and actions to resolve his past-due debts over at least the past two years.
Available information shows Applicant has paid or otherwise resolved the debts at 1.a,
1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.h. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 4; Ax. A; Ax. E - G; Tr. 31, 49 - 50, 62, 71)
As to the debts at SOR 1.b and 1.g, Applicant has been unable to obtain
information about the status of those debts, which have been referred from one
collection agency to another. He avers he will resolve those debts once he is able to
contact the current holder of those accounts. As to SOR 1.f, a $19,030 (according to the
latest communication from the law firm collecting on this account) debt being enforced
by a judgment lien, the original amount due was about $9,000 for a delinquent credit
card. Applicant recently received an offer to settle this debt for about 65 percent of the
current stated balance due. Applicant is motivated to resolve this debt because the lien
will interfere with his ability to refinance his mortgage to a lower monthly payment.
(Answer; Gx. 3; Ax. H; Tr. 37 - 40, 51 - 55)
Applicant’s current finances are sound. A personal financial statement (PFS)
shows that he has about $600 remaining each month after expenses, which include
debt repayments. Applicant also has saved about $150,000 in a retirement account, and
he has received part of an inheritance from his parents, both of whom have passed
away since 2013. He used some of his inheritance and some of his retirement savings
to pay the debts at SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e. Applicant and his four siblings also are in
the process of selling their late parents’ home. He estimates his share of the proceeds
from that sale will be just under $100,000. (Ax. I; Tr. 42, 55 - 58, 60 - 61, 64 - 71, 77)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).8
4
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed at AG
¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
5
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations).
I also conclude that the record supports application of the following AG ¶ 20
mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Admittedly, Applicant put his finances at risk by accruing high balances on his
credit cards while he and his ex-wife were both employed and he could count on a lot of
overtime. When his ex-wife was laid off and his overtime cut, Applicant found himself
overextended and unable to pay his debts as agreed. However, Applicant has
presented information showing he started trying to resolve his debts long before the
SOR was issued. He also established that his current finances are sound; that he is
able and likely to continue resolving his remaining debts; and that he has the requisite
good judgment to responsibly manage his personal finances so as to avoid future
unpaid debts. On balance, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns about his
financial problems.  
In addition to evaluating the facts presented, and having applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has been candid about
his financial problems at every stage of the investigation and adjudication of his
application for clearance. His reputation in the work place is consistent with the good
judgment he has shown in response to his financial problems. A fair and commonsense
assessment of this record shows that Applicant is a mature, responsible individual who
can be trusted with sensitive information. On balance, he has mitigated the security
concerns raised by the Government’s information.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
It is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
