 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-00225 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position in the defense industry. Applicant submitted sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised by her $8,000 in delinquent debt. 
However, she failed to mitigate the criminal and personal conduct concerns raised by 
her recent criminal activity and her continued association with individuals engaged in 
criminal activity. Accordingly, her request for access to sensitive information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of  
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations, 
criminal conduct, and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to 
find that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue 
Applicant’s access to sensitive information and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on February 12, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection. After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted AE E through H, without objection.3 Department Counsel submitted 
GE 5, which is also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
February 24, 2015. 
 
Procedural Issues 
  
 Before the hearing commenced, Department Counsel learned that Applicant did 
not receive a copy of the Government’s discovery documents. Department Counsel 
provided Applicant a copy of the documents to review before the hearing. During the 
hearing, I confirmed that the documents were sent to the address Applicant provided on 
the SOR receipt. After receiving the SOR, Applicant moved and did not inform 
Department Counsel of her new address. After updating Applicant’s address for the 
record, I gave Applicant the option to reconvene the hearing at a later date to allow her 
additional time to prepare for the hearing. Applicant indicated her choice to proceed with 
the hearing as scheduled. Without objection from Department Counsel, I left the record 
open after the hearing to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. 
Department Counsel sent a second copy of the Government’s exhibits to Applicant after 
the hearing.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 37, has worked for a federal contractor since August 2013. Her 
position requires access to personally identifiable information (PII). On her electronic 
questionnaire for investigations processing (e-QIP), submitted that same month, 
Applicant disclosed several delinquent accounts and a 2010 arrest for shoplifting. The 
ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant is indebted to seven creditors for 
approximately $8,000. In addition to the 2010 shoplifting arrest, Applicant was also 
arrested several times between 2001 and 2005 for prostitution. Most recently, she was 
arrested in March 2013 for possession of drug paraphernalia.5  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant began working as a prostitute in 1998, when she was 21 years old. 
Initially, she engaged in sex work to escape an abusive home life. Between 2001 and 
2002, Applicant was arrested several times on prostitution charges in State 1 and State 
2. In 2002, she was convicted of prostitution charges in State 2 and sentenced to 20 
days confinement. After meeting her husband in 2004, Applicant continued working as 
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated November 28, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 HE II. 
 
4Tr. 9-12. 
  
5 Tr. 25-26, 39-40; GE 1, 3-4. 
 
3 
 
prostitute because, doing so, at times, provided the couple’s only source of income. In 
December 2005, Applicant was arrested in State 3, which resulted in the consolidation 
of several cases. She was charged with four counts of failure to appear and one 
prostitution charge. She successfully completed a diversion program that resulted in the 
charges being dropped. She has not worked as a prostitute since 2005.6  
 
Applicant did not have contact with the criminal justice system again until 2010, 
when she was arrested for shoplifting. According to Applicant, she agreed to conceal 
merchandise in her purse for a friend. Applicant claims to have pleaded guilty to the 
charge for a friend who would have received a stiffer penalty. Applicant received 
probation, was ordered to attend a shoplifting and theft diversion program, and ordered 
to pay a fine. In 2013, Applicant was charged with possession of drug paraphernalia, 
after the items were found in her car during a routine traffic stop. Applicant testified that 
the paraphernalia belonged to the passenger in her car and that he told the police 
officer that the paraphernalia belonged to him. Applicant was issued a citation and 
received a court date. Applicant failed to appear, citing the financial hardship caused by 
having to appear in a court 200 miles away from home, which included lost income from 
having to take off work, finding child care for her daughter, and gas money for the 400 
mile round trip. At the time of her trustworthiness hearing, these charges were still 
outstanding. After the hearing, Applicant negotiated a plea agreement on the drug and 
failure to appear charges. Under its terms, Applicant will plead guilty to possession of 
drug paraphernalia. She will not serve jail time, but will be assessed a fine in addition to 
a warrant fee. It is unclear if the court will accept Applicant’s plea or if she will be subject 
to some form of court-ordered monitoring.7  
 
Financial Issues 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began after her marriage in 2006. Her husband 
has an extensive criminal history and has been incarcerated for the majority of their 
nine-year marriage. Applicant’s husband went to prison in 2007, serving 18 months for a 
probation violation. Their daughter, now seven, was born while he was incarcerated. 
When Applicant’s husband was released from prison in 2008, Applicant provided the 
family’s only income. Applicant also tried to provide financial support to her three 
stepchildren, who live in State 1. In an attempt to integrate her husband back into the 
household, Applicant transferred some of the household responsibilities to him, such as 
caring for their young daughter and entrusting him to pay the bills. In 2009, Applicant 
learned that he was using the money to support his drug habit and extramarital affairs. 
Upon discovering his conduct, Applicant took loans to repay the debts, but soon she 
became unable to repay the loans. Applicant’s husband returned to prison in August 
2011. He is serving a six-year sentence and is scheduled for release in 2017.8 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 26-29, 31, 88, 95-98; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 74-86; GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. 24, 31-37, 40-42, 54-55, 66-67, 99; AE C-D.  
 
4 
 
Applicant currently earns $15 per hour and has the opportunity to work three 
hours of overtime each week. She is able to live within her means, but does not have 
significant disposable income. She decided to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 
April 2014, but the petition was dismissed because she could not afford to pay the 
bankruptcy fees. She filed again in December 2014, this time representing herself. She 
petitioned for and received a waiver of the bankruptcy fees. The bankruptcy, which 
included the debts alleged in the SOR, was discharged on May 19, 2015.9  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive 
positions.”10 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is 
that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security.”11 Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any 
final unfavorable access determination may be made.12 An administrative judge’s 
objective is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision that embraces all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 37-38, 46-62-54, 56, 59-64; GE 5; AE F. 
 
10 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
11 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
12 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious trustworthiness concern because failure 
to “satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive 
information.”13  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $8,000 in delinquent debt. 
The allegations are supported by the credit reports in the record.14 Applicant has 
demonstrated an inability to pay her debts as well as a history of not doing so.15 Her 
financial problems were caused by events beyond her control – her husband’s use of 
the household income to support his drug abuse habit. Given her financial situation, 
Applicant’s decision to resolve her delinquent debt through bankruptcy is reasonable. 
Having received the benefit of bankruptcy protection, Applicant’s finances appear to be 
under control. She has mitigated the financial considerations concerns.16  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.17 Applicant admits to an extensive criminal 
history, consisting of multiple misdemeanor offenses, dating back to 2000. Between 
2000 and 2005, Applicant was arrested on several occasions for prostitution. She 
pleaded guilty to a shoplifting charge in 2010 and has an impending guilty plea on a 
2013 drug and failure to appear charges.18 Given the circumstances and recency of her 
criminal conduct, none of the criminal conduct mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 Applicant’s circumstances have changed sufficiently that it is unlikely she will 
engage in prostitution in the future. These offenses are mitigated by the passage of 
time. She has also been able to establish a positive employment record since 2005. 
However, these facts do not fully mitigate the criminal conduct concerns. Applicant’s 
criminal conduct is connected to her choice of associations in her personal life. These 
choices raise serious concerns about her judgment and cast doubts on her current 
suitability to occupy a position of trust. A review of an Applicant’s trustworthiness is not 
                                                          
13  AG ¶ 18. 
 
14 GE 3-4. 
 
15 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
16 AG 20(b).  
 
17 AG ¶ 30. 
 
18 AG ¶ 31(a). 
 
6 
 
limited to an evaluation of Applicant’s conduct during duty hours; off-duty conduct is 
also material in evaluating an individual’s trustworthiness. Applicant chooses to 
associate with individuals involved in criminal conduct and those relationships have 
resulted in her continued participation in criminal activity. 
 
Applicant was not pressured or coerced into engaging in criminal conduct. In 
2010, Applicant admitted that she willingly accepted a criminal penalty to help a friend. 
In 2013, Applicant allowed another friend to bring illegal items into her car. These 
continued interactions with individuals engaged in criminal activity increase the 
likelihood that Applicant will engage in criminal conduct in the future. Furthermore, 
ambiguity remains regarding the disposition of her most recent criminal charges. While 
the unresolved nature of Applicant’s most recent criminal conduct does not preclude a 
granting her eligibility to occupy a public trust position, it does weigh against it. 
 
Applicant’s recent criminal activity, while relatively minor, indicates that Applicant 
may treat the rules and regulations associated with handling and protecting sensitive 
information with the same disregard of the law. Applicant’s conduct indicates that she 
does not possess the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of those seeking 
to enter into a fiduciary relationship with the government.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct is also disqualifying under the personal conduct 
guideline. As discussed above, Applicant has engaged in conduct that shows 
questionable judgment, an unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations, and raises 
questions about her ability to protect sensitive information.19 Furthermore, Applicant’s 
history of criminal conduct and her continued association with individuals engaged in 
criminal activity, if known, has the potential to negatively impact her professional or 
community standing.20 Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns. Applying the same analysis employed in the discussion of the criminal 
conduct mitigating conditions, Applicant’s off-duty conduct and her continued 
association with individuals involved in criminal activity continue to reflect negatively on 
her current trustworthiness. She has failed to take any steps to reduce or eliminate 
these areas of vulnerability or exploitation.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public 
trust position. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(a). It is not the purpose of trustworthiness adjudications to punish an 
applicant for past acts of misconduct. The purpose of the trustworthiness adjudication is 
to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
                                                          
19 AG ¶ 15.  
 
20 AG ¶¶ 16(e) and (g). 
 
 
7 
 
determination that the person is a risk.”21 In cases involving access to sensitive personal 
information, the degree of acceptable risk is less than that acceptable to mere access to 
employment.22 Applicant is smart, industrious, and capable of high performance in the 
workplace. However, in her personal life, Applicant continues to maintain relationships 
and engage in activities that compromise her judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. 
Following Egan23 and the clearly-consistent standard, these concerns must be resolved 
in favor of the government.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Criminal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    For Applicant   
 
 Subparagraphs 2.d – 2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. Her 
eligibility to occupy a position of public trust is denied.  
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
21 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
22 See Gayer v. Schlesinger, 490 F.2d 740, 750 (D.C. Cir. 1973).  
 
23 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
