KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the evidence.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-01945.a1
DATE: 06/12/2015
DATE: June 12, 2015
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01945
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
26, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 27, 2015, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact 
Applicant has worked for Defense contractors since 2002.  He served in the U.S. military,
retiring in 2000.  He has held a clearance since 1980.  
Applicant’s SOR alleges three delinquent credit card debts totaling about $46,500.  He
provided no explanation for how he acquired these debts.  His response to the SOR includes letters
from an attorney to the creditors and the credit reporting agencies disputing the amounts of the debts
though not their validity.  He has provided no information about any other action taken to resolve
his financial problems.  The record includes a letter from the attorney stating that no collection
action can be taken so long as the debts are in dispute.  The letter also states that Applicant is
deliberately choosing to neglect his debts because of the disputed amounts.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial delinquencies raised concerns under
Guideline F.  He also concluded that none of the mitigating conditions could be favorably applied. 
He stated that Applicant has not demonstrated a meaningful track record of debt resolution, merely
having disputed the amounts of the debts.  The Judge also stated that Applicant failed to provide
evidence substantiating the reason for the disputes.  He stated that Applicant presented no evidence
of having taken any action on his debts since 2011, the date of the letters from the attorney.  The
Judge concluded that “Applicant’s lack of documented action is significant and disqualifying.” 
Decision at 5.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to evidence of Applicant’s military service and
his having held a clearance for many years without incident or concern.  He reiterated, however, that
Applicant had provided no credible evidence to show a reasonable and responsible approach to his
financial problems.  He concluded that the record left him with questions and doubts about
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.    
Discussion
Applicant’s brief contains assertions from outside the record, which we cannot consider. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  He cites to information contained in his clearance application and personal
2
interview, arguing that he has established his case for mitigation by presenting all of the evidence
that he has available.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-06824 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr.
9, 2012).  In essence, Applicant argues for an alternative interpretation of the record.  However, this
argument is not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Id.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s presentation
consists more of promises for future payment than of a demonstrated tack record of debt resolution
is sustainable based on the record that was before him.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-04176 at 2-3
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2012).  
 The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
