KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence.  The principal of administrative
finality requires that, absent a showing that an applicant was denied an opportunity to present
evidence, there is no basis to reopen a record for the presentation of additional evidence. 
Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-02480.a1
DATE: 06/01/2015
DATE: June 1, 2015
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02480
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 20, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On March 20, 2015, after the close of the record, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert E. Coacher denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge made the following findings:  Applicant is 53 years old.  He had four delinquent
debts.  One was a deficiency amount from a repossessed vehicle in the sum of $14,658.  He also had
a telecommunications debt in the amount of $895, a child support debt in the amount of $427, and
a collection account debt in the amount of $166.  Applicant paid all of the debts except for the
arrearage on the repossessed vehicle.  He purchased a truck in 2005 and financed at a high interest
rate because of a poor credit record.  The next year, he experienced financial difficulties because he
helped his daughter and his girlfriend with college expenses.  He consented to a voluntary
repossession because he could not make the payments.  He attempted to set up a payment plan with
the creditor, but the creditor wanted a one-time payment in an amount that Applicant could not
afford.  The account has been purchased by a new creditor, but Applicant has not contacted the new
creditor about payments.  The last payment on the account was in 2008 and it remains unresolved. 
Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial status or a budget.  There is
no evidence that he sought financial counseling.
The Judge concluded: Applicant has a delinquent debt that remains unpaid or unresolved. 
 He did not provide sufficient evidence to show that his debts are unlikely to recur.  Although he
acted responsibly by paying three of the smaller debts, he failed to act responsibly in dealing with
the remaining large debt.  He presented no evidence of financial counseling.  Although he paid the
three small debts, there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved
or are under control because the largest debt remains unpaid.  Despite some mitigation, Applicant’s
financial status remains a concern.  He has not shown a track record of financial stability.  
Applicant asserts that the Judge erred because his decision was based on credit information
from 2014, even though his decision was made in 2015.  He feels that the decision was unfair
because it was made with no further investigation up to the time of the decision.1  He states that the
issue of the outstanding debt has been addressed and payment arrangements are being made on a
monthly basis to clear the account.  Applicant has not established error on the part of the Judge.  
Applicant’s representations regarding payment arrangements for the outstanding delinquent
account constitute additional evidence that goes beyond the record evidence in the case.  The Board
cannot consider new evidence on appeal.   See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant argues that his case should have been decided using more current information,
although he fails to articulate with any specificity what additional information favorable to him
1Applicant’s appeal statement is ambiguously worded.  One possible interpretation is that he asserts the Appeal 
Board should have been part of the investigative process.  The jurisdiction of the Board is delineated by the Directive. 
The Board has no fact-finding authority.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-11414 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 5, 2007).  It therefore
lacks the authority to conduct investigations.  Another possible interpretation of Applicant’s appeal assertions is that the
Judge should have considered facts taking place up to the time of the decision.  The Board will address this assertion
in the main body of its decision.   
2
would have come into play or how that information would be made part of the record.  Applicant’s
assertion requires the Board to address the legal principle of finality.  This principle is applicable
with respect to claims that circumstances have changed after the hearing was conducted or, in this
case, after the record evidence was closed.  The Supreme Court has recognized that the
administrative consideration of evidence always creates a gap between the time the record is closed
and the time the administrative decision is promulgated, and that attempts to eliminate the gap would
create a situation where the administrative process might never be consummated.  See Vermont
Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 435 U.S. 519, 554-555
(1978).  The Board has followed this reasoning because there must be some reasonable degree of
administrative finality in DOHA adjudications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-17114 at 3 (App. Bd.
Nov. 29, 2004).  Absent a showing that Applicant was denied a reasonable opportunity to present
evidence for the Judge to consider in his case, there is no basis for reopening the proceedings to
expand the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-22643 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 24, 2005).  Here,
Applicant has made no such showing.
Applicant states that he has resolved three of the four debts at issue in the case.  The Board
construes this statement as an assertion that the Judge should have considered the case mitigated. 
The Judge made findings about all of Applicant’s debts and acknowledged that three of them had
been satisfied.  However, given the size of the remaining debt, and the paucity of evidence relating
to Applicant’s efforts to address it, the Board concludes that the Judge’s overall decision is
supported by the record.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all
the evidence in the record or that he weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06438 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2009).        
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b): “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
3
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
