 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06893 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has nine outstanding debts that became delinquent between 2003 and 
2012. He failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to establish financial 
responsibility in the handling of his financial obligations. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 25, 2011. 
On February 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2013, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
The case was originally assigned to two other administrative judges. Applicant 
was not able to appear at a hearing in June 2013. (Appellate Exhibit 1) The case was 
assigned to me on June 17, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on June 20, 2013, scheduling a hearing for July 
24, 2013. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented six documents for my 
review at the hearing. (A picture of Applicant receiving a community service award; a 
letter from a car manufacturer, dated April 15, 2013, stating that the company was 
aware Applicant may have been the subject of identity theft; Applicant’s college 
transcripts showing he finished the semester with a 3.68 GPA; Applicant’s resume; a 
certificate for completing a production planning course; and a certificate for completing 
the shipbuilding apprenticeship school.)  
 
Applicant only brought original documents to his hearing. Although I reviewed the 
documents, no documents were marked or admitted at the hearing. I left the record 
open until August 9, 2013, to allow Applicant time to supplement the record. He 
promised to submit copies of the six documents. By email dated July 31, 2013, 
Applicant contacted Department Counsel asking for a mail address, which was provided 
to him that same date. (Appellate Exhibit 2) He failed to submit any documents. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 1, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h, 
with explanations. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.j. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the 
evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has never been 
married, and has no children. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 
September 1998 to June 2001, and possessed access to classified information at the 
secret level. He was discharged from the service pursuant to an administrative board for 
misconduct. (In October 2000, he received non-judicial punishment for the forgery of a 
naval document.) His service was characterized as “under other than honorable 
conditions.” He is in the process of requesting an upgrade of the characterization of his 
discharge. Following his discharge, Applicant worked for a moving company between 
2003 and 2004. He was hired by his current employer, a government contractor, in June 
2004.  
 
Applicant attended college and received a Bachelor of Science degree in 
business management in December 2010 (magna cum laude). While in college, he also 
completed his shipbuilding apprenticeship school. Applicant is currently working on a 
master’s degree in systems engineering. He has a 3.56 GPA.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant disclosed in his January 2011 SCA (Section 26 – Financial Record) 
that he had financial problems, which included delinquent loans, judgments, wage 
garnishments, delinquent debts, and debts over 90 and 180 days delinquent. The 
background investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed the 10 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling over $30,000. The SOR debts are 
established by the credit reports submitted by the Government and by Applicant’s 
testimony.  
 
On March 3, 2011, Applicant was interviewed by a government background 
investigator and questioned about the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
acknowledged some of the SOR debts, disputed some, and claimed no knowledge of 
other debts. The status of the alleged SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR 1.a ($600) – Applicant owed his landlord for past-due rent and a damaged 
door. He claimed he paid his share of the rent, but his roommates failed to pay. The 
landlord obtained a judgment against Applicant in November 2012. Applicant claimed 
he did not know about the judgment until February 2013. He claimed he contacted the 
creditor in 2013, and settled the debt for $400, of which he owes $100. Applicant failed 
to present documentary evidence of any contact, agreement, or payments made to the 
creditor. 
 
SOR 1.b ($590) – Applicant received medical treatment and failed to pay his co-
payment. The creditor contacted him, and Applicant claimed he disputed the debt. The 
creditor filed a law suit against Applicant, who ignored the law suit. The creditor 
obtained a judgment against Applicant in July 2009. Applicant claimed he contacted the 
creditor and established a payment agreement in 2013. He failed to present 
documentary evidence of any contacts, agreements, or payments made to the creditor. 
 
SOR 1.c ($80 – debt from 2005-2006); SOR 1.d ($54 – debt from 2003); SOR 
1.e ($229 – debt from 2003); and SOR 1.f ($50 – debt from 2002-2003) - These are 
delinquent medical debts. Applicant claimed he paid three of these debts, and made a 
payment agreement for the last one in February 2013. He failed to present documentary 
evidence of any contacts, agreements, or payments made to the creditors. 
 
SOR 1.g ($348) - This is a delinquent credit card debt from 2008. Applicant 
claimed he offered to settle the account for $138 in 2012. He failed to present 
documentary evidence of any contacts, agreements, or payments made to the creditor. 
 
SOR 1.h ($1,121) - This is a delinquent cellular service account from 2007. 
Applicant claimed his phone was stolen in 2007, and he did not make the phone calls. 
He initially testified he offered to settle the account and set up a payment plan. Later, he 
testified he is still disputing the debt because these were not his phone calls. He failed 
to present documentary evidence of any contacts with the creditor, agreements, 
payments made, or disputes filed with the creditor.  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR 1.i ($22,391) – Applicant cosigned a car loan for a girlfriend in 2007-2008. 
Apparently, she was involved in an accident and stopped paying the loan. Applicant 
claimed he believed the car was returned to the dealer, and was not aware the debt was 
delinquent until he was contacted by the creditor in 2010. Applicant believes it is not fair 
for him to pay the debt, because he was not the owner of the car. However, he stated 
he would pay the debt to clean his credit. He failed to present documentary evidence of 
any contacts, agreements, or payments made to the creditor. 
 
SOR 1.j ($4,891) – One of Applicant’s girlfriends cashed a fraudulent check 
against his bank account. The bank obtained a judgment against Applicant. However, 
he was able to establish that he was not involved in the fraud. Applicant’s documentary 
evidence established that the creditor dismissed the judgment and refunded the 
garnished money to him. (See document attached to Applicant’s answer to the SOR.)  
 
Applicant provided numerous reasons to justify his failure to address the debts 
alleged in the SOR: He did not pay them because he had accumulated too many debts 
and was paying other debts first. He forgot about some of the debts, and he had not 
reviewed his credit report recently. In 2008, his girlfriend and her two children moved in 
with him, and his income was not sufficient to pay for their day-to-day living expenses 
and his old debts.  
 
Applicant testified that he wants to pay his delinquent debts. He needs his 
security clearance to retain his job to be able to pay his debts. He claimed that he is 
trying hard to get his finances in order. He believes that he is making a diligent effort to 
clean up his credit. He obtained a credit report to identify his delinquent debts, and 
claimed to be contacting his creditors to set up payment plans. Applicant believes that 
his current financial situation is stable. He stated that his present earnings allow him to 
meet his current financial obligations. Applicant’s personal financial statement, dated 
August 2012, indicated that his net monthly income was around $3,000. His monthly net 
remainder was around $800, after paying $2,210 in monthly expenses.  
 
Applicant failed to present documentary evidence to show that he maintained 
contact with his creditors, established payment plans, or disputed any of the SOR debts. 
He presented no documentary evidence to show he has received financial counseling. 
Applicant testified he recently started an electronic budget, but did not present the 
budget document. He also claimed that his mother has been lending him money to pay 
some of his delinquent debts. He presented no documentary evidence to support any of 
his claims. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
 
5 
 
 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
The evidence established the nine delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling 
over $25,000, some of which have been delinquent since 2003. Financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
6 
 
 
SOR 1.j is not established by the evidence. The creditor dismissed the judgment 
and reimbursed Applicant. I find for Applicant on this allegation. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant has been fully employed with a government contractor since May 2004. 
He has a net monthly income of around $3,000. Outside of a garnishment of wages to 
pay one of his debts, he presented no documentary evidence of any debt payments, 
contacts with creditors, disputes, or that he otherwise attempted to resolve his debts. 
Additionally, he has not participated in financial counseling or has a budget.  
 
 Applicant was interviewed in Mach 2011 by a government investigator, and 
questioned about his financial problems. Even though he was placed on notice about 
the government’s concerns about his financial problems, he failed to make a convincing 
effort to resolve his delinquent obligations. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing, 
and he owes a large debt. I considered that Applicant acquired additional obligations 
when his girlfriend and her children moved in with him. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s 
favorable evidence is insufficient to show financial responsibility with respect to any of 
 
7 
 
 
the debts alleged in the SOR, or that he attempted in good faith to establish payment 
plans or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
 Applicant’s lack of financial responsibility shows he is not aware of what is 
required of him to establish eligibility for a security clearance. In light of all available 
evidence, Applicant’s unresolved debts cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant has worked for a defense contractor since 2004. His academic 
achievements show he is a smart and dedicated person with potential. He has nine 
outstanding debts that became delinquent between 2003 and 2012. He failed to submit 
sufficient documentary evidence to establish financial responsibility in the handling of 
his financial obligations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:     Against Applicant 
  
Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
