KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that Applicant did not corroborate his claims to have made good-
faith efforts to resolve his debts. The Judge also concluded that Applicant had failed to
demonstrate any mitigating condition under Guideline E.  These conclusions are sustainable on
this record  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-08831.a1
DATE: 11/06/2013
DATE: November 6, 2013 
In Re:
---------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-08831
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John B. Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 1, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On August 29, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Richard A. Cefola denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact contain
errors; whether the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record; and whether the Judge’s
adverse security clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), as evidenced by tax liens
totaling $1,024,000.  In March 2005, he filed his IRS return for tax year 2002, and in early 2013 he
filed tax returns for tax years 2003 through 2009.  Applicant owes the IRS about $200,000 in back
taxes, and he is currently working on a repayment plan.  Applicant’s debt to the IRS is outstanding.
Applicant is indebted to his state taxing authority, as evidenced by tax liens totaling about
$286,000.  In 2012 he filed his state tax return for tax year 2002 and in early 2013 he filed returns
for tax years 2003 through 2009.  He still owes the state about $1,503 in back taxes.  
Applicant has past-due debts for child support.  He has been ordered by a court to make a
lump sum payment of $15,000 and then minimum monthly payments of $1,100 until the debt is
satisfied.  This debt is ongoing.
In completing his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant answered “no” to several
questions pertinent to his financial condition: whether he had paid his taxes in a timely fashion,
whether he had any tax liens, and whether he had any past due debts in excess of 90 or 180 days.
These answers were untrue.  He claimed that someone else completed his SCA for him and that he
did not look at it closely before signing it.  Applicant stated that he had provided information to the
person completing his SCA but was unclear as to the content of this information.  Applicant’s
omissions were willful falsifications.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns under both
Guidelines alleged in the SOR.  In concluding that Applicant had failed to meet his burden of
persuasion under Guideline F, the Judge stated that Applicant did not corroborate his claims to have
made good-faith efforts to resolve his debts.  The Judge also concluded that Applicant had failed to
demonstrate any mitigating condition under Guideline E.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in some of his findings of fact.  For example, he
challenges the Judge’s finding that he had deliberately falsified his SCA.  In evaluating whether an
applicant’s omissions or false answers are deliberate, a Judge must examine the statements in light
of the record as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07551 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2011).  In this
case, the Judge’s treatment of this issue is admittedly cursory.  However, we note the clarity of the
1See ISCR Case No. 06-23613 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2013) (number of false statements by the applicant was
a factor that supported the Judge’s finding of deliberate falsification); ISCR Case No. 07-03307 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 26,
2008) (multiple nature of contemporaneous false statements was a factor the Judge should have addressed in analyzing
the applicant’s intent to deceive).
2“[Q]: But as far as [f]illing out this form, this . . . was for you to fill out the form and you knew you had those
outstanding problems or at least issues, right? [A]: Yes, but in the back of my mind I knew because when I was running
through my taxes that I really didn’t owe that kind of money.”  Tr. at 83.  
questions at issue here and the number of omissions, which, under the facts of this case, militate
against a conclusion of honest mistakes.1  We note that Applicant’s explanations for the omissions
were not totally consistent.  For example, in his clearance interview, he stated that his security
officer had filled out the SCA and that he had read it hurriedly before signing, reasonably implying
that he did not notice the omissions.  Clearance Interview at 2, included in Government Exhibit 8,
Answers to Interrogatories.  However, at the hearing, Applicant testified that he had answered the
questions as he did because of a belief that he did not owe the debts in question.2  The record as a
whole supports the Judge’s finding.  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he still owed $200,000 to the IRS, contending
that the actual amount is much lower.  He also contends that he owes nothing to his state.  Applicant
testified, however, that  he had liens for back Federal taxes in an amount over $1,000,000 and that
these liens were outstanding as of the date of the hearing.  Tr. at 69.  The $200,000 amount was
derived from Applicant’s own evidence.  See AE Z, Letter from IRS Taxpayer Advocate, at 3.
Applicant also testified that he had outstanding liens to his state.  Tr. at 69-70.  The Judge’s finding
as to the extent of Applicant’s state tax delinquencies was based on Notices of State Income Taxes
Due, also an Applicant exhibit.  AE Y.  Even if there are errors in the Judge’s findings, they did not
likely affect the outcome of the case.  We have considered the entirety of Applicant’s arguments
regarding the sufficiency of the Judge’s findings.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern
are based upon substantial record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-11735 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep.
21, 2010).
Applicant cites to evidence that, in performing his official duties, he has provided support
to the U.S. in attaining its military and governmental objectives.  This was evidence that the Judge
was required to consider, alongside all the other evidence in the record.  In the whole-person
analysis, the Judge cited to Applicant’s evidence of good duty performance.  However, his overall
adverse decision was supportable.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-01735 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug.
31, 2010).  In support of his appeal, Applicant has submitted evidence not contained in the record
concerning his child support obligations.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive
¶ E3.1.29.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
