 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 11-06649 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Hiawatha Burris, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for personal conduct. 
Her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 11, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under Guideline E 
(personal conduct). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
In her September 25, 2013 Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied both allegations 
under Guideline E. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing on October 25, 2013. At the November 13, 2013 hearing, I admitted 
 
 
 
2 
four Government exhibits into evidence (GE 1-4). Applicant testified and did not present 
documentation. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 22, 
2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and 
the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old, single, and has an 11-year-old daughter. She received 
a bachelor’s degree in business administration in 2002. She has worked for her current 
employer, a federal contractor, since 2002. Her position is financial analyst. She was 
granted a secret security clearance in 2002, and a top secret clearance in 2005. In 
2010, she completed a security clearance application for her periodic security 
reinvestigation. She testified that she has received a promotion and commendation from 
her employer, but did not provide supporting documentation. (GE 1; Tr. 24-31, 49) 
 
 On August 6, 2000, when Applicant was 21 years old, she was arrested and 
charged with three counts of Destruction of Private Property, value less than $1,000. All 
three charges were misdemeanors. At the hearing, Applicant testified that she and her 
boyfriend had an argument, and he accused her of damaging his car. He called the 
police and Applicant was brought to the police station, charged, and released with a 
court date. At the hearing, Applicant testified she was aware of the three misdemeanor 
charges, and that they were dismissed. The court report confirms that all three charges 
were dismissed on March 15, 2001. (GE 4; Tr. 24, 31-34) 
 
 On April 18, 2002, when she was 23 years old, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with destruction of property or monument,1 value equal to or greater than 
$1,000, a felony. As part of her reinvestigation, Applicant was interviewed by an agent 
of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on October 15, 2010. During her 
interview, she said that the 2002 incident occurred when she had an argument with her 
boyfriend, and demanded to be admitted to his apartment. When he refused, Applicant 
damaged his screen door. She was arrested and subsequently released. However, in 
her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that the charge was based on her boyfriend’s 
claim that she had “keyed his car” after a domestic dispute. At the hearing, Applicant 
said she thought the 2002 charge related to an altercation with the same boyfriend that 
occurred in 2000. (GE 2, 3; Tr. 34-39) 
 
 At the court hearing on June 11, 2002, Applicant was represented by a public 
defender. In her Answer, she stated, “However, I was told by my attorney, at the time of 
my guilty plea that the charge was being reduced to a misdemeanor. On that basis I 
pleaded guilty.” She stated during her security interview that her boyfriend did not 
                                                 
1 Applicant testified she did not know why the word “monument” was included in the charge, because the 
incident did not involve a monument. (Tr. 20, 62, 65) 
 
 
3 
appear at the hearing, and therefore, the charge was dismissed. The court report shows 
the charge was nolle prosequi. (GE 2, 3; Tr. 38-39) 
 
 Applicant testified that during and after her court appearance, she did not know 
the charge was a felony. She also testified that she did not realize the 2002 charge was 
a felony-level charge until she was completing a job application. She amended her 
testimony to say she did not remember how she learned of the felony charge. (GE 2, 3; 
Tr. 34-39) 
 
 In September 2010, Applicant completed a security clearance application for her 
periodic reinvestigation related to her top secret security clearance. Section 22, “Police 
Record,” subsection (c) asked, “Have you EVER been charged with any felony 
offense?” [emphasis in original] She answered “No.” At the hearing, Applicant testified 
that at the time she completed the application, she was not aware she had been 
charged with a felony. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 39-41) 
 
 Applicant completed DOHA interrogatories in July 2013. She was provided an 
opportunity to review the OPM agent’s summary of her security interview, and correct 
any inaccuracies. Applicant adopted it as an accurate reflection of the interview. She 
made no changes, and signed a notarized statement that it was “true and correct to the 
best of my knowledge and belief.” (GE 2; Tr. 41-47) 
 
 In response to the interrogatories, Applicant stated that when she was 
interviewed, she was unaware that the 2002 offense was a felony-level charge. During 
the interview, when asked about felony offenses, Applicant denied having been 
arrested on felony-level charges. She also denied ever having been arrested for any 
offense, regardless of the level of the charge. After the agent confronted her with the 
evidence of her 2002 arrest, she admitted the arrest, and stated she did not list it in her 
security clearance application because she was uncertain about the time frame 
required by the question. She also did not disclose the 2000 arrest to the agent. At the 
hearing, she stated she did not remember if she disclosed the 2000 arrest. She also 
testified she did not disclose the 2002 arrest because she did not know it was a felony. 
When asked why she claimed she was confused about the question’s time frame, she 
reiterated that she thought all of the charges were misdemeanors, and all were 
dismissed, and that therefore she was not required to list them on her application or 
disclose them to the agent. She denies deliberately falsifying information on her 
application or at her security interview. (GE 2; Tr. 41-49)  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2 Decisions 
                                                 
2 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
4 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, 
commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a 
disqualifying or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an 
applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can 
be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or 
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the 
information presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and 
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline E (personal conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant 
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Therefore, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant 
possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national 
interests as her or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance 
process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance 
process. 
 
                                                 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
5 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
5 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2000 on three misdemeanor charges, and in 2002 on 
a felony charge. The Government alleges that she deliberately failed to disclose these 
arrests during her investigation. She answered “No” to a straightforward question on 
her 2010 security clearance application that asked if she had ever been charged with a 
felony-level offense. The word “EVER” was written in capital letters to clearly 
distinguish it from the questions that are limited to a specific time frame. She also failed 
to disclose either the 2000 or the 2002 arrest when questioned during her 2010 
security interview. Applicant admitted her 2002 arrest only when confronted with the 
evidence garnered from her security investigation. Moreover, she did not disclose the 
2000 arrest at all during the interview, despite being asked if she had ever been 
arrested on any level of offense. She gave varying reasons for not disclosing the facts: 
that she was confused about the time frame, and that the charges were dismissed so 
she did not have to report them. She also repeatedly contended that she did not know 
the 2002 arrest involved a felony-level charge. However, she stated in her Answer that 
when she appeared in court, her attorney informed her the charge would be reduced to 
a misdemeanor, and she agreed to plead guilty on that basis, that is, in order to have it 
reduced from the more serious felony level. Her statement shows that she was aware 
that she had been charged originally at the felony level. I conclude Applicant intended 
to conceal her police record from the Government. AG ¶¶16 (a) and (b) apply. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 The record includes no evidence that Applicant attempted to correct the 
answers on her security clearance application. On the contrary, she continued to 
 
 
6 
conceal the charges and arrests during her subsequent security interview, until she 
was confronted with the evidence of her police record. Applicant's failure to be 
forthright with the government during a security clearance investigation cannot be 
considered minor, because it undermines the integrity of the security clearance 
process. I cannot conclude that such conduct will not recur, because after failing to be 
forthright on her application and at her interview, Applicant continued to give conflicting 
information at the hearing. Although Applicant's arrests are not recent, her failures to 
be forthright occurred in 2010, and at the 2013 hearing. Applicant's conduct casts 
doubt on her trustworthiness and judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and (c) cannot be applied. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant is an intelligent and educated woman who has maintained a position 
as a financial analyst with a federal contractor for several years. It is not credible that 
she would not understand a simply worded question that asked if she had ever been 
arrested. Her credibility is also undermined because she concealed her arrests during 
her security interview, until she was confronted with evidence. 
 
 The record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
