 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 11-04167   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Bradley P. Moss, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
personal conduct concerns raised by the findings of a 2006 Army Criminal Investigation 
Command (CID) investigation. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 5, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the personal conduct guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on July 25, 2013. At the hearing, convened on August 22, 2013, I 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. I admitted GE 5, over Applicant’s 
objections.2 Applicant offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without 
objection. He also testified and presented the testimony of two witnesses. After the 
hearing, Applicant timely submitted3 AE F through H, which were admitted without 
objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on August 30, 2013. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Applicant requested that I take administrative notice of three federal statutes 
underlying the CID investigation:  18 U.S.C. § 371, Conspiracy to Defraud the United 
States; 18 U.S.C. § 641, Embezzlement of Government Property; and 18 U.S.C. § 208, 
Acts Affecting Personal Interests. Without objection from Department Counsel, I 
approved the request. The request and the attached documents are included in the 
record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) B through D.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 56, is an employee of a federal contractor. He retired from the U.S. 
Army after 34 years of service as a chief warrant officer 4 (CW4). He held a security 
clearance from 1975 to August 2006. His professional expertise is in logistics. He is a 
graduate of the Defense Acquisition University’s contract management course, the 
Federal Acquisition Institute Mentoring Program, and the Army’s Senior Staff Course. 
Between February 2005 and August 2006, Applicant was a civilian employee of the 
Army, working as senior contracting officer at an overseas military base, with direct 
oversight and guidance of contractors providing lifecycle support services to the U.S. 
military. He also served on the Award Fee Board of a federal contractor, although he 
was not a voting member.5  
 
 In May 2006, based on a compliant from an unknown source,6 CID began 
investigating Applicant and his wife for conspiracy, conflict of interest, and wrongful 
appropriation of U.S. Government property. The investigation was initially focused on 
                                                          
2 Applicant objected to GE 5, a redacted version of the CID investigation, citing the incompleteness of the 
document, which is missing a number of the attachments identified in the report.  
 
3 The record closed on September 6, 2013. (Tr. 252) 
 
4 HE A is an index of Applicant’s exhibits.  
 
5 Tr. 88-91, 177-179; GE 1, GE 5. 
 
6 The identity of the complaining witness is redacted. (GE 5) 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the nail salon that operated on base, which was also the 
subject of a March 2006 Army Regulation (AR-15) investigation.7 Applicant admitted 
that he and his wife, as a favor to the owners of the salon, purchased and received 
$3,000 of supplies through the military mail system. The investigation also revealed that 
Applicant inserted himself, possibly at the request of the nail salon owners, into the 
interactions between the salon owners and the Army and Air Force Exchange Service 
(AAFES) manager. Ultimately, the investigation did not establish that Applicant had an 
ownership interest in the business. No further action was taken regarding Applicant’s 
relationship with the nail salon or his use of the military mail system.8  
  
 However, the investigation did discover an outside business owned by Applicant 
and his wife. Applicant started the company in 1988, while he was stationed in 
Germany. The company, which cleaned vehicles and found used cars for people, 
operated until 1999, when Applicant was transferred to another duty station. The 
company lay dormant until January 2006, when he revived it as a logistics support 
business. Applicant re-launched the company by building and publishing a website. 
(Applicant claims that the website was not publicly available, but the CID investigators 
reviewed the website days before Applicant’s initial interview.) He registered the 
company with the Central Contractor Registration System and the Dun & Bradstreet 
(D&B) federal contractor database. He created a profile for the company in each 
database and received a company-specific identification number from each. A Financial 
Crimes Enforcement Network (FINCEN) profile of the company, which pulled 
information from the D&B database, indicated that it held one million dollars in assets, 
and employed 17 people. Applicant and his wife prepared a proposal for a range 
support contract as well as job announcements for positions necessary to support the 
contract. Applicant explained to the CID investigators that he relied on his years of 
experience as a logistics specialist and publicly available information to complete the 
proposal. He also told the investigators that he had no plans to submit the proposal for 
consideration until he had an opportunity to have his lawyers review the document for 
possible conflicts of interest. At hearing, Applicant claimed that he was planning to 
submit the proposal to the staff judge advocate on base for a conflict of interest review.9  
 
 At the conclusion of the investigation, CID found probable cause to believe that 
Applicant and his wife’s actions constituted wrongful appropriation of government 
property and conspiracy. Working together, the couple used a government-issued 
computer in government-assigned quarters to develop a website and a proposal for 
their private business. Applicant also used, albeit temporarily, a U.S. military phone 
number as the contact number on the company’s website. CID further established 
probable cause to believe that Applicant and his wife’s activities constituted a criminal 
conflict of interest when they authored a proposal for a contract that involved an area in 
which Applicant, as a senior contracting officer, exercised significant control. The 
investigation determined that the proposal contained information Applicant’s wife gained 
                                                          
7 The AR-15 investigation is not alleged in the SOR. 
 
8 GE 5.  
 
9 Tr. 100-117; GE 5. 
 
4 
 
as a former employee on the incumbent support contract. CID recommended the case 
for prosecution, but the Department of Justice declined citing jurisdiction and venue 
issues.10  
  
 Applicant denies any criminal wrongdoing. At the time, he claims he was not 
aware that using his Army-issued computer for writing the proposal was not permitted. 
He believed, based on his experience and education, that his private business did not 
create a conflict of interest because the proposal offered services different from those 
provided by the incumbent range support contract.  He also denied the range support 
contract fell within his sphere of influence. Applicant denies that the company was 
actually a going concern because, contrary to the FINCEN report, it did not have assets, 
employees, or contracts at the time of the CID investigation.11  
 
 Applicant believes the CID investigation was initiated by his former supervisor in 
retaliation against Applicant for personal issues between them. In August 2006, 
Applicant’s command suspended his local access to classified information pending the 
resolution of the investigation. Applicant elected to take paid leave and returned to the 
United States. In October 2006, Applicant’s command placed him in a leave-without-pay 
status. Upset with how the command handled the investigation, Applicant tendered his 
resignation in November 2006. He began a new job in the United States working for a 
private company the same month. In February 2007, Applicant’s command decided to 
suspend him for five months. The suspension was applied retroactively. The command 
processed Applicant’s resignation after the suspension was completed.12 
 
 In the seven years since the CID investigation, Applicant has continued to work 
as a contractor supporting lifecycle support and sustainment contracts at forward 
operating bases in Afghanistan. His coworkers, military members, civilian employees, 
and contractors alike, laud Applicant’s work ethic and good character. In 2008, 
Applicant launched another logistics company, specifically dealing with transportation 
operations for private companies.13  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. 101-108; GE 5. 
 
11 Tr. 101-102, 110-111.   
 
12 Tr. 96-97, 108-109, 130-131, 141-155, 194-202, 203-208, 217-219; GE 1, GE 4; AE H. 
 
13 Tr. 19-41, 55-73, 190; AE A-G 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant received a five-month suspension while he was 
civilian employee of the Army. Not only did this ‘administrative punishment’ have no 
effect (it was imposed five months after Applicant tendered his resignation and moved 
on to other employment), it is not disqualifying under the Directive. However, the 
underlying conduct — Applicant and his wife conspiring to use government-issued 
property entrusted to Applicant, and information available to Applicant in the 
performance of his official duties for their personal gain — is potentially disqualifying 
and merits scrutiny. Although obtusely drafted, the SOR gave Applicant adequate notice 
of the reasons the government proposed for revoking his access to classified 
information and afforded him a reasonable opportunity to respond to the allegations and 
present a defense to the case against him as required under the Directive.14  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a security concern when he acts in a 
way that raises questions about his judgment or his ability to protect classified 
information.15 The conduct identified in the CID investigative report is sufficient to 
establish the Government’s prima facie case against Applicant. The CID report contains 
                                                          
14 See Executive Order 10865, Section 3; Directive, Section 4.3. 
 
15 AG ¶ 15. 
 
 
6 
 
credible adverse information that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under a 
single guideline (criminal conduct).16 It also contains credible adverse information that is 
not specifically covered by another guideline (wrongful appropriation of government 
property, conspiracy, and conflict of interest) that when considered as a whole supports 
an unfavorable whole-person assessment, raising concerns about Applicant’s ability to 
properly safeguard classified information.17 Applicant showed a willingness to place his 
pecuniary interests before his obligations as a civilian employee to avoid outside 
activities that may create a financial conflict of interest.  
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate identified concerns. While 
Applicant’s supervisor’s ill-will toward Applicant may have been the impetus for the CID 
investigation, it does not extenuate Applicant’s misconduct or his financial motives. 
Also, given Applicant’s 31-year career as a DOD employee (28 as a military member 
and 3 as a civilian employee in management positions) he knew or should have known 
of the constraints on his outside activities or use of government resources.  Ultimately, 
Applicant failed to refute the CID findings that his private business fell within in his 
sphere of influence and created a conflict of interest. Accordingly, none of the personal 
conduct mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s actions are not minor. There is no such 
thing as an insignificant conflict of interest.18 He misused his government resources and 
information he obtained in the performance of his duties to his benefit. Given his inability 
to identify and take responsibility for his misconduct, I find there is a risk he will engage 
in similar conduct in the future as he continues to engage in business opportunities 
outside of his employment as a federal contractor. Because this concern lingers, 
Applicant’s conduct has not been mitigated by the passage of time. 
 
Despite the favorable character information in the record, I have significant 
reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2. The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to make 
“an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”19 Applicant violated the 
ethical code of conduct that applies to all DOD personnel. His conduct, in turn, raises 
concerns about his ability to protect classified information that must be resolved in favor 
of the Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
16 AG ¶ 16(c). 
 
17 AG ¶ 16(d). 
 
18  See HE D.  
 
19 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
