 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
         
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09972  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
In addition to having ongoing, unresolved financial issues, Applicant has 
repeatedly lied to the Government about his history of drug involvement.  Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
This case is Applicant’s reapplication for a security clearance. On October 26, 
2009, a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge denied 
Applicant access to classified information after finding that he failed to mitigate the drug 
involvement and personal conduct allegations presented in a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) dated March 31, 2009. Applicant submitted a security clearance application on 
August 15, 2011, again seeking access to classified information. He submitted a second 
security clearance application on April 20, 2012. The Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a SOR on June 27, 2013, detailing security concerns under the personal conduct 
guideline and financial considerations guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative 
judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on September 19, 2013. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. Accordingly, 
the items appended to the FORM are admitted to the record as Government’s Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 10.The case was assigned to me on November 6, 2013. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
On my own, I take judicial notice of the October 26, 2009 decision issued in ISCR 
Case No. 08-04283. In the Decision, the Administrative Judge made specific findings 
that are relevant and material to the current adjudication. The Decision is appended to 
the record as Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 41, is a driver and general clerk for a federal contractor. Married since 
August 1997, Applicant and his wife are expecting their first child.2 
 
 Applicant first began using marijuana in 1991. He used the drug regularly until 
1996. After three years of abstinence, Applicant resumed using marijuana in 1999, but 
only on what he deemed special occasions. In September 2006, Applicant submitted his 
first security clearance application. In response to the questions on the application 
about prior use or purchase of illegal drugs, Applicant denied any history of drug 
involvement. Initially, Applicant claimed that he answered the drug questions on the 
security clearance application in the negative because he was not using marijuana at 
the time he completed the form. Under cross-examination at the September 2009 
hearing, Applicant admitted that he lied on the security clearance application.  He also 
admitted that he continued to use marijuana after he submitted the security clearance 
application in September 2006 until January 2008. Despite his March 2007 arrest on 
possession of marijuana and distribution of controlled substance charges, which were 
subsequently nolle prossed, Applicant denied ever selling or distributing the drug. In 
denying Applicant access to classified information, the Administrative Judge concluded, 
in pertinent part, that Applicant intentionally falsified his security clearance application.3 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 GE 5; GE 4. 
 
3 HE I. 
 
3 
 
 In August 2011, Applicant reapplied for a security clearance. On the security 
clearance applications Applicant completed in August 2011 and April 2012, he disclosed 
prior drug use at New Year’s Eve parties in 2007 and 2008.4 According to the summary 
of Applicant’s interview with a background investigator: 
 
[Applicant] smoked marijuana from January 2007 to January of 2008. [He] 
first tried it at a New Year’s Eve party in 2007, and then smoked an 
unrecalled amount of times may [sic] three to four in a social setting with a 
group of friends that he no longer associates with. The last time 
[Applicant] smoked marijuana was at a New Year’s Eve party in 2008.5 
 
In his interrogatory responses adopting the interview summary, Applicant clarified that 
he first tried marijuana as a teenager, not in 2007. He further explained that he was 
never addicted to the drug, but only used it because the other kids he knew were using 
the drug. Applicant confirmed the 2007 and 2008 drug use, but claimed that he does 
not recall the details because it happened so long ago.6 In another set of responses to 
DOHA interrogatories about his history of drug use, Applicant stated that that he first 
used marijuana years ago, but did not remember the date. He admitted that he used 
the drug off and on, but not with great frequency, smoking approximately zero to three 
joints during a given year. He reiterated that his last use occurred around January 
2008. He also stated that he did not intend to use drugs in the future.7  
   
 In response to the SOR allegations that he falsified his August 2011 and April 
2012 security clearance applications as well as his February 2012 and July 2013 
responses to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant qualifies his admissions stating: 
 
When the very first top secret interview was performed, everyone around 
me said  ‘don’t tell this or don’t tell that’, but I decided to speak the truth . . . 
I am sorry, but I do not sit and dwell on negative things from my past so 
dates are not always going to be remembered. The last investigator I talked 
with, I spoke to her about the current time, not years before. . . . 
 
I admit I only answered that way because I can’t recall specific dates. . . 
Nobody is that good to recall each and every situation in life verbatim [sic]. I 
answered the most recent memories I could recall. . . . 
 
My answers to the July 2011 questionnaire were marked up and not 
thought through. It hurts. I didn’t make the best decision in life all of the 
                                                          
4 GE 5-6.  
 
5 GE 7.  
 
6 GE 7.  
 
7 GE 8. 
  
 
4 
 
time. However, I have not been in possession, or used, marijuana since 
2008.8 
 
 In addition to the personal conduct concerns, the SOR also alleges that Applicant 
is indebted to seven creditors for approximately $14,266.9 The largest debt, $11,696 is 
for a car loan Applicant co-signed for his mother. Applicant attributes his delinquent 
debts to a decrease in his household income caused by a disability that prevents his 
wife from working. However, only one of the alleged accounts is for a medical expense. 
The majority of the delinquent accounts are for consumer goods. All of the debts alleged 
in the SOR remain unresolved. Applicant claims that his mother will rehabilitate the car 
loan and that he will pay the other delinquent debts in the future when he is able.10 
 
Policies 
 
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the 
guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 GE 4. 
 
9 Department Counsel concedes that SOR ¶ 1.c is a duplicate of ¶ 1.b. Therefore, I find in Applicant’s 
favor on the debt alleged in ¶ 1.c. 
 
10 GE 4. 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
An applicant’s lack of candor or dishonesty raises questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and his ability to protect classified information. Of special interest in any 
adjudication is an applicant’s failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security clearance process.11 Such is the case here. The SOR alleges that Applicant 
failed to fully disclose his illegal drug involvement on two security clearance applications 
and in response to two sets of interrogatories. When Applicant’s statements in the two 
security clearance applications, his subject interview, and his two sets of interrogatory 
responses are compared to the findings in the October 2009 decision denying his 
access to classified information, it is clear that Applicant’s history of drug involvement is 
much more extensive than he disclosed during the present adjudication.  
 
In his qualified admissions to the SOR allegations, Applicant denies any intent to 
deceive the government, insisting that his disclosures were truthful. He attributes any 
omissions regarding his history of drug involvement to his faulty memory. An omission 
of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about 
it or inadvertently overlooked it. Conversely, an omission is deliberate when it is made 
knowingly and willfully. I find that Applicant deliberately falsified his August 2011 and 
April 2012 security clearance applications and his February 2012 and July 2013 
responses to DOHA interrogatories.12  
 
It is not credible that Applicant could not remember the details of his drug history. 
Having previously been denied access to classified information because of his lack of 
candor about his drug history, Applicant knew the importance of full and candid 
disclosure during all phases of the adjudication process as well as the consequences of 
not doing so. Even if he could not recall the specifics of his drug history, the October 
2009 decision provided sufficient detail to aid Applicant in providing full disclosure.  
 
None of the personal conduct mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
falsifications are not minor. His inability to speak candidly about his drug history now 
spans two security clearance adjudications. His has demonstrated a pattern of 
dishonesty and lack of trustworthiness that continues to casts doubts on his ability to 
safely handle and protect classified information.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a security concern because “an individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”13 Applicant’s $14,266 in unresolved delinquent debt is enough to establish that 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 15. 
 
12  See AG ¶16(a). 
 
13 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 
 
he has a history of not paying his bills.14 None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems are recent and ongoing. Although Applicant suggests that 
the financial problems were caused by events beyond his control there is not sufficient 
evidence in the record to support such a finding given Applicant’s history of dishonesty 
with the Government and the absence of any corroborating evidence. Most important, 
Applicant has not taken any steps nor has he articulated a plan to resolve his 
outstanding delinquent debt. 
   
The record leaves me with reservations about Appellant’s current security 
worthiness. I also considered the nine-factor whole-person concept.15 Applicant’s 
pattern of dishonesty and his recent, unresolved financial problems are strong indicators 
that he is not a suitable candidate for access to classified information. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b, 2.d - 2.h: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.c.:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
14 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
15 AG ¶ 2(a). 
