 
 1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03696 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
From 1993 to 2009, Applicant illegally downloaded and, in some cases, copied and 
distributed software, movies, and video games. In 2006 or 2007, he illegally used Percocet 
once while holding a security clearance. After inadvertently viewing child pornography via an 
image-posting forum on the Internet on three occasions in 2008, he downloaded two images 
that were sexually exploitive of young women, whom he believed were of college age but 
could have been as young as 16. He drove a vehicle while intoxicated at least once annually 
between 2005 and October 2009. As of September 2013, Applicant was continuing to 
associate with persons who regularly smoke marijuana. Alleged misrepresentation of his 
past marijuana use was not established, and there has been no recurrence of access to 
child pornography, drunk driving, or illegal drug use in more than four years. Yet, criminal 
conduct and personal conduct concerns are not fully mitigated. Clearance denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 29, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
 
 
 2 
concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), and 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and explaining why it was unable to find it clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for 
him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
(DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 26, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. He requested a 
decision based on the written record without a hearing. Pursuant to E.3.17, the 
Government requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) administrative judge. (Tr. 15.) On August 22, 2013, the case was assigned to me 
to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. On August 29, 2013, I scheduled a 
hearing for September 26, 2013. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Eight Government exhibits (GEs 1-8) were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on 
October 18, 2013. Based on the Government’s evidence, Department Counsel withdrew 
SOR allegation 1.c. 
 
Summary of the Pleadings 
 
 The SOR as amended alleges under Guideline E (SOR 1.a), Guideline D (SOR 2.a), 
and Guideline J (SOR 3.a) that Applicant viewed and downloaded underage pornography 
between 2008 and October 2009. Under Guidelines E and J, the SOR alleges that 
Applicant illegally used Percocet while possessing a security clearance around October 
2006 (SOR 1.b and 3.a); operated a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol at least 
once a year from 2005 until 2009 (SOR 1.f and 3.a); left the scene of an accident involving 
property damage that he caused while driving under the influence in December 2008 (SOR 
1.g and 3.a); and illegally downloaded and distributed software, movies, and video games 
from 1993 until January 2009 (SOR 1.h and 3.a). The SOR alleges solely under Guideline 
E, that Applicant allegedly falsified his March 2006 security clearance application by 
reporting a last use of marijuana in May 2004 when he smoked it to at least December 
2005 (SOR 1.d), and that he frequently associates with friends and acquaintances who 
regularly smoke marijuana (SOR 1.e). 
 
 In his detailed Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he accessed images of 
child pornography inadvertently. While he downloaded two pornographic images in 
December 2009, he believed the females were of college age. Applicant denied the alleged 
lack of candor about his marijuana involvement and explained, “I do not have any real idea 
on when [was] the last time I smoked marijuana.” Applicant admitted that he had illegally 
used Percocet on one occasion while he held a security clearance; that he frequently 
associates with persons who regularly use marijuana; that he drove under the influence of 
alcohol at least once yearly from 2005 to 2009; that while driving under the influence of 
 
 3 
alcohol around December 2008, he damaged a privately-owned fence, although he 
intended to report the damage the next morning; and that he illegally downloaded and 
distributed software, movies, and video games from 1993 until January 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old senior information systems engineer. He was granted a 
Secret clearance in or before February 2007. (GE 1.) Applicant’s Secret clearance was 
apparently suspended after he was denied a Top Secret clearance and access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI) in May 2010.  (GEs 3, 5, 6; Tr. 30-31.) 
 
Applicant smoked marijuana with friends about 15 times total, starting in September 
1996 while in high school and ending in 2004 or 2005. (GEs 1, 7, 8; Tr. 43-44, 58-59.) 
Applicant obtained the marijuana from his friends without cost to him, except for one 
occasion in 2003, when he paid $5 for the drug. (GE 7.) 
 
Applicant was awarded his bachelor’s degree in June 2003. (GE 8.)  From June 
2003 to September 2005, Applicant worked as a lab assistant at the university. In May 
2004, Applicant left the college dormitory environment and moved back into his mother’s 
home. (GEs 1, 8.) From September 2005 to December 2006, Applicant held a part-time 
research assistant position while pursuing his graduate degree at the university. Around 
March 2006, Applicant began working for his current employer as a student intern. (GEs 1, 
8.) 
 
On March 21, 2006, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for a Secret clearance for 
his duties with the defense contractor. Applicant responded affirmatively to any illegal drug 
use in the last seven years. He indicated that he used marijuana less than 10 times from 
September 1999 to May 2004, and added, in part, “It was just a few times experimenting 
during college. I have no future plans to try it again.” (GE 8.) Applicant was granted a 
Secret clearance, and in February 2007, he became a full-time computer programmer for 
the defense contractor. (GE 1.) 
 
While at a party in October 2006 or October 2007,
1
  Applicant took two Percocet 
pills not prescribed for him. Applicant was drinking at the time, and he gave no thought to 
                                                 
1 
Applicant provided discrepant information about the date of his use of Percocet. On his September 28, 2009 
SF 86, he indicated that used Percocet in October 2006, but also that he responded affirmatively to having 
used an illegal drug while he held a security clearance because of that use of Percocet. He provided a date of 
February 2007 for his clearance grant. He would not have had a clearance when he abused Percocet, unless 
he was granted an interim clearance shortly after he completed his first security clearance application on 
March 2, 2006. The report of a March 2010 polygraph examination (admitted as GE 4 without objection) 
indicates that Applicant used Percocet in October 2007 rather than in October 2006, as he had previously 
reported. (GE 4.) On September 15, 2010, Applicant provided an affidavit to an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator in which he indicated that he used Percocet in October 2007. (GE 6.)  
 
 4 
his security clearance. (GE 2; Tr. 40.) The Percocet was given to him by a friend at no cost. 
(GE 6.) 
 
 On September 28, 2009, Applicant executed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) for an upgrade of his security clearance to Top Secret and access to 
SCI. Applicant responded affirmatively to questions 23a, concerning any illegal use of a 
controlled substance in the last seven years, and 23b, about whether he had ever illegally 
used a controlled substance while possessing a security clearance. He indicated that he 
used marijuana from September 1996 to December 2005, “a couple times in high school 
and a few times in college, about once or twice a year, 10-15 times total.” In addition, 
Applicant indicated that he took two Percocet pills in October 2006 “Took two Percocets 
one night from a friend’s prescription. It was a one-time recreational thing. I won’t do it or 
anything like it again. Question 23B is in response to this incident.” (GE 1.) 
 
In conjunction with a polygraph examination for SCI access, Applicant was 
interviewed by a government representative on March 3, 2010. In response to questioning, 
Applicant disclosed several issues of potential adjudicative significance, as follows: 
 
 Applicant indicated that he used marijuana no later than January 2007 instead of 
December 2005, as he had previously reported. Also, he used Percocet in October 
2007 instead of October 2006.  
 
 Once a month between 1993 and January 2009, he illegally downloaded games to 
his personal computer. He loaded 50 games onto computer disks (CDs) and gave 
10 disks to friends free of charge. As of March 2010, Applicant had 10 CDs but had 
no illegally downloaded games on his personal computer. Between 1995 and 
January 2009, Applicant illegally downloaded 14-19 computer software programs 
with an estimated total value of $6,500. He put five of the programs on CDs and 
stored the rest on his personal computer. Applicant gave three persons operating 
software that he obtained illegally.
2
 In 2009, he deleted the software from his 
                                                                                                                                                             
Applicant now indicates that his use was in October 2006. In response to DOD interrogatories, Applicant 
indicated in March 2013 that he used Percocet in October 2006, six years ago while he was “mostly not 
working” and was finishing his master’s degree: 
 
Although I held a clearance, I never actually used it to work on anything classified until the 
10/2009 time frame. As stated above, I was taking time off from work to focus on school and 
the security clearance was not something that was in my mind at the time. I did not hold the 
pill in my hand, thinking about how I was going to take it, in spite of having a clearance. It was 
not a thought that ever came into my mind. 
 
Applicant explained that he originally thought that he took the Percocet in 2007, but that he later learned that 
his friend had knee surgery and was prescribed Percocet in October 2006. (GE 2.) If I assume that he was 
mistaken and that his abuse of Percocet was in October 2006 rather than in October 2007, then Applicant has 
not explained why he indicated on his SF 86, in his DOD response to interrogatories, in his Answer, and at his 
security clearance hearing that he used Percocet while he held a clearance. Neither party attempted to clarify 
the inconsistency. 
 
2 
Applicant testified that while most of his illegal downloading stopped around 2007, he downloaded for a 
friend’s sister a program used to cut up music on the computer. “I was just helping her this one time, so I didn’t 
 
 5 
personal computer, but he still had five CDs as of March 2010. From February 2007 
to summer 2008, he copied 20 movies from rented digital video disks (DVDs) onto 
his own DVDs.
3
 Between 2000 and January 2009, Applicant downloaded six 
pornographic movies from a website to his personal computer. The movies were still 
on his computer as of March 2010. Applicant denied any intent to engage in any 
illegal downloading in the future. 
 
 In late winter 2008, Applicant frequented a website that features comical content. 
While browsing a “random” sub-forum that allows for anonymous image postings, 
Applicant clicked on a thumbnail image with subtext inviting the viewer to take a 
look. Applicant expected to see something funny but the picture was pornographic 
and involved a young female. A month or so later, in April 2008, Applicant returned 
to the website where he clicked on a picture with a caption that again led him to 
think the image would be humorous. The image of underage girls was pornographic 
in nature. In April or May 2008, while scrolling in the sub-forum, he saw an image of 
a young, fully-clothed female about to perform oral sex on an adult male. Applicant 
did not click on that image, and he signed off the site. In October 2009, Applicant 
accessed two indecent images involving three teenage females. He viewed the 
images a second time on the website in December 2009, when he downloaded the 
images to his personal computer. Applicant believed that the teenagers were 18 
years old because they appeared to be in a dormitory setting, although he told the 
interviewer that the girls could have been as young as 16. As of March 2010, the 
two pictures were still on his personal computer. Applicant denied any intent to 
engage in similar activity in the future. 
 
 Applicant operated a vehicle while intoxicated once a year from 2005 until late 
summer or early fall 2009.
4
 While he drank on average seven to eight beers on 
those occasions, he consumed 10 or 11 beers before driving in the last instance. In 
December 2008, Applicant consumed five pints of beer to intoxication at a local 
restaurant. He decided to spin his car (“did a donut”) in the parking lot of his 
apartment complex. It was snowing, and he slid into a fence on the property. He left 
the scene, intending to notify the manager of the damage in the morning. A 
neighbor reported him to the police, who filed no charges against him. (GE 4.) 
 
 On May 20, 2010, Applicant was denied eligibility for SCI access because of his 
recent viewing of child pornography, illegal downloading, and “undetected” driving while 
                                                                                                                                                             
want to shell out $600 for it.” (Tr. 49-50, 74.) 
 
3 
Applicant copied the movies because he “thought it would be cool to have a big movie library” like his friends. 
(Tr. 76.) 
 
4 
Applicant testified that a couple of times he drove while intoxicated out of stupidity but also that he drove out 
of necessity a couple of times. (Tr. 46.) In the December 2008 incident, he hit a fence that belonged to his 
apartment complex around 12:30 a.m. He decided to park his car and report the damage to the management 
office in the morning. The police came to his apartment before he had a chance to do so. While he had been 
drinking, he does not believe that he was intoxicated at the time. (Tr. 47-48.) 
 
 6 
intoxicated. (GE 3.) Applicant’s Secret security clearance was suspended pending final 
adjudication of his clearance eligibility. (GE 5.) 
 
 On September 10, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), partially about his Percocet abuse. He 
indicated that he used the drug experimentally without a prescription in October 2007. 
Applicant denied any intent of future abuse. He added that his Secret clearance was 
temporarily suspended on August 19, 2010, because his application for higher clearance 
had been denied by another agency “due to his failing the polygraph test.” Applicant denied 
any current association with persons who use illegal drugs. (GE 2.) On September 15, 
2010, Applicant provided the investigator with two affidavits. He detailed his use of 
Percocet in October 2007 and the suspension of his security clearance (GE 6.), and he 
reiterated that none of his current associates used illegal drugs on a regular basis. (GE 5.) 
 
 On October 1, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator about his 
marijuana involvement. (GE 2.) Applicant executed an affidavit in which he indicated that 
he used marijuana with friends twice a year, 15 times total, between 1996 and spring 2005. 
He indicated that he did not recall the exact dates of his first and last use. Applicant 
explained that he stopped smoking marijuana when he moved out of the college dormitory, 
and he denied any intent to use marijuana in the future. (GE 7.) 
 
 Around February 2013, the DOD CAF asked Applicant about issues that surfaced 
during the investigation for a Top Secret clearance and SCI, including why he had not 
reported on his 2009 SF 86 that he had used marijuana while he held a security clearance 
in light of information that he smoked marijuana until January 2007. In his March 2013 
response, Applicant explained that during his polygraph interview, he gave January 2007 
as the date beyond which he could be sure of no marijuana use. He denied any recall of 
the last date on which he smoked marijuana. He made “a reasonable guess” of December 
2005, because that is when he moved out of the college dormitory. Applicant admitted that 
since moving into the city 1.5 years ago, he has new friends and acquaintances who 
smoke marijuana, although he denied any intent of future marijuana use. He reported that 
he used marijuana in the past, on “rare” occasions, “probably 10-15 times total,” between 
January 1996 and December 2005. Concerning his OPM interview report of a last use of 
marijuana in spring 2005, Applicant attributed the discrepancy to a lack of recall and not to 
intent to mislead. Applicant disclosed that he used Percocet in October 2006 while he held 
a security clearance. He gave no thought to his security clearance at the time because was 
off from work that semester while finishing his master’s degree. About his alcohol use, 
Applicant described his current drinking pattern as two to three times per week. He 
consumed one to five pints of beer, although once a week he became intoxicated after 
drinking between five and eight pints of beers. Applicant denied driving while under the 
influence since “roughly September 2009.” (GE 2.) 
 
  Applicant has never been charged with any criminal activity. He acknowledged at 
his September 2013 hearing that he had “made some poor decisions as far as drinking and 
driving, [his] Percocet use, [and] illegally downloading.” (Tr. 52.) Applicant no longer has 
the software programs, but he still has about 20 movies that he illegally copied between 
 
 7 
February 2007 and the summer of 2008. (Tr. 72-74.) Applicant denied any intent to access 
child pornography. While he admitted downloading a thousand pornographic images in his 
lifetime, he indicated that none of them involved child pornography. (Tr. 61) He 
downloaded the two pictures of three girls in a dorm room in December 2009 because he 
found them “funny.” He had no reservations about the females being of age because of the 
dormitory setting. (Tr. 33-39.) 
 
 As for any illegal drug involvement, Applicant now believes that he ingested the 
Percocet in October 2006 instead of October 2007 as he initially recalled. (Tr. 40-41.) He 
last smoked marijuana sometime during the 2004-2005 timeframe. (Tr. 44.) Applicant has 
four or five friends who regularly smoke marijuana, and they have no problem “lighting up” 
when he is there (Tr. 67-68.), but he leaves the room when they smoke the drug. He has 
declined offers to smoke marijuana with them, and he is not pressured to join in. (Tr. 46, 
68.) He tells his friends either that he doesn’t smoke marijuana anymore or that he cannot 
use the drug because of his job. Applicant is not troubled by his friends’ use and 
possession of marijuana because possession of less than an ounce has been 
decriminalized by the state. (Tr. 68-69.) 
 
 Applicant last drove a motor vehicle while intoxicated in October 2009. He drank 
with some friends while out celebrating a friend’s birthday. When a friend became 
belligerent, Applicant chose to drive his friend home, even though he was in no condition to 
operate a vehicle safely. (Tr. 70.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
 
 8 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance 
process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant exercised questionable judgment in several different aspects since he was 
in high school. Approximately once a month from 1993 to January 2009, Applicant illegally 
downloaded computer games onto his personal computer (SOR 1.h). He copied about 50 
of the games to CDs and distributed 10 CDs to friends. From 1995 to 2007, Applicant 
illegally downloaded 14-19 software programs for his personal use. In January 2009, he 
illegally downloaded and copied for a friend’s sister a software program costing around 
$600. From February 2007 to the summer of 2008, Applicant illegally copied 20 movies 
from rented DVDs with the intent of building his own movie library. 
 
 In addition, in early 2008, while browsing an Internet website that allows for 
anonymous image postings, Applicant inadvertently accessed a pornographic image 
involving an underage female. Despite reportedly being “pretty, kind of traumatized” by the 
experience, Applicant returned to the website in April 2008, where he again viewed child 
 
 9 
pornography (SOR 1.a). (Tr. 37.) Applicant had expected a humorous rather than a 
pornographic image on that occasion. In October 2009, he accessed two indecent images 
involving three females who appeared to be teenagers, albeit in college. In December 
2009, he downloaded the indecent images to his personal computer. Applicant speculated 
during his interview for SCI access in March 2010 that the females could have been as 
young as 16, although he assumed they were of college age because of the dorm setting. 
The evidence does not prove that the females in the downloaded images were underage. 
Nonetheless, concerns about Applicant’s judgment are raised by him browsing a website 
that either permitted child pornography or failed to adequately monitor postings for such 
illegal content. 
 
 Applicant abused mood-altering drugs under circumstances that create doubt about 
whether he can be counted on to follow rules and regulations. He operated a vehicle while 
intoxicated once a year from 2005 until October 2009 (SOR 1.f). In December 2008, after 
drinking five pints of beer, Applicant spun his vehicle around in the snow in the parking lot 
of his apartment complex, and he damaged a fence. He did not report the incident before 
he was confronted by the police (SOR 1.g), although he maintains that he intended to 
contact the apartments’ manager. Applicant previously admitted he was intoxicated (GE 
4.), although now he does not believe that he was that impaired. (Tr. 48.) In October 2009, 
Applicant was drunk when he drove a friend who had become belligerent after drinking. 
 
 Applicant abused Percocet once, and he provided conflicting dates about when that 
occurred. Whether he illegally used the drug in October 2006 or in October 2007, he 
admitted several times that he held a security clearance when he abused the Percocet 
(SOR 1.b). In addition, Applicant abused marijuana about 15 times while he was in high 
school and college. Presumably because of the passage of time, the abuse itself was not 
alleged in the SOR. However, Applicant is alleged to have misrepresented the extent of his 
marijuana use when he applied for a clearance in March 2006 (SOR 1.d). He is also 
alleged to currently associate with friends and associates known by him to be regular users 
of marijuana (SOR 1.e). The evidence shows that Applicant provided several different 
accounts of his marijuana abuse. On his March 2006 e-QIP, Applicant indicated that he 
used marijuana fewer than ten times from September 1999 to May 2004. (GE 8.) On his 
September 2009 SF 86, he reported use of marijuana 10-15 times from September 1996 to 
December 2005. (GE 1.) He indicated during a polygraph interview in March 2010 that he 
last used marijuana no later than January 2007 instead of December 2005 as previously 
reported. (GE 4.) In October 2010, he told an OPM investigator that he smoked marijuana 
twice a year from 1996 until the spring of 2005, when he moved out of the college dorms. 
(GE 2.) In response to DOD CAF interrogatories, Applicant indicated in March 2013 that he 
used marijuana “probably 10-15 times total” while in high school and college between 
January 1996 and December 2005. He explained that he stopped smoking marijuana 
because he moved back to his mother’s house “in 12/2005.” (GE 2.) At his hearing, he 
testified that the May 2004 date reported by him in March 2006 is likely accurate because 
of the contemporaneity of the account. Available address information on his March 2006 e-
QIP and his September 2009 SF 86 indicates that he moved back home in May 2004 and 
not in December 2005. Applicant is the sole source of information about his marijuana use. 
His admitted association with known marijuana users bolsters his credibility. About January 
 
 10 
2007 as the date beyond which Applicant was sure of no marijuana use, it suggests the 
possibility that he smoked the drug after college, but it would not prove that he falsified his 
March 2006 e-QIP. Applicant’s reference to a December 2005 date for his last use was an 
estimate and possibly due to inaccurate recall of the date he moved out of the college 
dorm environment. The evidence falls short of proving that Applicant intentionally falsified 
his March 2006 e-QIP when he disclosed marijuana use only until May 2004. However, 
personal conduct concerns are raised by Applicant’s friendships and associations with 
known marijuana abusers in light of the evidence that they have no trouble smoking the 
drug around him. Possession of marijuana remains a crime under federal law, even if 
possession of minor amounts has been decriminalized in Applicant’s state.
5
 
 
 Among the seven personal conduct disqualifying concerns that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16, the following apply in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other singe guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information; 
and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 With the exception of maintaining friendships with marijuana users, Applicant has 
not engaged in any of the conduct of personal conduct concern since 2009. Applicant’s 
access to child pornography was infrequent and apparently inadvertent. His Percocet 
abuse is aggravated by the fact that he held a security clearance at the time, but it 
occurred only once. Although he has consumed alcohol to intoxication as recently as 
March 2013, there is no evidence that he operated a motor vehicle on that occasion. AG ¶ 
17(c), “the offense was so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” 
applies in part. However, Applicant’s illegal downloading and distribution of software was to 
such an extent to make it difficult to mitigate under AG ¶ 17(c). He pirated computer games 
about once a month for 16 years. He essentially stole computer software worth an 
estimated $6,500 between 1995 and January 2009. He copied some 20 movies from 
rented DVDs. AG ¶ 17(c) also cannot reasonably mitigate the concerns raised by his 
association with marijuana users. As of September 2010, Applicant was not knowingly 
associating with marijuana users. Sometime before March 2013, while working for his 
                                                 
5
Under § 94C:32L of the state’s Controlled Substances Act, effective January 2, 2009, the state decriminalized 
possession of one ounce or less of marijuana, making possession of one ounce or less a civil offense subject 
to a $100 fine and forfeiture of the drug. Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance under the Controlled 
Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 812). Under federal law, Schedule I controlled substances are those drugs or 
substances which have a high potential for abuse, no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the 
United States, and lack accepted safety for using the drug under medical supervision. 
 
 11 
defense contractor employer, he established friendships with marijuana users. Since then, 
his friends have used marijuana while socializing with him. 
 
 Applicant testified that he leaves the room when his friends begin smoking 
marijuana, and he denies any social pressure to use marijuana. However, Applicant 
continues to justify these friendships on the basis that the state has decriminalized minor 
marijuana use. He is not going to tell his friends and acquaintances what to do. (Tr. 46.) 
The Government is not in the business of dictating a person’s friends and associates. Yet, 
by choosing to associate with persons involved in activity that continues to be illegal under 
federal law, Applicant has not shown the reform required under AG ¶ 17(d) or AG ¶ 17(g), 
which provide as follows: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(g), association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal downloading, copying, and distribution of copyrighted material is 
not mitigated under AG ¶ 17(d). He showed an unacceptable tendency to justify his illegal 
downloading on the basis that everyone did it in college (“You know, all the way through 
college, I don’t know one college student who doesn’t illegally download movies or, or 
songs, or anything like that and give them to their friends.”), and with respect to his 
downloading of the music-splicing software program in January 2009 when he could afford 
the cost, that he wasn’t going to pay $600 for a program that he was only going to use 
once. As of his hearing in September 2013, he still possessed the 20 movies illegally 
downloaded from rented DVDs. Considerable personal conduct concerns persist because 
of his years of pirating copyrighted material and his association with marijuana users. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) has some applicability in that Applicant’s abuse of Percocet was under a 
circumstance that is not likely to recur. Applicant was provided the drug by a friend who 
had a prescription following surgery. As of March 2013, Applicant was drinking alcohol to 
intoxication once a week, but there is no evidence that he has driven a vehicle after 
drinking since October 2009. About the likelihood of Applicant accessing child 
pornography, Applicant denied frequenting websites featuring child pornography or 
accessing the sub-form involved in his inappropriate access since 2009. (Tr. 62-63.) AG ¶ 
17(f), “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability,” 
applies only in that access to child pornography was inadvertent.  
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concerns about sexual behavior are set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
 12 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability 
to protect classified information. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
 As discussed under Guideline E, Applicant viewed images involving child 
pornography on a website that allowed for random image postings. After inadvertently 
viewing an image that involved a minor female in early 2008, Applicant returned to the 
website in April 2008 where he clicked on a thumbnail image of four young girls, at least 
one of whom had her genital area exposed. In April or May 2008, while scrolling in the sub-
forum, Applicant saw an image of a young, fully-clothed female about to perform oral sex 
on an adult male. In October 2009, Applicant accessed two indecent images of three 
young women, whom be believed were of college age. Applicant downloaded the images 
to his personal computer in December 2009. Three disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 13 
apply: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment. 
 
Pornography involving minors is criminal, although Applicant’s access to some of the 
images was inadvertent. Whether or not his initial access to the images of the three female 
teenagers in October 2009 was accidental, he knew after viewing them that they were 
pornographic in nature. His subsequent viewing and downloading of the images in 
December 2009 was intentional. Applicant continues to believe that the girls were at least 
18 years old based on the dorm setting. Whether they were 18 or as young as 16, access 
to pornography, especially involving minors, is conduct that could adversely affect an 
individual’s reputation and make one vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress. His 
behavior also reflects a lack of discretion or judgment. 
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 14(b), “the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so 
infrequently, or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is 
implicated with regard to child pornography. While Applicant testified that he has 
downloaded about 1,000 pornographic images to his personal computer over the years, 
there is no evidence of recent access to child pornography. AG ¶ 14(c), “the behavior no 
longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress,” is satisfied in that he made 
the Government aware of his involvement with pornography, albeit during a post-polygraph 
 
 13 
interview and his security clearance hearing. AG ¶ 14(d), “the sexual behavior is strictly 
private, consensual, and discrete,” is not pertinent to the facts of this case. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concerns about criminal conduct are set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of criminal conduct starting in 1993, when he began 
illegally downloading copyrighted materials. It includes viewing of child pornography, the 
illegal use of a prescription narcotic, repeated drunk driving, and the distribution to friends 
of pirated computer games and software, as detailed above. Two disqualifying conditions, 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation 
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted,” are firmly established. 
 
 As already discussed under Guideline E, the extent and duration of Applicant’s 
illegal downloading, copying, and distribution of copyrighted materials makes it difficult to 
fully apply AG ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstance that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” even if the 
other criminal conduct concerns are mitigated by the passage of time without recurrence 
and by no future intent. Applicant appears to have a good work record with the defense 
contractor. He started as a student intern, was hired as a computer programmer, and is 
now a senior information systems engineer. A good employment record is indicative of 
reform under AG ¶ 32(d), which provides as follows: 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
At the same time, Applicant’s reform is incomplete without an appropriate expression of 
remorse or meaningful acknowledgement of its illegality. While he testified that he makes 
no excuses for the illegal downloading, he described it as “a lesser offense.” (Tr. 93.) He 
still has 20 movies that he copied for his personal use between 2007 and the summer of 
2008. A full appreciation of the seriousness of his behavior, and an attitude to put his past 
behind him would require at a minimum that he rid himself of the fruits of his illegal 
conduct. The criminal conduct concerns are not fully mitigated. 
 
 14 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(a).
6
 
 
Applicant has a long history of illegal behavior that did not stop once he started 
working for his defense contractor employer. He abused a narcotic while he held a security 
clearance. He continued to illegally download computer software for himself and friends. 
After he became a full-time employee, he illegally copied movies from rented DVDs in an 
effort to build his own movie library. In January 2009, he illegally downloaded and gave a 
friend’s sister a computer program that cost around $600 because he didn’t want to spend 
the money for a program of limited use to him. He operated a motor vehicle while 
intoxicated in October 2009. In December 2009, he downloaded two images that were 
sexually exploitive of young women, whom he speculated were around 18 years old. 
Applicant continues to socialize with friends who regularly use marijuana, including when 
he is around them. Applicant showed good judgment in removing himself from the 
immediate presence of these friends while they are abusing marijuana. However, it is well 
settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See 
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9
th
 Cir. 1990.). Based on the facts before me 
and the adjudicative guidelines that I am required to consider, I am unable to conclude that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance at 
this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
                                                 
6
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 15 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
___________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
