 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-15005 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has six outstanding debts that became delinquent between 2008 and 
2012. He failed to submit sufficient documentary evidence to establish financial 
responsibility in the handling of his financial obligations.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 5, 2011. On 
April 10, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 8, 2013, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
The case was assigned to me on June 17, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on June 20, 2013, scheduling a 
hearing for July 24, 2013. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented 
three original documents for my review at the hearing. The original documents were not 
offered or marked as evidence. Applicant promised to submit copies of the three 
documents for the record and for Department Counsel. He was allowed until August 9, 
2013, to submit any documents to supplement the record. He submitted no documents. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 7, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the 
evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He married his wife 
in October 2005, and they separated in September 2008. He has no children. He served 
on active duty in the U.S. Navy from August 2003 to August 2008. He was honorably 
discharged as a third class petty officer.  
 
Applicant attended college via the Internet from August 2008 until February 2009. 
He used his GI Bill benefits to pay for his college courses. However, he failed to 
complete several courses, and he now owes several student loans.  
 
Following his discharge, Applicant worked for a government contractor from 
September 2008 until August 2009. Applicant testified that he was granted access to 
classified information at the secret level in September 2008. He was fired from his job in 
August 2009, because of his repeated failure to bring his identification card to work. 
Applicant found a part-time job, but was let go in April 2010, because of a disagreement 
with the manager. Applicant did not want to work 25 hours a week; he only wanted to 
work 10 hours a week. He remained unemployed until he was hired by his current 
employer in July 2010.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his May 5, 2011 SCA (Section 26 – Financial Record) that 
he had financial problems, which included delinquent loans, judgments, wage 
garnishments, delinquent federal debts, and debts over 90 days delinquent. The 
background investigation addressed his financial problems and revealed the seven 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling over $24,500. The SOR debts are 
established by the credit reports submitted by the Government and by Applicant’s 
testimony.  
 
In May 2011, Applicant was interviewed by a government background 
investigator and questioned about the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
acknowledged the SOR debts. He explained that his financial problems were the result 
 
3 
 
 
of a decrease in his income after his discharge from the Navy, his getting fired from his 
job in September 2009, and his inability to find a permanent job until he was hired by his 
current employer in July 2010. He did not have sufficient income to pay his day-to-day 
living expenses and his accumulated debts.  
 
Applicant testified that after he lost his job, he contacted some of his creditors to 
let them know he was unemployed, and to set up some payment plans. He was unable 
to establish payment plans because some of the creditors wanted a substantial down 
payment up front before starting the payment plan. While unemployed, Applicant 
received unemployment benefits, but the money he received only covered his day-to-
day living expenses. He did not have sufficient money to make any debt payments.  
 
Applicant also stated that several creditors secured judgments against him and 
initiated wage garnishments. Because of the wage garnishments, he did not have 
sufficient income to make payments on any of the other delinquent debts. He is waiting 
to pay some of the judgments (through wage garnishments) first, and then he intends to 
contact other creditors to make payments arrangements.  
 
The status of the alleged SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR 1(a) ($4,837) – Applicant obtained a car loan in 2004. He claimed he paid 
his car loan payments until he was fired in September 2009. He averred he tried to 
return the car to the creditor, but the creditor refused to take it back. The car was not 
working, and he abandoned the car when he changed residences. The car was 
impounded by the city in July 2008. Applicant claimed he contacted the creditor in 2013 
to set up a payment plan. The creditor asked for a large sum of money up front before 
starting the payment plan. He did not have the money to make the large payment. 
 
SOR 1(b) ($7,797) – Applicant obtained a personal loan in 2006. He could not 
afford to pay it after he was fired from his job in September 2009. Applicant claimed he 
was making sporadic payments when he could afford it. The creditor obtained a 
judgment against Applicant in November 2010, and garnished his wages. Applicant 
claimed his last contact with the creditor was in April 2013. 
 
SOR 1(c) ($1,540) – Applicant and his roommate failed to pay their apartment 
rent and were evicted. The landlord obtained a judgment against them in June 2009. 
Applicant claimed he was in contact with the creditor. He failed to present documentary 
evidence of any contacts or payments to the creditor. 
 
SOR 1(d) ($2,590) – Applicant used his VA benefits to finance two student loans 
in 2008. He failed the college courses, and he has to repay the student loans. Around 
May 2013, Applicant entered into a payment agreement with the collection agency. He 
made one payment in May 2013, and was notified that a second payment was 
scheduled to be taken out of his bank account. He presented no documentary evidence 
of payments or contacts with the creditor between 2008 and 2013. 
 
4 
 
 
SOR 1(e) ($1,000) – Applicant claimed that this debt is included in the debt 
alleged in SOR 1(b). The credit reports identify the debts as separate collections. 
Applicant failed to present documentary evidence to support his claim. 
 
SOR 1(f) ($126) – Applicant testified this debt pertains to another student loan he 
obtained in 2008. He claimed he made sporadic payments, but stopped making 
payments when he was fired from his job in 2009. Applicant was sued, failed to appear 
in court, and the creditor obtained a judgment against him. In March 2013, the debt was 
paid through a wage garnishment. 
 
SOR 1(g) ($6,673) – This is a delinquent credit card account Applicant opened in 
May 2012. He stopped making payments when he lost his job. He presented no 
documentary evidence of payments or contacts with the creditor. 
 
Applicant testified that he tried to get his finances in order. He claimed that he 
obtained a credit report to identify his delinquent debts. He also claimed he tried to 
retain the services of a debt management firm, but it did not work out. He stated that 
because of the different wage garnishments, he did not have the money to pay the debt 
management firm, or to make any payments to other creditors. 
 
Applicant believes that his current financial situation is stable. He claimed that his 
present earnings allow him to meet his current financial obligations. Applicant’s personal 
financial statement, dated December 2012, indicates that his net monthly income is 
$2,388. His monthly net remainder was between $700 and $1,000, after paying $1,300 
in monthly expenses. He listed no debt payments. Applicant intends to pay some of his 
debts with overtime, which he anticipates will be available to him in the near future. 
 
Outside of the payments he made through wage garnishments, Applicant failed 
to present documentary evidence to show that he maintained contact with his creditors, 
established payment plans, or disputed any of the SOR debts. He presented no 
documentary evidence to show he has received financial counseling. He claimed that 
he received some financial counseling when he tried to retain the services of a debt 
management company. He failed to present documentary evidence of any contacts with 
a debt management company. Applicant testified he recently started a budget, but did 
not present the budget document. He also claimed that in June 2013, he started a 
savings account to accumulate money to pay his delinquent debts. He stated he has 
$300 in the account. He presented no documentary evidence to support his claim. 
 
Applicant testified that he wants to pay his delinquent debts. He needs his 
security clearance to retain his job to be able to pay his debts. He receives credit for 
seeking a job with a government contractor in July 2010. However, he failed to present 
any evidence to show that he used his earnings to pay any of his outstanding delinquent 
debts, except through wage garnishments.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
6 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
The evidence established the seven delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
totaling over $24,500, that became delinquent between 2008 and 2012. Financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant has been fully employed with a government contractor since July 2010, 
and has a net monthly income of around $2,388. Outside of the garnishment of wages 
to pay for some his delinquent debts, he presented no documentary evidence of any 
debt payments, contacts with creditors, disputes, or that he otherwise attempted to 
resolve his debts. Additionally, it is not clear whether he participated in financial 
counseling or has a budget.  
 
 Applicant was interviewed in May 2011 by a government investigator, and 
questioned about his financial problems. Even though he was placed on notice about 
the government’s concerns about his financial problems, he failed to make a convincing 
effort to resolve his delinquent obligations. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing, 
and he owes a large debt. I considered that the debts became delinquent, in part, after 
he left the service, he separated from his wife, and he was fired from his job in 
September 2009.  
 
 Notwithstanding, the main reason for Applicant’s financial problems was that he 
was fired from his job in 2009, and his inability to retain employment thereafter. 
Applicant did not act responsibly under the circumstances as he failed to prove he 
attempted in good faith to establish payment plans or otherwise resolve his delinquent 
debts without being garnished. Moreover, Applicant’s favorable evidence is insufficient 
to show financial responsibility with respect to any of the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant’s lack of financial responsibility shows he is not aware of what is 
required of him to establish eligibility for a security clearance. In light of all available 
evidence, Applicant’s unresolved debts cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor since 2010. He 
honorably served five years in the U.S. Navy. He has six outstanding debts that became 
delinquent between 2008 and 2012. He failed to submit sufficient documentary 
evidence to establish financial responsibility in the handling of his financial obligations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e,      
    and 1.g:      Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
