1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 11-14841
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA, Item 5), on
November 7, 2007. He was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) on January 9, 2008. On December 31, 2008, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security
concerns under financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline
E). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and made effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant submitted his answer to the SOR on February 4, 2009. He requested a
decision be made on the record in lieu of a hearing. A copy of the Government’s File of
Relevant Material (FORM, the government’s evidence in support of the allegations of
the SOR) was sent to Applicant on April 8, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on April
20, 2009. His response was due by May 20, 2009. No response was received by
DOHA. The case file was assigned to me on June 17, 2009. 
Rulings on Procedure
In the last full sentence of Paragraph 2.a. of the SOR, there are references to
subparagraphs 2(a) through 2(j). Those references are incorrect. The references should
be to subparagraphs 1(a) through 1(j) of the SOR, which is the location of the omitted
accounts. Another change is made in Item 7, containing Applicant’s interrogatory
answers dated March 22, 2008. Interrogatory 3, page 4, of Item 7 is amended as
follows: the question is changed by inserting the date “November 7, 2007,” in place of
June 21, 2007; and by inserting the correct SCA question, “28A (LAST 7 YEARS,
OVER 180 DAYS DELINQUENT ON ANY DEBTS?),” in place of “38. Your Financial
Delinquencies - In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any
debt(s)?” Pursuant to E3.1.17. of the Directive, the SOR is amended accordingly. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR contains nine allegations under the financial considerations guideline.
SOR 1.b. and 1.e. are the same account. SOR 1.f. is not reported in Item 9, the
government’s recent credit bureau report, even though Applicant acknowledged the
delinquent account. The overdue debts are for a satellite television account, credit card
accounts, and signature loans. The total amount of the debt is approximately $33,000.
Applicant admitted subparagraphs 1.a., 1.b., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., and 1.i. He denied
subparagraphs 1.d., and 1.j. He also denied paragraph 2. (including subparagraph 2.a.)
alleging an intentional omission of debts from his SCA dated November 7, 2007. He first
realized he had debt in 2005 when he encountered trouble purchasing a car (Item 6, 7).
In an attachment to his answer, Applicant provided an explanation for each of the
listed accounts. Three general explanations supplied were: (1) because of his extensive
travel, he would experience significant periods without adequate funds between travel
reimbursements; (2) his wife bore responsibility for some of the delinquent debts; and,
(3) Applicant has been caring for his mother and supporting two households. Applicant
believes he should receive his security clearance because he served the country (U.S.)
in the United States Army (USA) for 17 years, and received an honorable discharge in
September 1995. Since then, he has been employed for 13 years by defense
contractors. He has worked as a Technician 4 for his current contractor since October
2007 (Item 4). 
Applicant is 49 years old. He was married in January 1985. He has been
separated from his wife since January 2003. In addition to Applicant’s admissions to the
SOR, I make the following factual assertions.
3
Financial Considerations
SOR 1.a., $300, satellite television. Applicant provided no documentation to
support his claim (Item 4) that the delinquent part of the debt was paid, and the debt is
in a current status. 
SOR 1.b., $4,144, signature loan. According to the credit reports (Items 8, 9), this
account became delinquent in October 2007. Applicant indicated he personally
contacted the accounting department of the creditor, and was informed the account was
not in the system. Applicant provided no documentation to support his assertions. 
SOR 1.c., $2,506, credit card. Applicant thought he paid the account (Item 4, 6),
but provided no documentation to prove how or when the account was paid. 
SOR 1.d., $18,389, Applicant explained that he was on deployment at the time
when the leased automobile was repossessed. He mailed in the final payment. His wife
then returned the car to the lender (Item 4). Applicant told the lender he did not want to
buy the car, and does not believe he owes for the car (item 6, 7). He provided no
documentation to show that he made his final payment or why he does not owe a
balance on the car, i.e., that he reached an agreement with the lender that he was
released from liability. The credit reports (Items 8, 9) reflect the last car payment was in
June 2003. 
SOR 1.e., this is a duplicate entry of SOR 1.b., and is resolved in Applicant’s
favor (item 8, 9). 
SOR 1.f., $3,246, credit card. Applicant provided no proof he paid the account
(Item4). The last activity on this account is October 2002. The account does not appear
in the most recent credit report (Item 9), and is probably unenforceable under the state
statute of limitations. The statute identifies the amount of time available for creditors to
file legal action to recover a debt. However, Applicant admitted he owes the account
(Item 6). SOR 1.f. is found against Applicant. 
SOR 1.g., $214, unknown account type. Applicant claimed he was ahead of the
account’s payment schedule, and eventually paid the account off (Item 4, 6). This
declaration lacks documentary proof. 
SOR 1.h., $726, credit card. There is no verification for Applicant’s claim of
satisfying the account (Item 6). 
SOR 1.i., $3,193, Applicant explained that he did not recognize this creditor. Yet,
he admitted the account (Item 4, 6). I find that Applicant still owes the account.
SOR 1.j., $306, Applicant explained he was deployed at the time. He believed
the delinquent account is the responsibility of his wife (Item 4). Also, according to
4
Applicant, the relevant medical records may have been lost in a weather incident (Item
6). Applicant furnished no documentation to support his claims. 
On January 9, 2008, Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator. During
the interview, he acknowledged most of the debts listed in the SOR, and stated his
intention to contact the creditors by January 31, 2008 (Item 6). The record contains no
documentation of action taken. 
On March 22, 2008, Applicant provided answers to interrogatories (Item 7)
regarding the status of certain delinquent debts listed in the SOR, and action he
intended to take to resolve the debts. Applicant furnished attached statements to five of
the listed creditors. In these statements, he reiterated his intentions to pay off some of
the creditors (Id.). Concerning SOR 1.c., Applicant supplied no verification that he made
monthly payments as he stated. He did not provide support for his claim of agreeing
with an official of the SOR 1.b. creditor to make payments. Regarding the creditor in
SOR 1.h., Applicant claimed he resolved the debt in two payments of $236 (Item 4). The
payment claims are unsubstantiated. 
Personal Conduct
On November 7, 2007, Applicant certified and signed an SCA. In response to
question 28A requiring information about debts more than 180 delinquent in the last
seven years, he answered “No,” even though he had six past due accounts over 180
days delinquent. In support of his denial of SOR 2.a., Applicant claimed that he was
deployed at the time the debts became delinquent, and his wife, from whom he has
been separated since 2003 because of communication problems, should bear
responsibility for the debts (Item 4). I do not find his claim credible. 
Character Evidence
Applicant provided no independent evidence regarding his job performance or
reputation in the community where he lives. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines
are applied in conjunction with the variables listed in the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
5
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
¶ 18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”
When Applicant furnished his SCA to the government in November 2007, he
intentionally did not disclose he had debts over 180 days delinquent in the past seven
years. In January 2008, Applicant was interviewed about the listed debts and declared
he would check his credit report, then contact the creditors by January 31, 2008. The
record contains no documentation to show he initiated action in support of his stated
intention. In March 2008, Applicant provided attached statements to his interrogatory
answers reiterating the claims in his answers that he had made payments to some of
 Relevant documentation includes receipts from the creditor, on-line responses showing the status of an1
account proving payment had been processed, or Applicant’s checking account statement disclosing checking
account activity. 
6
the listed creditors. There is no independent documentation,  e.g., from the creditor or1
collection agency or banking institution, that verifies Applicant made any payments on
any of the bills. FC disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 19.a. (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts) and FC DC ¶ 19.c. (a history not meeting financial obligations) apply. 
Evidence of financial problems may be mitigated by FC mitigating condition (MC)
¶ 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment); FC MC ¶ 20.b. (the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances); and, FC MC ¶ 20.c. (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control).
FC MC ¶ 20.a. does not apply because there are nine overdue accounts. Two of
the accounts became delinquent less than two years ago. In addition, Applicant
intentionally lied about his delinquent debt history. His falsification and decision not to
provide documentation to strengthen his claims about paying the debts continues to
cast doubt on his judgment and reliability. 
In his SOR answer, his January 2008 interview, and his March 2008 interrogatory
answers, Applicant placed blame on his wife for his financial distress. Even if I accept
Applicant’s claim, I conclude that with the passage of time after his marital separation,
specifically in 2005 when he experienced trouble buying a car, Applicant should have
dedicated more attention to his financial obligations. He receives no mitigation under FC
MC ¶ 20.b. Neither FC MC ¶ 20.c. nor FC MC ¶ 20.d. apply to the circumstances of this
case as there is no evidence of financial counseling, and no documented evidence of a
good-faith effort to repay the overdue creditors. Applicant’s history of not meeting his
financial obligations has not been mitigated. Accordingly, the FC guideline is found
against him. 
Personal Conduct (PC)
¶ 15. The Concern. “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.” 
This guideline applies to intentional attempts to conceal or omit information from
an SCA. I am unable to find in Applicant’s favor under this guideline because he
7
deliberately omitted all his delinquent debt from his SCA. PC DC ¶ 16.a. (deliberate
omission or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire to
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness) applies. Six of the nine listed
debts in the SOR are delinquent by more than 180 days. By falsely claiming he had no
past due accounts, Applicant tried to deceive the government regarding his financial
status. The most reasonable explanation for his omission was to enhance his chances
of obtaining a security clearance. 
There are three mitigating conditions (MC) that are potentially applicable to the
circumstances in this case. Those conditions are: PC MC ¶ 17.a. (the individual made
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment or falsification, before
being confronted with the facts); PC MC ¶ 17.c. (the offense was so minor, or so much
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and, PC MC ¶ 17.d. (the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur). PC MC ¶ 17.a. is not applicable as Applicant did not disclose his delinquent
debt history until after he was confronted with the debts in his January 2008 interview
(Item 6, Interrogatory answers). PC MC ¶ 17.c. is inapplicable because Applicant tried
to conceal a large amount of delinquent debt owed to six of nine creditors. Applicant’s
intentional omission of material financial information in November 2007 continues to
cast doubt on his reliability and judgment. Lastly, Applicant receives no mitigation under
PC MC 17.d. because he still denies he deliberately falsified the SCA.  
Though Applicant persists in his denial that he intentionally omitted material
financial information from his SCA in November 2007, the number of delinquent
accounts and the amount of the debt convince me he knew he had delinquent debt
when he filled out the security form. His lack of candor in not admitting he intentionally
concealed the information warrants a finding against him under the PC guideline. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC) 
I have examined the evidence utilizing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions
of the FC and PC guidelines. Even though I have resolved both guidelines against
Applicant, the case still must be weighed within the context of nine variables known as
the whole person concept. In evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the
administrative judge should consider the following factors: 
AG ¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
8
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s delinquent financial history began in 2002 when he fell behind in
paying the account set forth in SOR 1.f. After he separated from his wife in 2003
because of communication problems, he should have interpreted that separation as a
sign to pay closer attention to his financial accounts. Instead, the record shows he took
no action to resolve the debts, even after he was confronted with them in January and
March 2008, and even though he promised both times to obtain a credit report and/or
take action. Regardless of the explanations for his past due indebtedness, Applicant
(age 49) has furnished no proof that he paid any of the listed creditors. The lack of
documentation, the lack of character evidence, the lack of financial counseling, and
Applicant’s poor credibility, necessitates a finding against him under the FC and PC
guidelines.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Personal Conduct, Guideline E): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a. Against Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
