                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        -------------------------------------                  )        ISCR  Case No.  11-10901          
                                                               )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding her handling of protected
information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On December 21, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary
affirmative determination of eligibility for a security clearance, and  recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether a security  clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs)
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 17, 2013, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on August 14, 2013, and was scheduled for hearing on
September 26, 2013. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of six exhibits (GEs 1-
6). Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and one exhibit (AE A). The transcript (Tr.)
was received on October 4, 2013. 
Procedural Issues
Before the scheduling of the hearing, Applicant requested a hearing in lieu of
proceeding on the written record. Department Counsel concurred with Applicant’s
request, and the proceeding was converted to a hearing.
Before taking evidence at the hearing, Applicant requested an amendment of her
SOR response to admit paragraph 1.b and deny paragraph 1.a.  For good cause shown,
Applicant’s amendment request was granted, and the changes were made by inter-
lineation. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline K, Applicant is alleged to have (a) knowingly in October 2008
stored a CD containing secret classified information in an unauthorized location for
approximately one year, and then unknowingly stored the CD in another unauthorized
location for approximately six months (in violation of National Industrial Security Program
Operating Manual (NISPOM) 5220.22-M, Sections 5-100, 5-300, and 5-302) and (b)
knowingly disposed of the CD in September 2009 in an unclassified container (in violation
of National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual, DOD 5520.22-M, Sections 5-
700, 5-705, and 5-708)     
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the alleged actions covered by
subparagraph 1.b without explanation. She denied the allegations covered by
subparagraph 1.a as written and admitted to a modified version of the allegation that
changed the date of the alleged incident to October 2007 and the storage of the CD to
one unauthorized location instead of two locations as written. Applicant offered no other
explanations in her response.
            
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 55-year-old software engineer of a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in April 1980 and has two children from this marriage. (GE 1)
Applicant claims no military service. She earned a bachelor’s degree and earned a
master’s degree in December 1991 from a recognized university in her state. (GE 1)
3
Applicant worked for her current employer for several years before leaving the
company in 1988. (Tr. 42)  She returned to her employer  in 1992 and has remained in its
employ for a total of 30 years of combined employment. (GE 1; Tr. 36, 42-43) 
Applicant’s storage and destruction of classified information
In October 2007, Applicant was in her company’s lab testing a classified radar
model (classified secret) loaded on a CD (that was written by an engineer employed by
another defense contractor. (GEs 3 and 4; Tr. 40) This engineer had suggested the need
to test the model. On this testing day, Applicant and the engineer had returned from the
lab with the CD containing secret classified information and attempted to find the right
employees with the combination to the designated safe to open it and return the CD. (Tr.
40) Told that the two persons with the combination to the safe were out to lunch,
Applicant attempted to find others to open the safe. (Tr. 40) 
When Applicant was unable to locate another person to open the safe, she
questioned another engineer at the site to ascertain what to do. (Tr. 40) This engineer
suggested that since they were in a closed classified area, “it would be acceptable to put
the disk in my [your] desk until they returned, which was expected to be before the end of
the day.” (Tr. 40) Following this engineer’s suggestion, Applicant placed the CD in her
desk, intending to return to the area before the end of the day to return the CD to the
approved safe. (GE 4; Tr. 40) 
Applicant never returned to the classified area to account for the CD she left in her
desk, and forgot about it. (GE 4; Tr. 40, 47) She never performed any additional testing
on the radar model covered by the CD she stored in her desk and was never asked about
it by security personnel over the course of the ensuing year.
In October 2008, Applicant was in the process of packing up her belongings in
anticipation of a move to another building when she located the CD in the desk drawer.
(GE 2) Not sure of what actions to take with the disk, she left it in the desk drawer while
she was figuring out what to do with the CD. (GE 2) Well-briefed with prior security
training and refresher courses, Applicant was aware that her desk was not a designated
area for storing the CD, and afraid to report her retention of the disk, she left the CD in
her desk drawer while she contemplated what steps to take.  (GE 2; Tr. 40-41, 66)
When Applicant once again located the missing classified CD in the spring of 2009
while cleaning out her desk, she panicked (afraid she could go to prison for her actions)
and knowingly disposed of the CD in an unclassified LMAC proprietary information
destruction container located near her work station.  (GEs 3 and 4; Tr. 40-41)  For over
two years after disposing of the CD, she filed no reports with her employer’s facility
security officer (FSO) and remained silent about her actions. By the time an investigator
inquired of Applicant in the spring of 2010 about the CD, she could not recall working on a
classified radar model and told the investigator nothing about the CD. (GE 4; Tr. 41-42) 
4
In April 2011, an investigator from Applicant’s company asked her about the lost
classified CD. Unable to recall working on the radar model, she told the investigator
nothing. (Tr. 41) After surviving several sleepless nights trying to recall any work she
might have performed on the radar model, she remembered the incident. (Tr. 41) At this
time, she elected to self-report the incident to her FSO. (Tr. 41-42) 
Upon learning of Applicant’s 2009 handling of the CD in question, Applicant’s FSO
suspended her clearance pending further investigation. (Tr. 42-43) In a culpability report
filed by a field office chief of the Defense Security service (DSS) in May 2011, the
reporting official summarized the events covered by Applicant’s self-report and concluded
that the reported security violations were caused by Applicant’s failure to follow known
security practices and requirements. (GE 4) The DSS’s field director, in turn, requested
interim suspension of Applicant’s security clearance pending further review. (GE 4)
Following his field director’s recommendation, DSS’s director suspended Applicant’s
security clearance in June 2011, pending a final clearance decision from DOHA. (GE 4) 
NISPOM guidelines
NISPOM guidelines impose responsibility on contractors for safeguarding
classified information in their custody or under their control. (GE 5, Sec. 5-100) In turn,
contractors that store classified material shall establish a system of security checks at the
close of each working day to ensure that all classified material and security repositories
have been appropriately secured. (GE 5, Sec. 5-102(a)) Contractors working multiple
shifts must perform security checks at the end of the last working shift “in which classified
material was removed from storage for use.” (GE 5, Sec. 5-102(b)) 
Cognizant security officials (inclusive of software users like Applicant) must work to
meet appropriate security needs according the intent of the NISPOM and at acceptable
costs. (GE 5, Sec. 5-300) Secret material, in turn, shall be stored in a “GSA-approved
security container, an approved vault, or a closed area” with supplemental controls. (GE
5, Sec. 5-303) These storage requirements directly covered Applicant and bound her to
use utmost care in ensuring that classified CDs like the one she checked out was
properly accounted for and properly stored at all times while under her control.  
By Applicant’s accounts of her storing of the CD in issue, she failed to follow
NISPOM-approved storage procedures.  While it is not clear whether she could keep the
CD in her desk drawer while she remained in the secured area housing the desk, she
was clearly required to return the CD to the appropriate safe once she departed the area.
Applicant acknowledged as much and attributed her failure to secure the disk to
prolonged memory loss.  Her actions reflect negligent mishandling of the CD under all of
the circumstances considered, but not deliberate disregard of established NISPOM
storage procedures. 
Destruction of classified materials are covered in detail by the NISPOM. Section 5-
700 sets general requirements for the destruction of classified information. (GE 5) More
specifically, classified material may be destroyed by burning, shredding, pulping, melting,
5
mutilation, chemical decomposition, or pulverizing. See Sec. 5-705 of NISPOM.
Placement of a classified CD in a contractor’s proprietary bin for destruction is not an
approved destruction method. For classified waste covering test models no longer
operational, persons in control of such materials are required to complete destruction of
the material “as soon as practical.” Sec. 5-708 of NISPOM.  Pending destruction, persons
holding the materials must safeguard the materials in accordance with governing
guidelines for the level of classified materials involved.  See id. 
By at least October 2008 when she discovered the whereabout of the CD in issue
in her desk drawer, Applicant was on notice of her mishandling of the CD, and was duty-
bound at that point to notify her FSO of her actions.  Instead, she left the CD in her desk
drawer and outside of the designated safe while she considered what to do about her
missteps. 
By spring 2009, Applicant became aware once again of her continued storage of
the CD in her desk drawer and the interest of FSO personnel in the whereabouts of the
disk.  Worried about reprimands and potential punishment, she panicked at this point and
disposed of the CD in an unapproved proprietary bin. Not until April 2011 (some two
years later) did she determine it was in her best interests to come forward and self-report
her history of mishandling and disposing of the missing disk.  Her employer responded
with the interim suspension of her clearance, pending a further investigation of the
reported incident. 
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by her supervisor, former manager, and colleagues
who have worked with her for many years.  Friends recognized her strong commitments
to her family and church, and to her local civic and charitable communities. (AE A; Tr. 38-
39) They describe her as a consistently organized, caring, honest, and trustworthy person
who routinely adheres to high ethical standards when making value choices. (AE A)
Colleagues and former managers characterize her as a well-respected technical leader in
software development who is conscientious and dedicated in her work. (AE A) They cite
her deep remorse for her mistake and support the reinstatement of her security
clearance. (AE A) Applicant’s supervisor credited her with recognition of her mistake and
possession of qualities of strong moral and ethical behavior. (AE A) He believed she
should be given a second chance and an opportunity to obtain a security clearance. (AE
A)
Over the course of her 30-year tenure with her employer, Applicant has received
consistently good ratings.  She has also received monetary rewards on five occasions in
the past 12 years in recognition of her contributions to her employer’s missions. (Tr. 37)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
6
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Handling Protected Information
The Concern: Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and
regulations for protecting classified or other sensitive information raises
doubt about and individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or
willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious
security concern. (AG ¶ 33)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
7
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is senior software engineer with many years of experience in accessing
classified information without incident, who in 2007 knowingly stored a classified CD she
was working on in a desk drawer outside of her employer’s approved storage safe.
After forgetting about her leaving the CD in her desk, she discovered the CD in her desk
drawer a year later while preparing a move.  
After noting its presence in her desk drawer, Applicant kept the disk in her drawer
for another six months without alerting her superiors or FSO before locating it again and
discarding it in a proprietary bin not approved for classified information destruction.
Applicant’s cited mishandling of the CD in issue reflects multiple incidences of mistaken
decision-making, negligence, and faulty judgment and raises Government security
concerns about her level of judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
The importance of safeguarding classified information cannot be
overemphasized.  Protecting the nation’s security interests against the risks of foreign
coercion and intimidation  remains a core governmental responsibility that finds roots in
the early federalist papers (e.g., Federalist No. 8 (Hamilton), “Safety from external
danger is the most powerful director of national conduct.  Even the ardent love of liberty
will, after a time, give way to its dictates”) and enjoys the sustaining force of the courts.
8
Cf. United States v. Curtiss-Wright Corp., 299 U.S. 304, 319-20 (1936).  Or put in
geopolitical terms, national security policy implies a state of continuing readiness to take
the necessary steps to maintain our national independence. Cf. H. Lasswell, National
Security and Individual Freedom 51 (1950, reprinted 1971).  What is to be weighed in
this case are the actions of Applicant in her administering to the security requirements
imposed by the NISPOM guidelines for protecting the classified CD entrusted to her
custody and control.
By not reporting her storage of the missing CD before discarding it in an
unapproved container, Applicant deliberately placed classified information in her
custody and control at risk to compromise. Thereafter, her actions escaped scrutiny until
she self-reported them to her company officials in April 2011. Her self-reporting actions
resulted in her company’s initial suspension of her clearance and its referral of its
findings to DSS for further review.
Under the NISPOM’s security guidelines in force, persons responsible for
safeguarding classified information in their custody and control are required to keep the
materials secured in designated areas and to avoid taking classified materials outside
the designated area, destroying them in unapproved ways, or mishandling them in their
work sites. Responsible individuals like Applicant who either initially misplace a CD
containing classified information, or fail to undertake known appropriate storage
measures before departing a classified area, are required to immediately notify their
security manager or superiors. Security violations are, in turn, treated most seriously
and are considered to reflect negatively on a person's continued eligibility for security
clearance and access to classified information. 
Moreover, although the classified CD in issue was never compromised nor
misappropriated in any manifest ways, Applicant committed several security violations
in storing the CD in an unauthorized desk drawer and then destroying it in a
unauthorized proprietary bin without disclosing her actions to her FSO or superiors for
their approval. Whether or not the copied classified disk was ever compromised or not,
Applicant’s actions were undertaken negligently initially and then compounded by her
knowingly and wilful destruction of the disk in an unapproved manner. Her collective
actions constituted violations of NISPOM security guidelines and placed known
classified material at risk to compromise.
As a contractor fiduciary with access to classified materials, Applicant was duty-
bound to exercise not only personal accountability over her assigned safeguarding
responsibilities, but prudent reporting of any potential security breaches as well.
Holding a personal security clearance and having eligibility for access to classified
information draws upon the highest fiducial burdens imposed on persons with access to
facilities covered by the NISPOM guidelines and enables the Government to rightfully
insist on a clearance holder’s close adherence to governing trust responsibilities.
Applicant, as a lead software engineer for her technical team and a fiduciary of
entrusted classified materials can and should be held accountable for security violations
that derive from her knowing and willful mishandling of classified materials. See ISCR
9
Case No 07-08119 at 5 (App. Bd. July 8, 2010); ISCR Case No. 04-04264 at 3 (App.
Bd. Sept. 8, 2006); ISCR Case No.  89-0781 (February 23, 1993). Her actions invite
application of DC ¶ 34(b), “collecting or storing classified or other protected information
at home or in any other unauthorized location,” and DC ¶ 34(g), “any failure to comply
with rules for the protection of classified or other sensitive information.” The  AGs for
handling protected information are clearly reconcilable with the storage and destruction
guidelines in the NISPOM for handling classified materials in the clearance holder’s
custody and control.  
By improperly storing the classified CD in a non-approved desk outside the
designated safe for a prolonged period without reporting her findings, and later
destroying the disk in an unapproved proprietary bin without any approvals from her
FSO or superiors, Applicant showed considerable neglect and material disregard for
protecting classified information in her custody and control. Because Applicant’s actions
reflect judgment lapses and a disposition to conceal her efforts, Guideline K’s core
security concerns of trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, and willingness to safeguard
classified information come into play. See ISCR Case No. 00-0030 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep.
20, 2001).
In appraising the security significance of Applicant's security violations, careful
consideration was given to Applicant's clean record preceding the incident under review,
her standing with her company, and her  positive contributions to her company, family,
church, and civic community. Applicant's explanations of her mishandling the classified
CD in her possession and control are insufficient to extenuate and mitigate the security
violations attributable to her. 
Based on Applicant’s own experience and security training and the seriousness
of her (a) failing to properly store the classified CD after she departed the safe area; (b)
her failure to report her findings once she became aware of the CD’s whereabouts a
year later; and (c) her improper destruction of the CD without disclosing her actions to
her FSO or superiors in a timely way, Applicant may not take full advantage of three of
the mitigating conditions under the guidelines for security violations. Neither MC ¶ 35(a),
“so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” MC ¶ 35(b),
“the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now
demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities;” nor
MC ¶ 35(c), “the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training,” are
fully applicable to Applicant’s situation.
In fairness to Applicant, she has no prior history of security violations, and she
has exhibited remorse and renewed understanding about the importance of protecting
classified information in her custody and control. Both her contributions to her employer,
church, and civic community, and her attitudinal changes are acknowledged, and for
10
this she is to be both commended and encouraged. It is too soon, however, to conclude
that Applicant has successfully mitigated the actions attributable to her. 
So, while the cited mitigating conditions have some applicability based on
Applicant’s unblemished history of handling classified information, her expressed
remorse, and the favorable recommendations from her friends, colleagues, supervisor
and former manager, these positive influences and considerations are not enough to
mitigate her actions. More time is needed to mitigate Applicant’s actions associated with
her mishandling of classified information in her possession and control under the facts
and circumstances covered in this record. Considering all of the evidence, Applicant
does not at this time carry her evidentiary burden in demonstrating her eligibility to
access classified information.
In making a whole-person assessment, careful consideration was given to the
respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra), the AGs, and the facts and
circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline K.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE K (Handling Protected Information):   AGAINST APPLICANT
   Subparas. 1.a and 1.b:     Against Applicant
                                  
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
11
  
12
