 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11455 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 9, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted a notarized response to the SOR on August 10, 2013, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on September 5, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 18, 2013, scheduling the 
hearing for October 3, 2013. The hearing was cancelled due to the government 
 
2 
 
shutdown. DOHA issued another notice of hearing on October 21, 2013, scheduling the 
hearing for October 31, 2013. The case was reassigned to me on October 29, 2013. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
November 8, 2013.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through E, which were admitted without objection.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a by changing a state tax debt to 
a tax debt owed to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The motion was granted without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He seeks to retain 
his security clearance, which he first attained more than 20 years ago. He has a 
bachelor’s degree, and he attended graduate school, but he did not earn a post-
graduate degree. He is twice divorced, and he has four children.1 
 
 Applicant is part owner of a company that is incorporated as a Subchapter S 
corporation.2 There are at least two other owners. One of the owners had a friend who 
acted as bookkeeper and prepared the corporate tax returns, as well as the owners’ 
individual tax returns. The bookkeeper did not prepare the corporation’s tax returns or 
the owners’ individual tax returns for several years. In about 2010, corporate and 
Applicant’s individual tax returns for several tax years were prepared and filed. 
Applicant stated that the bookkeeper incorrectly subscribed all of the corporation’s 
income to him, instead of dividing it among the owners. Applicant stated that he did not 
notice the discrepancy because he was heavily involved in a child custody battle. The 
IRS determined that Applicant owed taxes for several tax years. In July 2011, the IRS 
filed a $42,256 tax lien against Applicant.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23-24, 44, 91-94; GE 1, 2. 
2 S corporations are corporations that elect to pass corporate income, losses, deductions and credit 
through to their shareholders for federal tax purposes. Shareholders of S corporations report the flow-
through of income and losses on their personal tax returns and are assessed tax at their individual 
income tax rates. This allows S corporations to avoid double taxation on the corporate income. S 
corporations are responsible for tax on certain built-in gains and passive income. See 
www.irs.gov/businesses/small/article/0,,id=98263,00.html.   
3 Tr. at 28-33, 64-65, 75-77, 86-90; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4; AE D. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
September 2010. He noted his difficulty in filing his income tax returns and that he had a 
delinquent $11,000 tax debt to the IRS. He wrote that “[a]ll returns have been filed and 
payments to rectify situation have started,” and that “[r]egular payments have been 
made each month.”4 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in October 2010 and 
December 2010. He told the investigator that he received a collection letter from the 
IRS, and the amount due was about $40,000. He stated that he had hired an 
accountant, and he was in the process of researching and negotiating the amount 
owed. He stated that he did not have an official payment plan, but he was making 
payments to the IRS every payday. He stated that he intended to pay the total amount 
in installments. He hoped to have the entire amount paid off in about two years.5 
 
 From about 2010 through 2012, Applicant went through a contentious and costly 
custody battle over one of his children. He estimated that it cost him about $45,000, but 
he finally obtained custody of the child. Applicant stated that the custody battle added to 
his financial problems and prevented him from addressing his delinquent taxes.6 
 
 Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in May 2013. In response to a 
question about his federal tax lien, he checked the box indicating “payments arranged.” 
In response to a question asking what steps he had taken to resolve his financial 
issues, he wrote: “Detailed budget now set in place and plan to pay debts established. 
Have significantly reduced monthly expenses.”7 
 
 Applicant testified that he paid the IRS about $4,000 for his tax debt. He admitted 
that he had not made any payments since about 2011.8 
 
 Applicant contracted with a tax consulting company in February 2013 to 
represent him before the IRS. He also has a certified public accountant who is preparing 
documents for the tax consulting company. He paid the tax consulting company a fee of 
$4,350. The company agreed to review his tax records and negotiate with the IRS. 
Applicant estimated his total debt to the IRS to be about $47,000. He also indicated that 
the company may prepare amended tax returns that will lower his tax liability to about 
$21,000. Applicant stated that the tax company is close to arriving at an agreement with 
the IRS. He indicated that he will pay whatever agreement is reached.9 
 
                                                          
4 GE 1. 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 25-26, 57-63; GE 2. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 42, 50. 
 
9 Tr. at 26, 37, 68-84, 107-108; AE A. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant filed his 2011 federal income tax return in about September 2013.10 He 
stated that he did not owe the IRS anything for that tax year. He stated that he expects 
to file his 2012 federal income tax return within the next several days. He expects to 
owe the IRS about $5,000 for tax year 2012. He indicated that he will pay the amount 
owed for his 2012 taxes when he files the return.11  
 
 Applicant’s state tax situation is dubious. He has not filed state income tax 
returns in the state where he spends the vast amount of his time because he indicated 
that his “permanent residence” is in another state. He admitted that he likely owes state 
income taxes. He stated that he will address any delinquent state taxes after he 
resolves his federal taxes.12 
 
 A judgment against Applicant of $1,090 was awarded to a homeowners’ 
association in about May 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant stated this was a business debt. 
Applicant satisfied the judgment in May 2012. Applicant successfully disputed owing the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d.13 
 
 Applicant took a financial course by a nationally-known financial expert through 
his church. He stated that he is in the process of dissolving the S corporation because 
he no longer wants to be self-employed or do business with his two co-owners. He has 
two potential job opportunities that will pay him a lucrative salary.14 
 
 A witness verified Applicant’s description of the tax problems caused by his 
corporation and his corporation’s bookkeeper. She praised Applicant’s job performance, 
technical skill, reliability, responsibility, judgment, trustworthiness, and integrity.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
10 Any tax issues that were not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. They 
may be considered in assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
11 Tr. at 36-40, 50. 
 
12 Tr. at 45-49, 68-69, 84-86. 
 
13 Tr. at 51-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE B-D. 
 
14 Tr. at 28, 35-36, 41-43, 78-80; AE E. 
 
15 Tr. at 97-109. 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
6 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a large tax debt covering a number of tax years. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Applicant paid a judgment owed to a homeowner’s association, and he 
successfully disputed two debts. Those issues do not raise security concerns. SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.c, and 1.d are concluded for Applicant.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant relied on his corporation’s bookkeeper to prepare his tax returns, and 
the bookkeeper did not fulfill his responsibilities in a timely manner. However, the 
responsibility to file his tax returns and pay his taxes ultimately rests on Applicant. 
Applicant went through a contentious and costly custody battle over one of his children, 
which cost him about $45,000. Applicant’s tax debt was not caused by conditions that 
were beyond his control. However, the expensive custody battle, which was beyond his 
control, impacted his ability to repay the IRS for his back taxes. To be fully applicable, 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant has known since at least 2010 that he had tax problems, and that they 
were of interest to the DOD. In 2010, he told a background investigator that he did not 
have an official payment plan, but he was making payments to the IRS every payday. 
He stated that he hoped to have the entire amount paid off in about two years. He 
 
7 
 
testified that he had not paid anything toward his delinquent taxes since 2011. He did 
not file his 2011 federal tax return until recently; he has not filed his 2012 federal tax 
return; he expects to owe the IRS an additional $5,000 for 2012; and his state tax 
situation is at best dubious.   
 
 Applicant contracted with a tax consulting company in February 2013 to 
represent him before the IRS. He stated that the tax company is close to arriving at an 
agreement with the IRS, and that he will pay whatever agreement is reached. The 
Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off debts in the future are not a substitute 
for a track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case 
No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) (quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 
(App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I do not find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to resolve all 
his financial problems. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to 
determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. The first section of AG ¶ 20(c) is 
applicable; the second section is not. I find that financial concerns remain despite the 
presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
8 
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, his significant 
unresolved tax problems are inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
