 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13974 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines B, foreign 
influence, and F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines B, foreign 
influence and F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 28, 2013. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On October 7, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM included an amendment to 
the SOR with additional allegations 2.j through 2.t.1 The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
and it was received on October 22, 2013. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
submitted additional information. The case was assigned to me on November 25, 2013.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request, as part of the FORM, that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts about Vietnam. The documents are attached 
to the record. Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the 
facts contained in the record. The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d and 2.a through 2.i. 
He denied SOR ¶¶ 2.j through 2.t. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He was born in Vietnam. He married a Vietnamese 
citizen in 1977. He immigrated to the United States in 1980, and became a naturalized 
citizen in 1987. His wife became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1988. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 1988. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2005. 
They have four adult sons. The eldest was born in Japan and is a naturalized citizen of 
the United States. His other sons were born in the United States.2   
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased, and his mother is a citizen and resident of 
Vietnam. She is retired, but her former occupation is unknown. It is unknown if she 
receives a government pension. Applicant indicated that his parents’ contact with the 
Vietnamese government was more than 40 years ago when his father was a member of 
the South Vietnamese army, which was not part of the Communist regime at that time. 
Applicant has telephonic contact with his mother about twice a month and visits her 
every two to three years.3  
 
 Applicant has six siblings. In 2011, Applicant indicated in his interview with a 
government investigator that three of his siblings are permanent residents of the United 
States. In his answer to the SOR, he indicated that two of the siblings are now 
naturalized citizens of the United States and the other will become a citizen later this 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel listed the additional allegations under the financial considerations guideline as 1.j 
through 1.t. I have changed the paragraph number to “2” to be sequential with the original SOR. 
  
2 Item 5. 
 
3 Item 5; Answer to FORM. 
 
3 
 
 
year. In his 2011 interview, he also indicated that his three other siblings were citizens 
and residents of Vietnam. In his answer to the SOR, he indicated that one of his sisters, 
who was residing in Vietnam, is now residing in the United States. Presumably it is her 
husband who is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, as Applicant’s brother-in-law. Applicant did not 
disclose what his sister’s immigration status is, how long she has been in the country, if 
her husband accompanied her, and what their occupations are in the United States. 
Applicant sponsored his siblings for immigration to the United States. He visits his family 
in Vietnam about every two to three years. His last visit was March 2010. He has 
telephonic contact with his brother in Vietnam about twice a month and with his sister 
about once a month. His brother is a small business owner. His sister is disabled. There 
is no information as to whether she receives any type of government benefits. 
Applicant’s daughter-in-law is a citizen of Vietnam and a permanent resident of the 
United States.4 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s father and her seven siblings are citizens and residents of 
Vietnam. Her father is retired, but it is unknown what his profession was or if he 
receives a government pension. Applicant last visited his wife’s family in Vietnam in 
2010. No other information was provided about his wife’s siblings, such as their 
occupations or contact with the Vietnamese government.5 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1997 and had his debts discharged. He 
attributed his financial problems to his own medical expenses and his wife’s excessive 
spending. In about 2007, he again experienced financial problems and had about 
$40,000 of outstanding credit card debt. He enlisted a debt consolidation company to 
assist him in resolving his debts. After paying the company $620 a month, totaling 
approximately $8,085, in late 2008, he realized it was not using the money to pay his 
debts. He attempted to get his money back from the debt consolidation company, but it 
filed for bankruptcy, and he did not receive any reimbursement. 
 
Applicant attempted to settle his debts on his own. In January 2010, the 
settlement payments and his home mortgage’s tax escrow payments were negatively 
impacting his ability to make his monthly mortgage payments on his home, including 
both his first and second mortgages. Applicant indicated he had a payment plan in place 
to pay his taxes, but somehow his mortgage company changed his monthly payment. 
He failed to make five monthly mortgage payments. In May 2010, he contacted the 
mortgage company in an attempt to obtain a loan modification. He paid a reduced 
mortgage payment for three months until an investor, not his mortgage company, told 
him his house had been sold.  
 
Applicant spent months working with an attorney and a financial services 
company in an attempt to reverse the sale, incurring approximately $18,500 in attorney 
fees. On the advice of his attorney, he filed two Chapter 7 bankruptcies, in January and 
February 2011, and one Chapter 13 bankruptcy in June 2011, in an attempt to reverse 
                                                          
4 Item 3, 5; Answer to FORM. 
 
5 Item 6. 
 
4 
 
 
the sale of his house. All of them were dismissed. Apparently his house was put up for 
auction several times during this period. Applicant abandoned his dispute with the 
mortgage company and moved out of his house in January 2013. In his 2011 statement, 
Applicant indicated that some of his debts were “wrote off” with his Chapter 13 
bankruptcy filing, but there is no evidence to substantiate his claim.6  
 
Applicant’s debt for his first mortgage was resolved in January 2013 by 
foreclosure. It appears there is no deficiency balance on the primary mortgage. 
Applicant believed the debt on his second mortgage, alleged in SOR ¶ 2.h ($160,810) 
would be settled by the first mortgage company, so it could get a clean title. He did not 
provide any documents to support his position. He indicated he is still working on 
resolving the debt. The second mortgage debt is not resolved.7  
 
Applicant admitted his debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.e ($8,815) and 2.f ($1,642). He stated 
he is attempting to settle the debts. At this juncture, they are unresolved.8 Applicant 
provided proof that he settled the debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.g ($961) and 2.i ($1,307).9  
 
As part of his response to interrogatories from March 2013, Applicant provided a 
personal financial statement. He listed his gross monthly salary as $11,900 and his net 
salary as $7,007. He indicated his monthly expenses are $5,220 and he has a net 
monthly remainder of $1,787. He indicated that he has no debts, $8,500 in savings and 
$165,000 in stocks and bonds. It appears he has two 401k loans, but no other 
information was provided about these loans.10 
 
The SOR allegations in ¶¶ 2.j through 2.t are based on Applicant’s 2011 
bankruptcy filings. There is insufficient evidence to determine that the debts that were 
disclosed by Applicant as unsecured nonpriority claims are presently delinquent.  
 
Vietnam 
 
 Vietnam is an authoritarian state ruled by the Communist Party of Vietnam. The 
government limits freedom of speech and the press and suppresses dissent, including 
restricted Internet freedom. It spies on its dissidents, limits privacy rights, freedom of 
assembly, association, and movement. Those exercising their right to freedom of 
religion are often subject to harassment, inconsistent legal protection, and differing 
interpretations of the law. Police corruption persists at various levels. 
 
                                                          
6 Item 5; Answer to FORM. 
 
7 Item 3, 5, 7, 12, 13; Answer to FORM. 
 
8 Item 3. 
 
9 Answer to FORM. 
 
10 Item 6. 
 
5 
 
 
 The Vietnamese government requires household registration and a block warden 
system that exists for the surveillance of its citizens. It focuses on those involved in 
unauthorized political or religious activities. The government opens and censors 
targeted persons’ mail and other means of communication. 
 
 The Vietnamese government does not permit private, local human rights 
organizations to form or operate, and it does not tolerate attempts by organizations or 
individuals to comment publically on its human rights practices. It uses a variety of 
methods to suppress domestic criticism. The U.S. Department of State reports that the 
most significant human rights problems in Vietnam continue to be severe government 
restriction on citizens’ political rights, particularly their right to change their government; 
increased measures to limit citizens’ civil liberties; and corruption in the judicial system 
and police. 
 
 By law the Vietnamese government considers anyone born to at least one 
Vietnamese-citizen parent to be a citizen. The Vietnamese government generally 
encourages visits and investment by Vietnamese emigrants but sometimes monitors 
them carefully.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
6 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
7 
 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s mother and two siblings are citizens and residents of Vietnam. It 
appears that another sibling and his daughter-in-law are permanent residents of the 
United States. It is unclear what the status of his sister who recently moved to the 
United States is and if her husband accompanied her. His wife’s father and her seven 
siblings are citizens and residents of Vietnam. I find the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. I find sponsoring family members into the United States does not establish a 
disqualifying condition. I also find those member of Applicant’s family who are 
permanent residents of the United States does not establish a disqualifying condition. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are concluded in Applicant’s favor. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has regular contact with his family in Vietnam. The only information 
provided was that the last time Applicant and his wife visited her family in Vietnam was 
in 2010. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that the familial connections and the 
nature of the relationship Applicant and his wife have with their families would make it 
unlikely that Applicant and his wife would be placed in a position of having to choose 
between their family interests and the interests of the United States.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government and its relationship with the United States is 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
 
8 
 
 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the foreign government or the country is known to conduct 
intelligence operations against the United States. Some of Applicant’s family and his in-
laws are citizens and residents of Vietnam. Although it is possible that Applicant’s family 
members do not pose a security risk, I cannot make that determination without 
additional evidence that was not provided. There is insufficient information to make a 
determination that Applicant’s family members would not be vulnerable to government 
coercion. The record is void of additional information about Applicant’s family and his 
wife’s relatives that would allow me to find that any of the mitigating conditions are 
applicable.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had debts discharged in bankruptcy in 1997. Applicant has 
approximately $171,267 in delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to pay. I find 
the above disqualifying conditions apply to these facts. 
 
Applicant filed three additional times for bankruptcy in an attempt to save his 
house from foreclosure. No debts were discharged and each bankruptcy was 
dismissed. These facts do not establish a disqualifying condition. SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, and 
2.d are concluded in favor of Applicant. 
 
Listing liabilities in a bankruptcy filing does not automatically mean that the debts 
are delinquent. Often when filing a bankruptcy claim the claimant will include all of his or 
her debts, even if they are not delinquent at the time of the filing. The government cited 
Applicant’s bankruptcy filings from 2011 as proof of the delinquent debts. Applicant 
disputes the allegations. Without additional evidence, I find the government’s evidence 
insufficient to conclude the debts are delinquent. 
 
9 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant provided documented proof that he settled and resolved the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 2.g and 2.i. He stated he is still working on the debt in SOR ¶ 2.h ($160,810) 
and is attempting to settle the debts in ¶¶ 2.e and 2.f. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
because Applicant continues to have delinquent debts that are unpaid or resolved. His 
history of financial problems casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
 Applicant attributed his early financial problems to his medical problems and his 
wife’s excessive spending. He had his debts discharged in bankruptcy in 1997. He had 
a clean financial slate. He failed to provide amplifying information as to why he had 
financial difficulties in 2007 and accumulated approximately $40,000 of credit card debt. 
He attempted to settle the debt through a debt consolidation firm in 2008. He was taken 
advantage of and lost more than $8,000. He later was unable to pay his property taxes 
and became delinquent on his mortgage payments. He attributes some of his later 
financial problems to issues with his mortgage company, but those issues were after he 
got behind on his property taxes and five months of mortgage payments. Applicant’s 
initial financial problem of accumulating $40,000 of credit card debt has not been 
explained. He attempted to do the right thing by enlisting the services of the debt 
consolidation firm. His initial financial problems were within his control. However, he is 
given credit for trying to resolve his credit card debts, albeit unsuccessfully. Some credit 
 
10 
 
 
is given under AG ¶ 20(b) because he attempted to resolve his earlier debts with the 
consolidation firm. However, Applicant has savings to pay some of his remaining 
creditors and has not yet done so.  
 
 No information was provided about whether Applicant has received financial 
counseling. At this time, there are not clear indications his financial problems are being 
resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant provided documentation 
to show he resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.g and 2.i. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to those debts. 
Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 2.h, but it also appears he is disputing it. He did 
not provide documents substantiating the basis or the validity of his dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He has a history of financial difficulties dating back to at 
least 1997, when he had his debts discharged in bankruptcy. He began experiencing 
financial problems again in 2007 when he had $40,000 of credit card debt. He tried to 
resolve it, but it impacted his other financial responsibilities. Applicant did not provide 
sufficient information about his finances to conclude they will not continue to be a 
problem in his future. He has sufficient income and savings to resolve some of his 
delinquent debts and has not.  
 
 
11 
 
 
Applicant and his wife have family who are citizens and residents of Vietnam. He 
provided insufficient information to mitigate the security concerns regarding them. 
Applicant has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.b-2.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.e-2.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.h:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 2.i-2.t:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
