                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-14309
           )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Greg A. Cervi, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 4, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on August 5, 2011.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  On March 27, 2013,
the Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on April 30, 2013, in which she
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on July 24, 2013.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information in
rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on August 2, 2013, and she failed to submit a response to DOHA.  The case was
assigned to the Administrative Judge for resolution on September 13, 2013.  Based
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 36 years old, and married with two children.  She attended two
universities between 1995 and 2001, however there is no indication that she obtained a
degree.  She is employed with a defense contractor as an Animal Trainer and is seeking
to obtain a security clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at risk
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated March 7, 2013; December 12, 2012;
and August 23, 2011, reflect that the Applicant is indebted to each of the creditors set
forth in the SOR totaling an amount in excess of $180,000.  (Government Exhibits 7, 8,
and 9.)  Most of the delinquencies, specifically allegations 1(a), 1(c), 1(d), and 1(g), are
credit card accounts.  Allegation 1(b) is a home equity loan.  Allegation 1(e) is a
collection account for a boat loan that went into default.  The boat was voluntarily
repossessed in January 2010.  Allegation 1(f) is a state tax lien entered against the
Applicant in November 2010.
Applicant indicates that her financial problems began when her husband lost his
job in December 2009.  At that time, Applicant was unemployed and pregnant with her
second child.  By January 2010, Applicant could no longer afford to make payments on
her credit cards and loan debts.  She also fell behind on her mortgage payments, but
with a strong desire to try to keep her house, she continued to make some kind of
monthly payment to the lender, no matter what the amount of the payment.  Their family
income was limited to her husband’s unemployment benefits until they expired.  
To resolve their indebtedness, Applicant contacted a bankruptcy attorney to
discuss their options under the bankruptcy laws.  At the same time, Applicant tried to
obtain a home loan modification.  After discussing the matter with her attorney, she
decided not to file bankruptcy until they had a decision on their loan modification.  She
further indicated that in order to file bankruptcy she needed to save between $3,500 and
$4,000.  The loan modification of the Applicant’s home loan took about one year, and in
September 2012 her home loan was modified.  She has not yet filed bankruptcy.          
The following delinquent debts became owing and remained outstanding at the
time the FORM was issued:  1.(a) a credit card debt owed to a creditor in the amount of
$11,845; 1.(b) a debt owed to a bank for a home equity loan in the amount of $106,000;
1.(c) a credit card debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $18,694; 1.(d) a credit card
debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $25,843; 1.(e) a debt owed to a creditor in the
3
amount of $9,706; 1.(f) a delinquent tax lien entered against the Applicant in November
2010 in the amount of $108; and 1.(g) a debt owed to a creditor in the amount of
$7,918.    
Applicant began working for her current employer in July 2011.  Her husband is
also now employed.  Applicant’s personal financial statement indicates that she and her
husband have a net monthly income of $3,334.  Their expenses total $3,156 with a net
remainder of $178 without making any payments toward any of their delinquent debts.
Applicant also has a savings account that contains $200 and a 401(k) with $6,000.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
4
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
 
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
5
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies (Guideline F) that have gone
unaddressed.  The evidence indicates unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of
the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude
there is a nexus or connection with her security clearance eligibility.
Despite the fact that the Applicant and her husband are now employed, their past
due debts have gone unresolved for a significant amount of time.  The Applicant has
very little monthly net remainder available to apply toward her monthly delinquent debts.
There is no evidence of any kind to show that the Applicant has made any effort or
attempt to begin to address these debts besides saving for an eventual bankruptcy.
Although the evidence shows that circumstances largely beyond her control started her
financial problems, namely her and her husband’s unemployment, she remains
excessively indebted.  Applicant has not started the process of resolving her debts and
has a long way to go to demonstrate that she is fiscally responsible.           
   Applicant must show that she can and will resolve her debts.  In this case, there
is no evidence that she can do so.  She has not shown an ability to pay any of her
delinquent debts or to live within her means.  At this time, there is insufficient evidence
of financial rehabilitation.  Applicant has not demonstrated that she can properly handle
her financial affairs. 
Applicant has not met her burden of proving that she is worthy of a security
clearance.  Assuming that she continues to work to resolve her debts, and then shows
that she has not acquired any new debt that she is unable to pay, she may be eligible
for a security clearance in the future.  However, not at this time.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  Mitigating Condition 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances, applies, but is not
controlling.  There are simply too many delinquent debts that are not being addressed.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
6
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.
  I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of her financial indebtedness and the effects it can have on her ability to
safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not
overcome the Government's case opposing her request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:       Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.a.    Against  the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.b. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.c.    Against  the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.d. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.e.  Against  the Applicant.   
Subpara.  1.f. Against the Applicant.
Subpara.  1.g.    Against  the Applicant.   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
7
