 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14158 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. The Government failed to establish deliberate falsification under 
Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement; and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2013, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on August 14, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
2 
 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 21, 2013, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on September 11, 2013. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 
1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s 
exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record was kept open for Applicant to submit additional evidence. She submitted AE D 
in a timely fashion and it was admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 25, 2013. From October 1, 2013, to October 10, 2013, I 
was a furloughed federal employee and was prohibited from working on any cases 
during that time period. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, she admitted all the allegations in the SOR, except for 
SOR ¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, 
I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. She is divorced and has one daughter, age 13, who 
lives with her. Since December 2001, she has worked for a defense contractor as a 
mission supervisor. She has a high school diploma and has taken some college 
courses. She served on active duty in the Air Force for four years, achieved the rank of 
senior airman (E-4), and was honorably discharged in January 2001.1   
 
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) using marijuana about 30 
times from about January 2004 to June 2010; using marijuana on at least one occasion 
in August 1995; using marijuana after being granted a security clearance (See SOR ¶¶ 
1.a – 1.c); and (2) deliberately providing false information when asked on her security 
clearance application (SCA), dated July 2011, if she ever used a controlled substance 
while holding a security clearance (See SOR ¶ 2.a).  
  
 In her 1999 SCA, Applicant admitted using marijuana on one occasion before 
she joined the Air Force in 1995. She did not further elaborate on this use. She was 
initially granted a security clearance in approximately September 2000 and has held a 
clearance since then. In July 2011, as part of her security clearance periodic review, 
she completed another SCA. When asked in Section 23a if she had illegally used any 
controlled substances within the last seven years, she answered “yes” and further listed 
her period of use between January 2004 and June 2010. She quantified and described 
her use as approximately 30 times for recreational use. The next question (Section 23b) 
asked if she ever illegally used any controlled substance while holding a security 
clearance to which she answered “no.”2 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5, 24, 31-32; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In August 2011, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator concerning her 
security clearance. She elaborated on her admitted use of marijuana between 2004 and 
2010 by stating that she used marijuana with old friends that stopped by her house or at 
music concerts that she attended. The method of use was by smoking “joints.” She 
knew it was illegal at the time and was aware that she held a security clearance, but she 
does not know why she smoked it on those occasions. She stopped smoking marijuana 
in 2010 because she ended a relationship and also wanted to change her lifestyle. She 
also told the investigator that she mistakenly answered “no” to the SCA question about 
marijuana use while holding a security clearance. She misread the question.3 
 
 During her hearing testimony, Applicant was consistent concerning the details of 
her previous uses and her mistake in answering “no” to the SCA question about any 
marijuana use while holding a security clearance. She researched the possibility of 
providing hair and/or urine for drug testing and indicated she was willing to do so. 
However, her current employer has no drug testing policy or program and could not 
administer it. She knew using marijuana was illegal under both federal and state law at 
the time she was using it. She also knew she could not use marijuana while holding a 
security clearance.4  
  
 Applicant offered three character letters attesting to her trustworthiness, honesty, 
professionalism, and integrity. One letter’s author wrote that he was unaware that she 
had ever broken any laws, apparently unaware of her past illegal marijuana use. She 
also presented a written statement of intent not to use any illegal drugs in the future.5 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
                                                          
3 GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. 25-26, 38, 43. 
 
5 AE C-D. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 One time in 1995 and on about 30 occasions from 2004 to 2010, Appellant 
illegally used marijuana. Her uses from 2004 to 2010 occurred while she was holding a 
security clearance. I find that both the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Although Applicant’s 1995 use of marijuana was remote and infrequent, her uses 
from 2004 to 2010 were more frequent. Her period of abstinence is insufficient to 
demonstrate her intent not to use marijuana in the future. Even though three years have 
passed since her last marijuana use in 2010, her use while holding a security clearance 
and knowing her actions were illegal are cause for significant concern about her 
judgment. She did not establish that recurrence is unlikely. While she apparently has 
abstained from marijuana use for several years and provided a statement about her 
intent not to use it in the future, her past actions, particularly her conscious decision to 
use marijuana while holding a security clearance, cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. It is too soon to tell whether her use will recur. 
Although she claims she no longer uses drugs and supplied her written statement of 
future intent, given her history of use while holding a security clearance, this is not 
enough to show a demonstrated intent not to use drugs in the future. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 
26(b) partially apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
Applicant answered “no” on her 2011 SCA when asked whether she used any 
illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. Her explanation is that she misread the 
question and did not intend to intentionally supply false information. This explanation 
has merit considering that she provided specific details about the timeframe and 
number of marijuana uses in response to the preceding question. These answers were 
truthful and the dates included the period that she held a security clearance. It would 
make no sense for her to then intentionally falsify the next question when she already 
provided the answer through her detailed response to the previous question. I found her 
testimony credible on this point. She did not deliberately falsify her 2011 SCA when she 
answered “no” about using marijuana while holding a security clearance. AG ¶ 16(a) 
does not apply. Having reached this result, it is not necessary to discuss the potential 
application of the mitigating conditions under this guideline. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s character 
letters and her prior honorable military service. However, I also considered that she 
used marijuana on multiple occasions while holding a security clearance over a seven-
year period. Additionally, she was over 30 years old and at the time of her last use a 
mother raising a small child. Despite the presence of some mitigation, Applicant failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to fully mitigate the security concerns.  
 
7 
 
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
drug involvement. I also find that she did not deliberately provide false information on 
her SCA. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
