 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-12165 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Government’s security concerns under the 
guideline for drug use. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
In March 2011, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). On 
January 7, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Use). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
In a January 25, 2013, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all three 
allegations raised under Guideline H, and requested a determination without hearing. 
The Government ultimately converted the case to one for hearing before a Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. I was assigned the case 
 
2 
 
 
on August 9, 2013. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 19, 2013, setting the 
hearing for September 20, 2013.  
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 
1-3. They were accepted without objection. Applicant gave testimony, introduced two 
witnesses, and offered three documents, which were accepted into the record as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A-C without objection. He was given until September 16, 2013, 
to submit any additional information. On September 13, 2013, the Government 
forwarded to me a document dated September 12, 2013, it had received from Applicant. 
It was accepted into the record as AX D. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
September 28, 2013, and the record was closed.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old director of operations for a defense contractor, where 
he was been employed since 2009. His position requires a security clearance. He has 
worked in the area of cybersecurity for nearly a decade, and first received a security 
clearance in August 2004. Applicant has a GED and is currently pursuing a bachelor’s 
degree. Applicant was married in October 2010. He and his wife have an infant child 
who lives with them. Applicant is also the father of an eight-year-old child, who spends 
weekdays with his mother and weekends with Applicant. Applicant sporadically used 
marijuana between January 1999 and January 2011. He has no intent to use illegal 
drugs again.  
 
 Applicant first used drugs between January 1999 and August 2000, when he was 
in college. During that time, Applicant was about 19 years of age and under the 
influence of a college roommate, with whom he admittedly made some poor choices. 
During that time, he used marijuana about 15 times. The drug did not do much for him 
and he only used it socially. By late 2000, Applicant asked the roommate to move out 
and Applicant stopped using the drug. Applicant eventually stopped attending college. 
Until December 2001, he continued with a network engineering position he had started 
in 1998. He was then unemployed from December 2001 until March 2002, when he 
started working for a string of employers, culminating with his hiring as a network 
technician by one employer in December 2002. 
 
 While working for his most recent employer, Applicant also found work at a 
research center. In August 2004, Applicant received a security clearance. In March 
2005, he left an engineering position to pursue DOD certification and accreditation. 
From March 2005 to December 2009, he was the senior lead security systems engineer 
for a noted defense contractor. He stayed there until accepting his current position.  By 
2010, Applicant was 30 years old, established in his career, and romantically involved. 
 
 At Applicant’s bachelor party in June 2010, a former friend showed up at the 
festivities with marijuana. Applicant knew he should not use the drug because he had a 
security clearance and because it was illegal. Despite a decade of abstinence, he 
accepted the drug because of “a lack of judgment,” and he soon “recognized [his] error 
 
3 
 
 
in many ways.” (Tr. 22)  Between New Year’s Eve of 2010 and New Year’s Morning of 
2011, Applicant was outside of a home where a holiday party was underway. He was 
with about six other people when he was again offered marijuana. Without thinking, he 
used the drug a second time.  
 
 Applicant has not had any drug counseling. He did, however, briefly discuss his 
behavior with his mother, who is a substance abuse counselor. (Tr. 25) Applicant noted 
that he has not actually handled restricted or protected material. He discovered that 
despite a decade without drugs and six years maintenance of a security clearance, 
however, it was “this process [that] solidified the seriousness of that type of behavior 
and [Applicant has] no desire to . . . do it ever again.” (Tr. 26) He stated that he was 
inebriated during both his 2010 and 2011 lapses, then explained that he has 
substantially reduced his use of alcohol since the birth of his youngest child about eight 
months earlier. (Tr. 28) He attributed his bachelor party lapse to not being in ‘the best 
state of mind.” (Tr. 26) He partly attributed his New Year’s lapse to being with some of 
the same people in the same type of gathering; he knew he should decline the offer of 
marijuana, but cannot explain why he accepted it. (Tr. 26-27) He stresses that he no 
longer associates with those individuals or with those who use drugs. (Tr. 29) He also 
stresses that he has changed his environment and now avoids places where drugs may 
be available, preferring instead to spend time with his family at home and at work. He 
emphasized that while a period short of three years may not be an appropriate length of 
abstinence in general terms, it does represent a significant gap of abstinence when 
combined with a credible and heartfelt expression of commitment to remain drug-free, 
his new commitments as husband and father, and his mature commitment as a 
responsible professional. In addition, after the hearing, Applicant submitted a Statement 
of Intent not to use illegal drugs in the future that conforms to the description set forth in 
AG ¶ 26(b)(4). (Tr. 30) 
 
 In restating that he no longer associates with those who used drugs, Applicant 
offered three highly complimentary reference letters from recent colleagues who praise 
Applicant’s capabilities and integrity. (Exs. AX 1-3) Applicant also introduced two 
witnesses. The founder and chairman of his company, who has known Applicant for 
over four years, recently promoted Applicant to a directorship despite his knowledge of 
Applicant’s lapses with drugs. He finds the Applicant of today to be of good judgment, 
strong character, and trustworthy. (Tr. 34-35) He notes that Applicant has handled all 
information appropriately and with the “utmost scrutiny and integrity.” (Tr. 37) 
 
Applicant’s wife credibly testified that Applicant has made positive efforts to make 
sure he never again is tempted by marijuana. Personally, she does not use drugs, notes 
that they are illegal, and has little patience for their use. She had no reason to think 
Applicant used or ever had used marijuana during their courtship. (Tr. 46) Applicant felt 
bad telling her of his lapse and his past drug use, but he did so after the New Year’s 
party. It was at this time that Applicant’s wife first learned that Applicant had used 
marijuana as an adult. (Tr. 47) Learning this fact led to a discussion on the types of 
things that would not be permitted in their home or around their child. (Tr. 43-44, 46) 
 
4 
 
 
She pointedly stated during the hearing that should he again use illegal drugs, that there 
would be “consequences . . . especially given the fact that we do have a child.” (Tr. 44) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and derived 
from the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 24) “Drugs” are defined as mood and behavior altering 
substances and include drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens) and inhalants and 
other substances. (AG ¶ 24(a)(1-2)) “Drug abuse” is the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction. (AG ¶ 24(b)) 
 
Here, Applicant admits using marijuana about 15 times as an underclassman, 
between about January 1999 and August 2000. He also admits that he was granted a 
DOD security clearance in August 2004. He further admits he subsequently used 
marijuana at his June 2010 bachelor’s party and again several months later at a 
January 1, 2011, New Year’s party. Such facts are sufficient to raise Drug Involvement 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse), 25(c) (illegal drug possession, 
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia), and 25(g) (any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance). With disqualifying conditions thus raised, the burden shifts to 
Applicant to mitigate related security concerns. 
 
As a preliminary matter, Applicant makes a special note to stress that he has not 
handled classified material. That is not the point. The point is that in 2004, he was 
entrusted with a security clearance based on certain criteria and conditions. Such 
conditions included his remaining abstinent from both illegal drugs and illegal activity 
while maintaining the security clearance; it similarly obligated him to report any 
transgressions as soon as practicable.   
 
For Applicant, a seven- to eight-month period of marijuana experimentation and 
drug abuse was quickly and uneventfully curtailed in January 2000 without any 
repercussions. By the time he received a security clearance in August 2004, that period 
of youthful indiscretion was behind him. What breathed new life into such old security 
concerns, however, was Applicant’s use of marijuana at his June 2011 bachelor party 
and a January 1, 2011, New Year’s Day party. While the former incident is sufficient to 
move drug involvement security concerns forward into the recent past, the latter incident 
increases the frequency of Applicant’s lapses, doubles the instances at issue, and 
makes the conduct even more recent. Moreover, given the circumstances, the repeated 
lapses cast serious doubts on Applicant’s trustworthiness and judgment. This scenario 
obviates applicability of Drug Involvement Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment). Similarly, under these facts, a period of less than 
 
6 
 
 
three years of abstinence is deficient to demonstrate a renewed commitment to 
remaining drug-free. Therefore, AG ¶ 26(b)(3) (an appropriate period of abstinence) 
does not apply.  
 
However, Applicant has made significant changes with regard to his peers, 
contacts, and venues, and he executed a Statement of Intent not to use drugs in the 
future in conformance with AG ¶ 26(b)(4). Therefore, I find that AG ¶ 26(b)(1) 
(disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts); AG ¶ 26(b)(2) (changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used) and AG ¶ 26(b)(4) (a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation) apply. 
  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my comments under the three above-referenced guidelines in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some 
warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old director of operations for a defense contractor, where 
he was been employed since 2009. He has a significant background in cybersecurity. 
He has earned a GED and is currently in college. Applicant used marijuana as an 
underclassman in college briefly, then quit in about August 2000.  Shortly thereafter, he 
embarked on his current career. He first received a security clearance in August 2004. 
By 2010, his life was coming together. He had started his current job and was engaged.  
 
Here, however, Applicant’s lapses were multiple in number, over the period of 
several months, and after he possessed a security clearance. While this process is not 
meant to be punitive, and while a proper invocation of the applicable mitigating 
conditions can accomplish much for an applicant seeking to meet his burden in this 
process, less than three years of renewed abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate the 
level of commitment to abstinence Applicant previously demonstrated until June 2010, 
only three years ago. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the drug involvement guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
