1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 11-11809
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government, David F. Hayes, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Christopher, Graham, Esq. 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has mitigated the Government’s security concerns under the foreign
influence and foreign preference guidelines. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed and certified his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on January 5, 2009. On May 24, 2011, he provided a sworn affidavit
to an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).
On March 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under foreign influence (Guideline B) and
foreign preference (Guideline C). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
2
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective in DOD on September 1, 2006.
Applicant submitted his notarized answer to the SOR on April 18, 2013. The
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 18,
2013 and the hearing was held as scheduled on July 25, 2013. Two Government
exhibits (GE) 1-2 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified at the
hearing. His seven exhibits (AE) A-G were admitted into evidence without objection.
DOHA received the transcript on August 6, 2013. The record in this case closed on
August 6, 2013. 
Rulings on Procedure
I have taken administrative notice of facts about Jordan which were provided by
the Government and Applicant. The Government’s administrative source documents
appear in GE 3. Applicant’s administrative source documents appear in AE A1, B1, and
E. No objections to the source documents were interposed by either party. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR has 11 allegations under the foreign influence guideline (¶ 1) and two
allegations under the foreign preference guideline (¶ 2). Applicant admitted all
allegations under ¶ 1 except for ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.f. He denied both allegations under ¶
2. 
Applicant, 33 years old, was born in Jordan in 1980. His parents, four brothers,
and two sisters, are dual citizens of the United States and Jordan. He has one sister
who is a citizen and resident of Jordan. He has one sister who is a citizen of Jordan and
a resident of Brazil. (AE F) 
Applicant and five of his eight siblings live in a city in the United States where
three of his four brothers manage a gas station and an auto mechanic shop. All brothers
in Applicant’s family emigrated to the United States at age 16 or 17, after they had
become proficient in the Jordanian language and culture. Occasionally, they observe
some of the cultural traditions at their domicile in the United States. 
Applicant emigrated to the United States in approximately 1997, after completing
the 11  grade at a Jordanian high school. In December 2002, he earned a bachelor’sth
degree in business administration (BA) from a U.S. university. He was naturalized as a
U.S. citizen in June 2003, and received a U.S. passport in January 2006. While he was
attending undergraduate school, he worked at his family-owned U.S. hotel business in
various positions. In April 2006, he began employment as an equity stock analyst. In
May 2008, he received a master’s degree in business administration from a U.S.
university. He continued to work as an analyst until the end of 2008. 
3
Based on the information he received from a friend’s reference, in December
2008, Applicant was hired into a cultural advisor/linguist position with a defense
contractor supporting the U.S. Air Force (USAF) located at a multinational air base in
Quatar. His duties included handling customs issues for military personnel and
coordinating logistical matters for missions in various middle eastern countries. He
traveled to the United States for his OPM interview in May 2011. In September 2012, he
lost his linguist job when he did not receive a security clearance within a required period
of time. In November 2012, another defense contractor assumed the contract and
assigned Applicant to the finance department as a staff analyst at the same air base
location. He was deployed overseas the entire year of 2012. He returned again to the
U.S. in 2013 for this security clearance hearing and training with his current employer. 
The foreign influence and foreign preference allegations will be addressed in
order they appear in the SOR. ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s parents are dual citizens of the United
States and Jordan. They are retired and spend about five months during the winter at
their one-story house in Jordan, and the remainder of the year in the United States at
the home of one of Applicant’s brothers. Applicant’s father retired from an administrative
position in the Jordanian military, but neither parent has any contact with the military or
government. Applicant’s parents do not vote in Jordanian elections and do not receive
any compensation from the government. When his mother is in Jordan, Applicant
speaks to her every day. 
¶ 1.b. Applicant’s 44-year-old brother, a dual citizen of the United States and
Jordan, owns a U.S. gas station which three of Applicant’s brothers, also dual citizens of
the two countries, manage when the 44-year-old brother is in Jordan. The three
brothers also own and manage an auto mechanic shop. While Applicant’s 44-year-old
brother usually returns to United States every year, he has not been in this country for
the past three or four years. He owns a bridal shop in Jordan.
¶ 1.c. Applicant’s 47-year-old sister is a citizen of Jordan living in Brazil. She is
married to Applicant’s brother-in-law, a citizen and resident of Brazil identified in ¶ 1.i.
She is also a resident alien of the United States who returns to this country every six
months so her resident alien status (green card) will not expire. Applicant contacts her
every two weeks by Internet media communication. 
¶ 1.d. Applicant’s 30-year-old sister is a dual citizen of the United States and
Jordan. She has lived in the U.S. since 2001. She attended Applicant’s wedding in
Jordan in June 2012. 
¶ 1.e. Applicant’s 42-year-old sister, a citizen and resident of Jordan, is married
to a citizen and resident of Jordan identified in ¶ 1.j. She used to work in a bank, but
now stays at home raising three children. She has an appointment at the U.S. Embassy
in October 2013 to begin the emigration process to receive a U.S resident alien card. In
four or five years, she will become a U.S. citizen.
4
¶ 1.f. In June 2012, Applicant married his fiancee, a citizen and resident of
Jordan whom he has known since childhood. They share an apartment at Applicant’s
duty location in Quatar. She is pregnant with their first child. She intends to emigrate to
the United States in June 2014. The record contains no additional information about
Applicant’s wife. 
¶ 1.g. Applicant’s first sister-in-law is a citizen and resident of Jordan. She is
married to Applicant’s 44-year-old brother identified in ¶ 1.b. She travels to the United
States every six months to fulfill her residency alien requirements. Applicant has
virtually no contact with her. 
¶ 1.h. Applicant’s second sister-in-law is a citizen of Jordan residing in the United
States. She is married to Applicant’s 47-year-old brother, a dual citizen of the United
States and Jordan.
¶ 1.i. Applicant’s first brother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Brazil. He is
married to Applicant’s 47-year-old sister identified in ¶ 1.c. He is an electrical engineer. 
¶ 1.j. Applicant’s second brother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Jordan. He is
married to Applicant’s 42-year-old sister identified in ¶ 1.e.
¶ 1.k. Applicant has two uncles and one aunt who are citizens and residents of
Jordan. Applicant knows his aunt travels to the United States every two years, but he is
not sure of the travel intervals of his two uncles because he is not in regular contact with
them.  
None of Applicant’s siblings have ever served in the military or worked in the
government of Jordan. All of his sisters and sisters-in-law, whether they reside in Jordan
or elsewhere, are homemakers. Applicant communicates with his siblings living in
Jordan every two or three weeks to two months through Skype (Internet
communication), emails, and by telephone. 
Between Applicant’s immigration to the United States in 1997 and his wedding in
June 2012, Applicant traveled to Jordan five or six times to visit his siblings and his
future wife, staying mostly for two-week periods. After becoming a U.S. citizen in 2003,
he renewed his Jordanian passport in 2006. He used the passport to travel to Jordan in
2006, 2008, and late 2009, until it expired in May or June 2011. He then used his U.S.
passport, which he received in January 2006, in June 2011 and June 2012 to travel to
Jordan. On June 24, 2013, Applicant’s Jordanian passport was destroyed by his
employer’s facility security officer (FSO). (AE A) He has no intention of applying for a
new passport whatsoever. He has not taken any other affirmative act to renounce his
Jordanian citizenship. He was unaware of the procedures for renouncing citizenship. He
does not consider himself a dual citizen and will formally renounce his Jordanian
citizenship if required. 
5
Applicant has no affiliation with any political parties in the United States or
Jordan. He is not aware of any individual or organization raising money for a political
group. He has never been associated with any organization capable of accomplishing
terrorist acts against any government. Applicant is not aware of any individual or
organization raising money for terrorist or criminal activity. He considers himself an
American and not a Jordanian. 
Applicant owns no property or other financial interests in Jordan and owes no
money nor does he contribute money to the Jordanian government. He holds a U.S.
retirement account through his previous position as a cultural advisor/linguist. He also
has U.S. checking and savings accounts. 
Character Evidence
Applicant submitted seven character references from his chain of command
during his employment as a cultural advisor/linguist. On April 10, 2013, and June 7,
2013, Colonel B, USAF, submitted two references indicating he was staff director for the
host nation organization from May 2011 to May 2012. Applicant served as a cultural
advisor and translator. Because of Applicant’s energetic and dedicated efforts on
passport and visa issues, missile radar support, and a sizable number of language
translation requirements, the unit was able to accomplish its daily objectives.
Colonel C, USAF, is the director of the host nation coordination unit. He
supervised Applicant for seven months in 2012. On June 16, 2013, Colonel C
recommended Applicant for security clearance consideration based on Applicant’s
conscientiousness and trustworthiness in the performance of his duties. 
Colonel D, Commanding Officer (CO), USAF, prepared a reference for Applicant
on June 10, 2013. The CO interfaced with Applicant for 18 months between 2008 and
September 2012. The CO commended Applicant on his knowledge of Middle Eastern
customs, regulations and laws, and his expertise in processing passports, visas, and
residential applications. Colonel D vouches for Applicant’s reliability and trustworthiness.
Three additional references appear in AE G. On January 31, 2012, Colonel G1,
USAF, submitted a reference on Applicant’s behalf. As chief of staff for the entire
command, he was impressed with Applicant’s professionalism and commitment to the
mission’s success. On January 23, 2011, Colonel G2, USAF, thanked Applicant for his
contributions in helping make the change of command successful. On May 13, 2011,
Brigadier General G3, USAF, cited Applicant’s outstanding contributions in presenting a
food event for multinational partners. 
6
Administrative Notice
As set forth in AG ¶ 6 of Guideline B, the identity of the country should be
considered along with other considerations such as whether the country is known to
target U.S citizens to obtain protected information or is associated with terrorism.
Jordan is a constitutional monarchy ruled by a king, with the assistance of a Council of
Ministers selected by the king, and a bicameral National Assembly. The country has
followed a pro-western policy of close relations with the United States for at least six
decades, and is a strategic partner in the war on terror.
On the other hand, continuing human rights problems persist within the country,
including arbitrary arrests, denial of due process through administrative detention,
prosecutorial interference with judicial decisions and privacy rights, and restrictions on
freedom of speech.
The threat of terrorism is high in Jordan. Terrorist groups inside and those with
international connections have targeted U.S. Government officials, private citizens, as
well as other foreign nationals. Terrorist organizations have targeted the United States
for intelligence information through various nefarious means. In October 2012, the
Jordanian government arrested 11 Jordanians from Syria before they were able to
bomb certain targets in Jordan, including the U.S. Embassy. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines must be considered in the context of the nine general factors
known as the whole-person concept to enable the administrative judge to consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
7
Analysis
Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 sets forth the security concern of the foreign influence guideline:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S.
citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 contains three disqualifying conditions that may be pertinent in this case:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and individual’s desire to help a
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
Applicant’s parents (¶ 1.a), Applicant and all brothers, including his 44 year-old
brother (¶ 1.b), and his 30 year-old sister (¶ 1.d), are dual citizens of the United States
and Jordan. His parents are retired. They spend about half a year in Jordan in their one-
story house which they own. His 44-year-old brother owns a U.S. business that is
managed by three of Applicant’s other brothers. His 30-year old sister has not returned
to Jordan since 2001. 
Applicant’s second sister-in-law (¶ 1.h) is a citizen of Jordan residing in the
United States. His 44-year-old sister (¶ 1.c) is a citizen of Jordan residing in Brazil. His
second brother-in-law (¶ 1.i) is married to his 30-year-old sister and is a citizen and
resident of Brazil. 
8
Applicant’s 42-year-old sister (¶ 1.e), his first sister-in-law (¶ 1.g), his second
brother-in-law (¶ 1.j), his two uncles and one aunt (¶ 1.k), are citizens and residents of
Jordan. His wife (¶ 1.f), a citizen of Jordan, resides in Quatar with Applicant. Applicant’s
ties to his parents, siblings, and other relatives in Jordan, create a potential for a
heightened risk of foreign influence that could place Applicant in a position of having to
choose between assisting his foreign relatives or U.S. interests. The presence of these
family members and in-laws in Jordan raises a potential conflict between the interests of
his family members and in-laws and the paramount interests of the United States. AG
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. AG ¶ 7(d) applies to Applicant’s wife who is sharing an
apartment with Applicant at his duty location in Quatar. 
The burden shifts to Applicant to present evidence under AG ¶ 8 that
demonstrates he is unlikely to be placed in a position of having to choose between his
family members and U.S. interests. The pertinent mitigating conditions are:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the position or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
minimal, or the individual has such deep and long-lasting relationships and
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation. 
The type of government in the foreign country or territory, the government’s
relationship to the United States, and the government’s record for protecting human
rights, are relevant concerns in evaluating whether an applicant’s family members may
be subject to government coercion. The risk of coercion is greater when the foreign
government has an authoritarian government, or the governing authority is known to be
associated with human rights abuses or terrorism. None of the Applicant’s siblings or his
wife are connected to the Jordanian military or government. Though the physical
presence of family members identified in¶¶ 1. e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, and 1.k, in Jordan raise a
potential heightened risk of foreign influence and conflict of interest, Jordan’s close
relationship with the United States over the last six decades reduces the risk
significantly. Jordan has been an active partner with the United States in the war on
terror. AG ¶ 8(a) applies in part. 
9
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1997 and became a naturalized
citizen in June 2003. He held several positions in his family owned hotel business while
attending undergraduate school. He was employed as a equity stock analyst while
attending graduate school. There is no evidence that Applicant has any connections or
contact with any other individuals in Jordan other than his immediate family members
and identified in-laws. He views himself as an American. AG ¶ 8(b) applies in part. 
When communication with foreign citizens is casual and infrequent, the risk of
foreign influence is reduced. Applicant maintains regular contact with his wife and
mother. He has occasional contact with his other family members. He traveled to Jordan
five or six times since immigrating to the United States in 1997. The familial contacts
and frequency of Applicant’s overall communication precludes the application of AG ¶
8(c). 
Foreign Preference 
AG ¶ 9 sets forth the security concern of the foreign preference guideline:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign
country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
AG ¶ 10 contains one disqualifying condition that may be pertinent in this case:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation or foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current passport.
Applicant was born in Jordan. He emigrated to the United States in 1997 and
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2003. He renewed his Jordanian passport in
2006, and used the passport to enter Jordan after becoming a U.S. citizen. AG ¶
10(a)(1) applies.
The pertinent mitigating conditions are:
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a
foreign country:
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the
individual was a minor; and 
10
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.
AG ¶¶ 11(a) and 11 (c) do not apply because Applicant renewed and used his
Jordanian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 11(b) does not apply because
Applicant has taken no affirmative action to renounce his Jordanian citizenship,
although he testified he would renounce if required. AG ¶ 11(e) applies because
Applicant allowed his Jordanian passport to expire in 2011, and took affirmative action
on June 24, 2013 to have the FSO destroy the expired passport.  
Whole-Person Concept 
I have evaluated the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of
the foreign influence and foreign preference guidelines. I have also weighed this case
within the context of the nine general factors of the whole-person concept. Those
factors, set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) are: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful
consideration of the specific guidelines and nine factors under the whole-person
concept.
Weighing against Applicant’s security clearance application in the whole-person
analysis is the risk of terrorism and human rights abuses in Jordan, and sharing living
quarters with his wife, a citizen of Jordan and resident of Quatar. Insurgents, or
criminals could potentially reach Applicant through coercive or non-coercive tactics
applied against his wife and other family members. Furthermore, Applicant
demonstrated a preference for Jordan by renewing and using Jordanian passport after
becoming a U.S. citizen in June 2003. 
There is sufficient mitigating evidence to support Applicant’s security clearance
application. His expired Jordanian passport was destroyed in June 2013, and he does
not intend to renew it. He testified credibly at the hearing. He has lived in United States
since 1997, and has been a naturalized citizen since 2003. A testament to his maturity
is the fact that he obtained his undergraduate and graduate degrees in the United
States while working full-time at his family’s hotel and as a stock analyst. Additional
11
evidence of Applicant’s maturation and sound judgment has been his high quality job
performance between December 2008 and September 2012, when he served the USAF
as a cultural advisor and linguist. Seven members of his command praised Applicant’s
trustworthiness, reliability, and professionalism in executing his employment
responsibilities. He has no financial or property interests in the Jordan, and has no
political affiliation to the country. His bank accounts and other funds are in the United
States. Considering all the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in
the context of the whole-person concept, Applicant has mitigated security concerns
associated with foreign influence and foreign preference. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Foreign Influence, Guideline B): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k: For Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Foreign Preference, Guideline C) FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
