 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-13238 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On February 8, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter dated March 2, 2013, Applicant admitted the three allegations raised in 
the SOR and requested a decision without hearing. Counsel for DOD prepared a Form 
of Relevant Material (FORM), containing nine attachments, to support the Government’s 
position in this matter. Applicant timely responded with additional narrative and 
attachments. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case 
to me on October 28, 2013. I have thoroughly reviewed the FORM and other case file 
materials. Based on the materials submitted, I find that Applicant met his burden in 
mitigating financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
2 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old systems engineer who has worked for the same 
employer since late 2010. He attended college for multiple years, but did not earn a 
degree. While in school, Applicant was a cadet in the Air Force ROTC, where he was 
considered to be enlisted in the Air Force Reserves as an Airman from September 1974 
to March 1977. He is married and has grown children. 
 
 When interviewers met with him in August 2011, following his application for a 
security clearance, Applicant described his current financial situation as “pretty bad.” 
(FORM, Item 7, Interrogatories, at 4). He attributed some of his financial distress to his 
2007 sponsorship of a brother-in-law and the brother-in-law’s family into the United 
States. This financial assistance lasted to at least the end of 2009. Applicant also 
provided for his mother-in-law, who lived with Applicant and his wife. Meanwhile, also in 
2009, Applicant’s wife lost her job. She has only maintained part-time positions since 
that time. Although Applicant owned a rental property for generating income to meet his 
monthly mortgage obligations, his tenants eventually stopped paying rent. Throughout 
this time, medical bills were received for undisclosed treatments. 
 
 In addition, since 2009, Applicant spent considerable sums to supplement his 
children’s educations, such as attendance at leadership programs that cost about 
$4,000 per student. Applicant sometimes paid routine bills and groceries with his credit 
card. In general, “[h]e found himself juggling [his] finances.” (Id.) As a result, payments 
became late, leading to related charges. Finally, for an unspecified period of time, he 
was unable to pay his bills. (Id.) He struggled to rectify the situation up to the time he 
met with investigators in 2011. In the end, however, his July 2011 credit report reflected 
debts in the amount of $27,810, $34,940, and $26,250, respectively; these are the 
same balances shown in the SOR for allegations (debts) 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. 
 
 Since that time, Applicant has attributed his inability to satisfy his debts to his 
deadbeat tenants. He went to court to make sure the tenants were evicted, and he is 
now awaiting reimbursement from the tenants for damages to the property. (FORM, 
Item 4, at 1) In addition, Applicant has reached 59.5 years of age, and he has 
transferred funds from his IRA to address SOR Debt 1.c, a debt related to Applicant’s 
wife’s primary credit card. That debt, for $26,250, was settled by a payment of $14,000 
on June 17, 2013. (Response to the FORM at 1 of 2; see attached bank statement for 
May 20, 2013, through June 19, 2013, at 3 of 8, entry eight from bottom)  
 
 Tragically, one of Applicant’s children died on active duty in May 2013. 
(Response to the FORM, Report of Casualty, dated Jun. 5, 2013) As next of kin, 
Applicant received a $100,000 death gratuity; his share of the life insurance proceeds 
amounted to approximately $200,000. (Response to the FORM, May 22, 2013, deposit, 
and insurance company statement, dated Jun. 4, 2013, respectively) These sums were 
deposited into Applicant’s bank between May 20, 2013, and June 19, 2013. Applicant 
applied these funds to satisfy SOR Debt 1.b for $34,940 for a negotiated settlement 
 
 
 
 
3 
amount of $14,819.63. (Response to the FORM at 1 of 2; see attached bank statement 
covering period Jun. 23, 2013, to Jul. 19, 2013, at 2 of 8, fourth entry from bottom)  
 
The holder of the obligation noted at SOR Debt 1.a was tracked down by 
Applicant. He discovered the creditor had charged off the debt, issued him a 1099-C 
form, and, on or before December 31, 2012, filed a copy of the 1099-C with the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS). (Response to the FORM, 2012 Form 1099-C, Cancellation of 
Debt). Under Federal tax law, Applicant was thus required to pay taxes on this charged- 
off debt because it is considered income to him. As required, Applicant timely satisfied 
his obligation to the IRS on this charged-off debt. (Response to the FORM, see 
attached bank statement for May 20, 2013, through June 19, 2013, at 8 of 8)   
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
 
 
 
4 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had three 
delinquent debts. Such facts are sufficient to invoke two of the financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant acquired delinquent debt between 2009 and 2011. Despite Applicant’s 
best efforts, deadbeat tenants failed to timely pay rent and caused damage to his rental 
property. He obtained a judgment against the tenants for money owed. He acted 
reasonably to resolve the financial problems created by the tenants. Such facts are 
sufficient to raise AG ¶ 20(b). Because there is no evidence Applicant received financial 
counseling, however, the first section of AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
Moreover, as soon as he was eligible at age 59.5 to make a withdrawal from his 
IRA, Applicant withdrew the sum necessary ($14,000) to settle his wife’s credit card 
obligation (SOR Debt. 1.c) Soon thereafter, tragedy struck his family. The payout in 
death benefits and life insurance on his child provided him with about $300,000 in 
expendable income. From that balance, Applicant settled the debt noted at SOR Debt 
1.b and satisfied that obligation by payment of $14,819.63. As for SOR Debt 1.a, 
Applicant paid the Federal taxes associated with that debt, which had previously been 
charged-off. In this manner, notable payments were made on the three significant 
delinquent debts reflected in Applicant’s credit reports and the SOR. Even after these 
payments, Applicant has a considerable balance from the insurance payout in the 
approximate amount of a quarter of a million dollars. Therefore, the second section of 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies, and AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies.   
 
     Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the three guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old systems engineer who has worked for the same 
employer since late 2010. He attended some college, during which time he was an Air 
Force ROTC cadet for over two years. He is married and has grown children, one of 
whom recently passed away while serving in the United States military. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant’s initial acquisition of debt started out with the best intentions, but those 
intentions went awry. He helped sponsor his in-laws to come to this country, but their 
trek to United States citizenship, employment, and financial independence was 
protracted. He also became the sole provider for his mother-in-law. He maintained a 
financial buffer to help supplement his income in hard times -- specifically, he owned a 
rental property which generated regular income. His renters at the time, however, 
proved to be deadbeats who not only withheld rent payments, but damaged Applicant’s 
property. Although Applicant prevailed against them in court, he has yet to realize any 
financial recompense from his action. 
 
What led to Applicant’s satisfaction is two-fold. First, he became eligible to make 
a withdrawal from his IRA to satisfy his wife’s credit card. Second, he received the death 
benefit payment and life insurance share owed to him upon the death of his child. 
Applicant worked out arrangements with two of his creditors. Those arrangements on 
the debts reflected in the SOR were apparently agreed upon and executed. Although 
the creditors’ names changed and debt balances were renegotiated, Applicant’s credit 
reports and the case materials cite to no other notable delinquent debts except those 
reflected in the SOR. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that the two debts at issue 
in the SOR are the same debts noted in Applicant’s 2011 credit report. In addition, he 
paid the taxes owed on the charged-off debt cancelled by his third creditor in a timely 
manner. Consequently, as a result of his negotiations and settlements, the facts 
persuasively indicate that Applicant has addressed the debts at issue. In light of these 
facts, Applicant has mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is 
granted.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
