 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13428 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists 20 delinquent, collection, or 
charged-off accounts totaling $57,098. She failed to make sufficient progress resolving 
her financial problems. Applicant also presented forged letters she claimed were from 
creditors falsely indicating some of her debts were paid or in payment plans. Financial 
considerations and personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 19, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 4) On May 29, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On June 28 and July 3, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. On 
November 7, 2013, Department Counsel indicated in an email that Applicant verified 
that she did not desire a hearing. (Item 2) A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated September 5, 2013, was provided to her on September 24, 
2013. She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case 
was assigned to me on November 7, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for 20 delinquent, collection, or charged-off 
accounts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.t) She also admitted that she provided fabricated letters 
from creditors to DOHA in an attempt to convince security officials that she was making 
progress addressing her delinquent debts. (SOR ¶ 2.a) She explained her husband left 
her and her family and did not provide financial support. Loss of her security clearance 
will adversely affect her financial situation. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old, and she was employed as a proprietary systems 
specialist in July 2011.3 She was employed from February 2006 to July 2011 in 
information technology. (August 24, 2011 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
personal subject interview (PSI) at 13) From September 1991 to February 2006, she 
was employed as a “Special Assistant/Labor Rational” for a large urban school system. 
She has never served in the military. In 2002, she married, and in January 2006, she 
separated from her spouse. She has a son, who was born in 1991. (OPM PSI at 13) 
She attended several colleges; however, she was not awarded a degree. There is no 
evidence of arrests or convictions. There is no evidence of use of illegal drugs or 
alcohol abuse.  
 
                                            
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated September 11, 2013, and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
September 24, 2013. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after her 
receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s July 19, 2011 SF 86 is the basis for the facts in this 
paragraph. (Item 4) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In Applicant’s July 19, 2011 SF 86, she disclosed four delinquent collection 
accounts as follows: $2,455; $347; $16,214; and $8,109. She said she would have all 
four debts paid off in 2013.   
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 20 delinquent, collection, or charged-off accounts totaling 
$57,098 as follows: ¶ 1.a ($2,485); ¶ 1.b ($1,668); ¶ 1.c ($10,966); ¶ 1.d ($677); ¶ 1.e 
($532); ¶ 1.f ($254); ¶ 1.g ($5,099); ¶ 1.h ($1,362); ¶ 1.i ($256); ¶ 1.j ($17,358); ¶ 1.k 
($715); ¶ 1.l ($9,739); ¶ 1.m ($4,068); ¶ 1.n ($586); ¶ 1.o ($121); ¶ 1.p ($109); ¶ 1.q 
($100); ¶ 1.r ($699); ¶ 1.s ($197); and ¶ 1.t ($107). Her three largest debts resulted from 
two vehicle repossessions and a lease on an apartment. (FORM at 5) Applicant’s credit 
reports, August 24, 2011 OPM PSI, and SOR response, consistently describe her 
financial problems and delinquent debts. 
 
In her February 2013 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant submitted 
documents that appeared to be letters from her creditors indicating payment plans were 
established, debts were paid, or debts were in the process of being paid through 
payment plans. (Item 8) DOHA was suspicious about the authenticity of the letters from 
creditors that Applicant provided. DOHA sent the letters to Applicant’s creditors for 
verification. (Item 8 at 7-38; FORM at 9-10) Six creditors indicated the letters Applicant 
submitted to DOHA were not issued by the creditors. (Items 10-15; FORM at 10) 
Applicant admitted that she knew the letters she submitted were fabricated to falsely 
reflect that she had paid some of her SOR debts and made payments on others. (SOR 
response) Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence, independently verified 
by DOHA as authentic, such as payments to SOR creditors, correspondence to or from 
creditors, debt disputes, or other evidence of progress showing resolution of her SOR 
debts.     
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) shows her monthly gross salary is 
$5,125; her monthly net salary is $3,229; and her monthly net remainder after 
subtracting expenses is $404.4 She shows monthly debt payments of $250 for a $5,228 
bank debt, $295 for a $1,495 bank debt, $160 for a $4,200 student loan, and $324 for a 
$3,318 car payment. None of her PFS debt payments are to SOR creditors.      
 
The September 11, 2013 DOHA letter conveying the FORM to Applicant invited 
her to “submit any material you wish the Administrative Judge to consider or to make 
any objections you may have as to the information in the file.” Applicant did not provide 
any response to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
                                            
4Applicant’s undated personal financial statement, submitted on February 12, 2013, is the source 
for the facts in this paragraph. (Item 8)   
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports, OPM PSI, and SOR response. Applicant’s SOR response indicates she 
admitted responsibility for 20 delinquent, collection, or charged-off accounts totaling 
$57,098. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving her delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all SOR debts. Applicant’s low income and 
separation from her spouse are financial conditions largely beyond her control; 
however, she did not act responsibly under the circumstances. She did not describe any 
unemployment or changes in her income after July 2011, when she received her current 
employment. In light of her false letters from creditors and false information about 
paying debts and making payments to creditors, the documentation she submitted 
cannot be accepted at face value.  
 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Under the circumstances of her submission of forged documents, there is no 
credible documented evidence of the following financial components: (1) her 
maintenance of contact with her SOR creditors;6 (2) her attempts to negotiate payment 
plans with her SOR creditors; (3) her disputes of her debts; (4) her payments to SOR 
creditors; (5) her financial counseling; or (6) her financial responsibility. Financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) provides one disqualifying condition that is particularly applicable as 
follows, “(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant 
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other 
official government representative.”7  Applicant admitted in her SOR response that SOR 
¶ 2.a was correct. She knowingly submitted false documents to DOHA indicating she 
had paid some of her creditors, and that she had established payment plans with some 
of her other SOR creditors.  
 
Seven mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
                                            
6“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant engaged in a calculated 
and deliberate attempt to portray herself as financially responsible by submitting 
fabricated documents to DOHA. The fabricated documents are complicated and 
required generation of spreadsheets and false signatures. She is credited with admitting 
her attempt to deceive; however, admitting her conduct is only the first step on the road 
to rehabilitation. More time without any serious breaches of integrity must elapse before 
Applicant can be entrusted with access to classified information. Personal conduct 
concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant’s 
finances were adversely affected by low income and separation from her spouse. These 
were circumstances beyond her control. She has been employed by the same defense 
contractor since July 2011, and for the last two years, she had stable employment. 
There is no evidence of abuse of alcohol or drugs. She contributes to her company and 
the Department of Defense. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that she would 
intentionally violate national security.   
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. She failed to mitigate 20 
delinquent, collection, or charged-off accounts totaling $57,098. She could have made 
greater progress resolving and documenting resolution of her delinquent SOR debts. 
She presented forged letters to DOHA that she claimed were from creditors. The forged 
letters purportedly from her creditors falsely indicated numerous payments to some 
creditors, and other creditors were paid. The false documents were relatively elaborate 
and required calculation and deliberation to generate. She did not provide documentary 
proof with established authenticity that she made any payments to any of her SOR 
creditors. Her failure to establish her financial responsibility and her submission of 
forged documents to DOHA shows lack of judgment and raises unmitigated questions 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
See AG ¶¶ 15 and 18.  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations and personal 
conduct concerns are not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not 
eligible for access to classified information at this time.  
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.t:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
