 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:                                             ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 11-10404                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits in this case, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign 
Preference, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
                                              Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 11, 2011. On October 19, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 2, 2012, and December 19, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR in 
writing and elected to have his case adjudicated on the written record. In February 
 
2 
 
 
2013, the case was assigned to an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On July 3, 2013, Applicant elected to have a hearing, 
and the case was re-assigned to me on July 31, 2013. I convened a hearing on 
September 18, 2013, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through Ex. 5 and entered in the record without objection. The 
Government also provided for administrative notice a copy of a state unemployment 
compensation law, which I marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and entered in the record 
without objection. The Applicant testified, called no witnesses, and introduced 11 
exhibits, which were identified, marked, and entered without objection in the record as 
Applicant’s Ex. A through Ex. K.  At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open 
until October 2, 2013, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide additional 
information.1 Applicant timely filed five additional exhibits, which I marked as Ex. L 
through Ex. P and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant also requested 
that the record remain open to receive new evidence, to include a response from a state 
agency, for an indefinite period. The Government objected to Applicant’s request, 
asserting that the state agency response was not necessary to a resolution of 
Applicant’s case.2 After reviewing the matter, I sustained the Government’s objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 26, 2013. 
 
                                                       Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations that raise security concerns under AG ¶ 9, 
Foreign Preference (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.), and one allegation that raises security 
concerns under AG ¶ 18, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶  2.a.). In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted all three allegations and provided additional information. 
Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact. (Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He has been married since 1983, and he and his wife 
are the parents of two adult children. Applicant is a native-born United States citizen, as 
were both of his parents. His paternal and maternal grandparents were citizens of 
Greece who immigrated to the United States and became U.S. citizens. (Ex. 1; Tr. 68.) 
 
 Applicant has been employed in the same industry for over 30 years. When he 
was hired, Applicant was advised that the mandatory retirement age for individuals 
working in the industry was 60 years. As he grew closer to the mandatory retirement 
age, Applicant began to look for opportunities to continue his career. He learned that the 
retirement age in European countries for individuals working in the industry was 65 
years. His U.S. employer did not offer a defined retirement plan, and Applicant 
                                            
1 The Government shutdown, which began on October 1, 2013, delayed the receipt and evaluation of 
Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. 
 
2 The Government’s response to Applicant’s post-hearing submissions is marked as HE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
concluded that he needed to continue working after the mandatory retirement age. (Tr. 
66-71.) 
 
 As a grandchild of Greek citizens, Applicant became a Greek citizen, under the 
laws of Greece, at birth. In 2006, in order to be employable in the industry in Greece 
and in other European Union countries, Applicant acquired a Greek passport. He 
renewed his Greek passport in 2012. His renewed passport had an expiration date of 
2017. These facts are alleged under the foreign preference adjudicative guideline at 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. (Tr. 68-70.) 
 
 After exploring the possibility of working in the industry as a trainer, Applicant 
concluded that the political situation in the European country precluded a role for him. At 
his hearing, Applicant explained that if he had affiliated with a foreign government to 
provide training, the program would have been overseen by a U.S. entity. However, the 
industry he hoped to work with in Greece went out of business. Moreover, the U.S. 
mandatory retirement for individuals in the industry was changed to age 65, and 
Applicant no longer had a need to seek employment outside of the United States. (Tr. 
70-80.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant asserted his preference for the United States. He stated 
that he never took a citizenship oath of loyalty to Greece; he never served in the Greek 
military; he does not own property in Greece; and he has no financial ties to Greece. 
After consulting with DOHA and his facility security officer, Applicant destroyed his 
Greek passport by shredding it. He provided a portion of the shredded document as an 
exhibit.3 In his answer to the SOR, he explained that he destroyed and shredded his 
current Greek passport to demonstrate that he did not have a preference for any 
country over the United States. (Tr. 66-70; Ex. 3; Ex. A; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 On his e-QIP, Applicant reported that he was unemployed from September 2008 
until March 2009. He characterized his unemployment as an extended voluntary leave 
of absence, which was offered to him, pursuant to a union contract, when his employing 
industry was in serious financial difficulty. Applicant explained that such extended 
leaves of absence were entitlements offered to individuals with seniority, with the 
expectation that if they accepted them, lay-offs of those employees with less seniority 
would be avoided. (Ex. 1; Ex. L; Ex. M; Tr. 83-85.) 
 
 As an employee on an extended voluntary leave of absence, Applicant was 
eligible for unemployment compensation under his union contract in the state where he 
was based. Applicant applied for the benefit. Soon after he began his extended leave of 
absence, the negotiated arrangement between Applicant’s union and the state ceased 
to exist. Nevertheless, he received unemployment compensation under his entitlement 
for six months. Thereafter, when the time of his leave of absence expired, Applicant 
continued to receive unemployment compensation. Neither his employer nor the state 
                                            
3 In his answer to the SOR and at his hearing, Applicant testified that he provided the remainder of his 
shredded Greek passport to his facility security officer. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 40-42.)  
 
4 
 
 
agency informed him that he had exhausted his eligibility for unemployment benefits. 
Moreover, the state agency created an electronic account which Applicant was directed 
to use to acquire his continuing payments. In October 2009, Applicant wrote to the 
agency and stated: “I no longer wish to receive unemployment compensation at this 
time. Thank you.” Nevertheless, the agency continued to make payments to Applicant’s 
account. When he was paid by check, he was advised not to return the check but to 
cash it. (Tr. 86-88, 90, 95-101; Ex. C; Ex. D.) 
 
 At Applicant’s request, the agency investigated the overpayments to him and 
determined that he was a “non-fault overpayment recipient.” In March and June 2010, 
the agency sent Applicant a notice which read, in pertinent part, as follows: 
 
A nonfault overpayment was established against your account and a 
notice of overpayment was previously sent to you. Your current nonfault 
overpayment balance owed is $14,144.[4] It may be beneficial for you to 
repay this money now rather than wait for the [state] to seek recoupment. 
Section 804(B) of the [state] unemployment compensation law, which is 
printed on the other side of this letter, states that the [state] is empowered 
to recover any benefits improperly paid to you by taking up to one-third 
from future unemployment compensation benefit checks for three years 
after the end of the benefit year in which the overpayment occurred. 
 
Your application for benefits was dated 09/07/08. Therefore, the period for 
recovering the money from your benefits will last until 09/06/2012. These 
automatic one-third deductions from your benefits will occur when you are 
unemployed and need the money most. Repayment in full now would 
ensure that no deductions are made from future claims you file. 
 
If you are unable to repay the full amount at once, partial payments are 
acceptable. (Ex. D.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he repaid all of the excess payments he received. 
However, he received no documentation from the state to corroborate that he no longer 
owed a debt for overpayments. He reiterated his understanding, that, pursuant to 
section 804(b)(1) of the statute5, the overpayments would have been recouped by the 
state if he had sought unemployment compensation within three years after the end of 
the benefit year in which the overpayment occurred. At the Government’s request, I left 
the record open so that Applicant could try to obtain information on whether he 
continued to owe a debt to the state for his non-fault receipt of excess unemployment 
compensation. (Tr. 102-126.)  
 
                                            
4 The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.a. that Applicant is indebted to the state for approximately $14,053 in excess 
unemployment compensation. 
 
5
 HE 1. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he owned two homes with a combined value of $1.5 
million. He provided documentation showing investments and savings of approximately 
$750,000. He stated that he had paid for his children’s higher education and owed few 
debts. (Tr. 70-73; Ex. H.) 
 
 Applicant provided several letters of character reference. An individual who 
worked with Applicant on a government contract praised Applicant’s subject matter 
expertise and observed that Applicant possessed personal integrity, judgment, loyalty to 
the United States, and commitment to the national security that was beyond reproach. 
(Ex. N.) 
 
 An industry professional who has known Applicant for 25 years stated that he 
believed Applicant “to be of the highest moral character, a man of honor, and a true 
professional,” and “his loyalty to his family, his country, and his profession are beyond 
reproach.” The individual further stated : 
 
[Applicant] is the consummate professional who enjoys an excellent 
professional reputation, commanding the highest regard from his 
colleagues and the [industry] in general. His contributions to [the industry] 
have been both meaningful and significant and he is widely recognized 
and credited with helping many young people interested in the various 
aspects of this industry realize their goals and ultimate successes. (Ex. N.) 
 
 A friend and former colleague, who had worked and studied with Applicant, also 
praised Applicant’s academic ability and accomplishments. He stated: “With his 
background in [industry] safety and a tremendous work ethic, [Applicant] proved to be 
an invaluable member of the team.” (Ex. N.)  
 
 As a post-hearing submission, Applicant provided a copy of a letter he wrote, 
dated September 19, 2013, to the state unemployment commission. In the letter, 
Applicant requested that the state agency advise him as soon as possible of the 
disposition of his case. He stated that it was his belief that he was in good standing with 
the state agency regarding his unemployment compensation status. He reiterated that 
he had complied with all instructions from the agency regarding payment of the financial 
obligation identified in correspondence sent to him. (Ex. P.) 
 
 Applicant also enclosed a personal check for $14,144, dated September 19, 
2013, made payable to the state agency. He asked the state agency to return his check 
if he was not required or obligated to make the payment.6 Department Counsel did not 
object to Applicant’s post-hearing submission. (Ex. P.) 
 
 
                                            
6 Applicant provided documentation showing that the letter and the accompanying check had been sent 
by express mail to the state agency, and an authorized agent for the state had signed and accepted 
delivery of Applicant’s letter enclosing the payment. (Ex. P.) 
 
6 
 
 
                                                        Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
7 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
                                                        Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  The relevant potential disqualifying conditions in this case are as 
follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport . . .[, and] 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, acquired Greek citizenship at birth through 
his grandparents’ Greek citizenship. In 2006, he took action to acquire a Greek passport 
through his Greek citizenship, and he renewed his Greek passport in 2012. He planned 
to use his Greek passport to obtain employment in the Greek or European Union 
counterparts of his industry when he reached age 60 and was subject to mandatory 
retirement. Applicant’s acquisition of a Greek passport as a U.S. citizen raises a 
concern that he actively exercises dual citizenship with Greece. His actions raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and 10(b). 
 
Under AG ¶ 11(a), dual citizenship might be mitigated if “it is based solely on [an 
applicant’s] parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Under AG ¶ 11(b), an 
individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or she “has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship.” Under AG ¶ 11(c), an individual’s “exercise of the rights, 
privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before 
 
8 
 
 
becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.” Under AG ¶ 11(d), an 
individual’s use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if it were “approved by the 
cognizant security authority.” Under AG ¶ 11(e), an individual’s use of a foreign 
passport might be mitigated if he or she presents credible evidence that “the passport 
has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated.” 
 
Initially, Applicant’s Greek citizenship was a passive condition: he acquired it at 
birth as the grandchild of Greek citizens. However, when he took action, as a U.S. 
citizen, to obtain a Greek passport, he acted in a manner indicating a preference for 
Greece over the United States. Moreover, his decision to acquire a Greek passport was 
not approved by his cognizant security authority. His dual citizenship with Greece, as 
expressed in his passport choice, therefore became a security concern. Accordingly, the 
mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 11(a), 11(c), and 11(d) do not apply to the facts of this 
case. 
 
 However, at his hearing and in his answer to the SOR, Applicant explained that 
while he appreciated his Greek heritage, he surrendered and destroyed his Greek 
passport to demonstrate his preference for his U.S. citizenship. He provided a portion of 
his shredded Greek passport as a demonstrative exhibit. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 11(b) 
and 11(e) apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
    
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: 
       
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. 
 
During a voluntary extended leave of absence in 2008, which was a part of his 
union contract, Applicant received unemployment compensation, also a benefit under 
his union contract. While Applicant was authorized to receive unemployment 
compensation for six months, the state unemployment agency continued to pay him 
after his entitlement expired. Applicant was no longer represented by the union which 
had negotiated the entitlement. While he requested that the payments cease, he was 
 
9 
 
 
unable to obtain clarification that might persuade the state agency to stop his payments. 
Nevertheless, the state agency later sent Applicant notices that he was responsible for 
over $14,000 in unemployment compensation overpayments. As of the date of the 
SOR, those payments had not been satisfied. This evidence is sufficient to raise the 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 In a post-hearing submission, Applicant provided documentation establishing that 
he wrote to the state unemployment agency on September 19, 2013, and requested 
that the state agency advise him, as soon as possible, of the disposition of his case. In 
his letter, Applicant asserted his belief that he was in good standing regarding his 
unemployment compensation status. He reiterated that he had complied with all 
instructions from the agency regarding payment of the financial obligation identified in 
correspondence sent to him.  
 
 With his letter to the state unemployment agency, Applicant also enclosed a 
personal check for $14,144, made payable to the state agency. He asked the state 
agency to return his check if he was not required or obligated to make the payment. 
 
Applicant’s indebtedness was the result of an overpayment of unemployment 
compensation that he did not seek. He requested that the payments be stopped, but 
they continued. He attempted to obtain clarification from the agency, and he testified 
that he made repayments as directed. However, he also acknowledged that the agency 
provided him with notice that he was responsible for over $14,000 in overpayments of 
unemployment compensation. 
 
 Applicant’s post-hearing submission demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve 
the debt and to comply with the requirements of the state unemployment compensation 
 
10 
 
 
agency. His letter to the state agency outlined his understanding of the dispute, and his 
check for the amount of the debt, offered in full payment should the agency conclude 
that he owed the debt, was an attempt to bring the matter to full resolution.  
 
 Applicant presented a financial record that was comprehensive and responsible. 
The debt alleged on the SOR arose five years ago, in 2008, under circumstances that 
are unlikely to recur, and it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(d), and 20(e) apply 
in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 59 
years. He is employed in an industry that is heavily regulated and has an unstable 
history. He attempted to organize his professional life to meet his financial obligations, 
and obtained a foreign passport in order to obtain work in the industry after mandatory 
retirement at age 60 in the United States. When the mandatory retirement age was 
raised in the United States, Applicant no longer needed to seek employment by using a 
foreign passport. 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that he systematically and 
responsibly addressed a debt for which he may or may not be responsible under an 
agreement by his employer, a union that represented him, and the controlling state 
unemployment agency. He demonstrated his good faith in addressing the debt, 
proffering full payment, and agreeing to abide by a determination by the state agency. 
  
 
11 
 
 
 Overall, the record evidence persuades me that Applicant is mature, trustworthy, 
and capable of being entrusted with access to classified information. I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the foreign preference and 
financial delinquency adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:             FOR APPLICANT 
 
                     Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:         For Applicant 
   
                      Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraph 2.a.:                        For Applicant 
 
                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
