 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12040 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 1, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2007, but the bankruptcy was dismissed 
a couple months after he filed it. He has eight delinquent debts totaling $29,599 
identified on the Statement of Reasons (SOR). Applicant failed to produce sufficient 
documentation that his debts have been addressed or are otherwise satisfied. He has 
not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 9, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons on June 14, 2013 (Answer). In his 
Answer, Applicant elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on September 
13, 2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was received by 
Applicant on September 24, 2013. He was afforded 30 days to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not 
submit any information within that time. The case was assigned to me on October 30, 
2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2010. He has 
been working for his current employer since February 1998. He is divorced and has two 
children. (Item 5.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified eight delinquent debts totaling $29,599. He also filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in September 2007; however, the case was dismissed in November 2007. 
Applicant’s debts appear in credit reports in the FORM. Applicant admitted SOR 
allegations ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, 1.g, and 1.i. He denied SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.f and 1.h. 
(Answer; Items 4 through 11.)  
 
Applicant attributes his debts to several factors: his daughter’s medical expenses 
that began accumulating in approximately January 2004; his divorce in May 2008 as a 
result of his infidelity; his ex-wife’s poor spending habits during their marriage; his 
decision to reside with his ex-wife after their divorce, despite her on-going poor 
spending habits that he was not aware of; and a decrease in work hours due to the slow 
economy. He acknowledged that he “did not stay on top of [his] finances.” (Item 6; Item 
7.)  
 
His debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent medical account in the amount of $269 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a). This debt has been delinquent since January 2012. Applicant 
indicated he arranged payments on this account, but he failed to introduce 
documentation to show he followed through on this promise. It remains unsatisfied. 
(Answer; Item 7; Item 10; Item 11.)  
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $60 (as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b). This debt has been delinquent since July 2008. It remains unsatisfied. (Item 
7; Item 10; Item 11.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $2,047 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c). This debt has been delinquent since January 2007. Applicant 
 
3 
 
indicated he was making payment arrangements with this creditor, but he failed to 
submit any evidence he followed through with his stated intent. This debt remains 
unsatisfied. (Answer; Item 7; Item 10; Item 11.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent credit card account in the amount of $7,026 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d). This debt has been delinquent since May 2011. Applicant 
indicated that he is paying this debt through payments of $351.34 by automatic 
deductions from his bank account on a monthly basis for 20 months. However, he failed 
to produce documentation of any payments. This debt remains unsatisfied. (Answer; 
Item 6; Item 7; Item 10; Item 11.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a repossessed automobile in the amount of $10,131 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e).  Applicant indicated he was attempting to make payment 
arrangements with this creditor; however, he produced no documentation to show he 
had made any payments. This debt has been delinquent since July 2012. It remains 
unsatisfied. (Answer; Item 7; Item 10; Item 11.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a second repossessed automobile in the amount of 
$8,192 (as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f). This debt has been delinquent since December 2011. 
Applicant denied responsibility for this debt because the vehicle belonged to his ex-wife. 
It remains unsatisfied. (Answer; Item 7; Item 10; Item 11.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $130 (as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.g). Applicant claims this debt is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
but they have different account numbers and 1.a is more than double this amount. This 
debt remains unsatisfied. . (Answer; Item 7; Item 11.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the amount of $1,744 (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h). This debt has been delinquent since May 2012. According to 
Applicant’s credit report, this account was reported 30 days past due six times or more. 
Applicant claimed that this debt was paid through garnishment of his wages; however, 
he failed to submit documentation to substantiate his claim. It remains unsatisfied. (Item 
7; Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 2007. He indicated that 
when he met with the trustee for his bankruptcy, he was advised that his debt-to-income 
ratio was “not significant enough to file, as [he] would eventually encounter further 
financial problems.” He estimated the total amount of debt listed in the Chapter 13 to be 
$10,000 to $12,000. He and his wife were advised to request dismissal, and followed 
this advice. The bankruptcy was dismissed in November 2007. (Item 7; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted 
no character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, 
trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or 
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems for at least the past six years, when he 
became delinquent on several accounts and filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Since 
2007, he has had an ongoing inability to satisfy his debts. He failed to present any 
evidence that he is addressing the debts in the SOR. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant’s ongoing financial problems are likely to recur, given his failure to 
address his outstanding accounts. His behavior is frequent and on-going. AG ¶ 20(a) is 
not applicable. 
 
 Applicant indicated that his financial problems were the result of a number of 
events, including his daughter’s illness; his divorce; his ex-wife’s poor financial 
management of their household; and a decrease in his hours at work. Some of these 
factors, like his daughter’s illness and the decrease of hours at work, were beyond his 
control. However, some factors, like his failure to monitor his wife’s spending (both 
during their marriage and after their divorce) and the divorce itself, are directly 
attributable to Applicant’s actions. Further, he failed to show he acted responsibly in 
relation to his debt. He failed to present any evidence that he is paying any of his 
delinquent accounts. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial counseling. Further, there 
is little indication that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are being resolved or are under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his delinquent 
consumer debts. He presented no evidence of any recent payments or progress toward 
the settlement of his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence to show that he was in the process of 
formally disputing any of his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant failed to address his delinquencies. While he has experienced the 
illness of his daughter and a decrease in hours at work, he failed to demonstrate any 
significant efforts to repay his delinquent debt. Accordingly, continuation of these 
circumstances is highly likely, and the potential for coercion, exploitation, or duress 
remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
