 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
                                                                      ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 12-00120 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s parents, sister, 
aunts, and in-laws, are citizens and residents of India. His wife is an Indian citizen living 
in the United States. He maintains a home, bank account, and other investment 
property in India. The foreign influence security concern has not been resolved. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on April 11, 2013, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
On April 22, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department 
Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
July 24, 2013, which contained 21 attachments.  
 
On August 22, 2013, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of 
his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. Applicant’s response was due2 on September 22, 
2013. As of October 16, 2013, no response had been received. On October 17, 2013, I 
was assigned the case.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to India. The material was included in the FORM attachments. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the allegations except for 
one. In response to SOR 1.m, he states the $190,000 worth of residential, investment 
property in India was not purchased by him, but by his parents who purchased it in his 
name. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old consultant who has worked for a defense contractor 
since March 2009, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. Applicant was born in India 
in 1967. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2009. (Item 3) In 1990, he obtained his 
master’s degree in mechanical engineering from a university in India. From 1991 
through 1995, he attended a U.S. university obtaining his doctorate degree in December 
1995. In 1996, he married his wife, a quality assurance engineer and Indian citizen. 
(Item 3, 5) She is a resident alien living in the United States. He has two children, ages 
11 and 15, who are U.S. citizens having been born in the United States. In 2010, he 
renounced his Indian citizenship. 
 
 Applicant’s mother, a housewife, and father are citizens and residents of India. 
From 1964 to 1998, his father was a municipal sanitation inspector for a local 
government in India. His father is now retired. (Item 5) He has telephone contact with 
his parents three times a week and visits them every one to two years. (Item 5) He has 
monthly contact with a sister, a citizen and resident of India, who is not currently 
working. (Item 5) He has another sister, an accountant, who is a Canadian citizen living 
in Canada. (Item 3) He has weekly contact with this sister. He has two aunts who are 
                                                          
2 Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. 
 
3 
citizens and residents of India whom he calls seven or eight times a year and sees 
when he visits India. (Item 5) Before retiring, one previously worked as an accountant 
for a state government and the other worked as a section manager for the state 
government. (Item 5) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law, a housewife, and father-in-law, a farmer, are citizens 
and residents of India. He has monthly telephone contact with his father-in-law and 
mother-in-law. (Item 5) He sees both of them when he visits India. He has two sisters-
in-law, citizens and residents of India, who work at various levels of government in 
India. One is an excise official working in revenue collections for the state government 
and another is an engineer who works for a municipality as a town planner. (Item 5) He 
has telephone contact with his sisters-in-law two to four times a year and sees them 
when he visits India. (Item 5)  
 
Applicant has numerous other relatives and in-laws who are citizens and 
residents of India. He has two brothers-in-law, three other sisters-in-law, an uncle, 
seven cousins, and other individuals related to these people. He contacts these 
individuals two to four times3 a year and sees them when he returns to India. (Item 5)  
 
Applicant has a friend in India who owns a business school and management 
center. (Item 5) He talks with his friend every two weeks. Between 2008 and 2010, 
Applicant gave his friend advice on managing the school for which he received no 
compensation. (Item 5) 
Applicant’s parents live in a home he owns in India worth $150,000. (Item 5) He 
owns three pieces of residential property worth $50,000 (purchased in 1989), $60,000, 
(purchased in 2004), and $80,000 (purchased in 1992). (Item 3, 5) In his response to 
the SOR, he states the land was purchased by his parents and placed in his name. 
(SOR Response) The property was purchased for investment purposes. (Item 5) He 
spent 21 days in India in 2012, 18 days in 2011, 8 days in 2008, 21 days in 2007, 22 
days in 2006, and 21 days in 2005. (Item 3, Item 5) He has a bank account in India with 
a balance of approximately $5,000. (Item 5) The funds are for his parents’ benefit and 
he also uses the funds when he travels in India. (Item 5)  
 
There is nothing in the record showing what assets Applicant owns in the United 
States. From the record, it is uncertain if he owns a home, has bank accounts, or has 
other property in the United States.  
 
India -- Administrative Notice 
 
 India, the world’s most populous democracy, uses a federal form of government, 
similar to the United States, but with more authority vested in the central government. It 
has a bicameral legislature modeled after Britain=s parliament, and its members are 
selected through open elections involving several political parties. India also has an 
                                                          
3 Applicant has telephone contact with one cousin ten to eleven times a year. (Item 5) 
 
4 
active market-oriented economy, and conducts most of its international trade with the 
United States.  
 
India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in 
international affairs. India has always been an active member of the United Nations. Its 
political history since it gained independence from Great Britain in 1947 has included 
several armed conflicts with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic 
outbreaks of religious riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorist groups 
in different parts of the country. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout 
the country, including attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known 
to congregate or visit.  
The United States and India have differences over India’s nuclear weapons 
programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, and India’s bilateral strategic 
partnership with Iran. Nevertheless, the United States recognizes that India is important 
to U.S. strategic interests. The strategic partnership between the United States and 
India is based on shared values such as democracy, pluralism, and the rule of law. 
Since 2002, the United States and India have held a series of substantive combined 
exercises involving all military services.  
The United States is India’s largest foreign investment partner. The two countries 
have a common interest in the free flow of commerce and resources, including through 
the vital sea lanes of the Indian Ocean. 
The United States and India share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in 
creating a strategically stable Asia. They are seeking to foster bilateral relations by 
establishing working groups to address: (1) strategic cooperation; (2) energy and 
climate change; (3) education and development; (4) economics, trade, and agriculture; 
and (5) science and technology, health, and innovation.  
 
 In the past, India had long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet 
Union, and Russia remains India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts. 
India is one of many countries engaged in economic intelligence collection and 
industrial espionage directed at the United States. The United States has long-standing 
economic issues with India regarding protection of intellectual property rights and trade 
in dual-use technology. There have been numerous incidents of international 
businesses illegally exporting, or attempting to export restricted, dual-use technology 
from the United States to India. 
 
 The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are 
serious problems involving abuses by police and security forces. Corruption in the 
police force is pervasive, and police officers often act with impunity. Abuses by police 
and security forces have occurred primarily in criminal investigations and efforts to 
suppress separatist and terrorist groups. There is no evidence that India uses torture or 
abuse against its citizens to extract economic intelligence.  
 
Policies 
 
5 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
6 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence  
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Applicant should not be placed in a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his relatives living in India. 
While there is a significant degree of overlap between AG ¶ 7(a) and ¶ 7(b), the concern 
under AG ¶ 7(b) is that Applicant has such close bonds to his parents and sister in India 
that he could be placed in the position of having to choose between their interests and 
his obligation to protect classified information. Applicant has frequent contact with his 
parents, who are residents and citizens of India. He has less frequent contacts with his 
sister and in-laws. These relationships with family members create a heightened risk of 
 
7 
foreign pressure. His connections to his family also create a potential conflict of interest 
because the relationships are sufficiently close in nature and could raise a security 
concern over his desire to help his family, including his wife’s mother, father, and sister. 
 
Applicant came to the United States in 1991 and obtained a Doctorate degree 
from a U.S. university. Since 2009, he has been a U.S. citizen. He has a home in India 
worth $150,000, $190,000 worth of property purchased by his parents, but titled in his 
name, and a $5,000 bank account in India. The record is silent as to assets Applicant 
may have in the United States.  
 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the foreign influence 
guideline. His relationships with immediate family members in India create a concern 
about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology.” The facts of 
Applicant’s case raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 
and 7(e). The Government produced substantial evidence of foreign preference 
disqualifying conditions and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove mitigation.  
 
Four of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Considering the totality of the facts and circumstances, Applicant could be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of his relatives living in India and 
the interests of the United States. Applicant’s contact with his foreign family members 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion. None of the mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s relationship with his 
parents and sister. 
 
8 
 
If contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation, then 
AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. However, Applicant’s relationships with his parents, sister, and 
parents-in-law are not casual but familial and committed. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply to 
these individuals. 
 
Applicant’s communications with his parents are frequent, and he provides 
financial support to them. He has contact with his parents three times a week and sees 
them when he visits India. He has monthly communication with his sister and parents-
in-law. He visited his parents, sisters, and in-laws during six of the last eight years. 
Applicant has strong ties of affection for, or obligation to, his parents and his sister and 
to a lesser extent, to his in-laws.  
 
Applicant frequent familial communications reflect Applicant’s ties of affection 
with his family members living in India. “[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members.” ISCR 
Case No. 01-03120 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant provided no information to 
rebut the presumption. Applicant contacts with his foreign family members raise 
concerns because of the close relationships he has with these individuals. Additionally 
has relationships with these individuals are strong and enduring. AG ¶ 8(a) does not 
apply.  
  
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
Applicant shares living quarters with his wife, who is an Indian citizen who is a 
U.S. resident alien. His two children are U.S. citizens having been born in the United 
States. Applicant’s wife and children live in the United States. I do not find his 
relationship with his wife to be a security concern and find for him as to SOR 1.a. 
 
If there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or 
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest, then AG ¶ 8(b) might apply. Applicant has been a resident of the United States 
for 22 years and has been a U.S. citizen for four years. These facts, without more, are 
insufficient, to establish that Applicant has a deep and long-standing relationship and 
loyalties to the United States. He has extensive financial holdings in India and the 
record fails to show any assets in the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) and 8(f) do not apply.  
 
One of Applicant’s sisters-in-law is an excise official working in revenue 
collections for the state government in India and another is an engineer who is a town 
 
9 
planner for a municipality. He has telephone contact with his sisters-in-law two to four 
times a year. Applicant has numerous other relatives and in-laws who are citizens and 
residents of India with which he has communication two to four times4 a year. (Item 5) 
Contact with these individuals is casual and infrequent. AG ¶ 8(c) applies to these 
individuals. I find for Applicant as to SOR 1.e, 1.f, and 1.i. 
 
I do not find it a security concern that Applicant’s father worked as a municipal 
sanitation inspector until his retirement in 1998. I find for Applicant as to SOR 1.d. It is 
not a security concern that Applicant’s retired aunts had previously worked as an 
accountant and a section manager for a state government. I find for Applicant as to 
SOR 1.g and 1.h. Nor is it a security concern that between 2008 and 2010, he gave 
advice to a friend in on managing a school. I find for Applicant as to SOR 1.j. It is not a 
security concern he has visited India between 2005 and 2012. I find for Applicant as to 
SOR 1.n.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole-person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for four years. His wife is a U.S. resident alien. He has 
worked for a U.S. government contractor for four years. He has numerous close family 
members and in-laws in India. He has substantial financial assets in India. His financial 
                                                          
4 Applicant has telephone contact with one cousin 10 to 11 times a year. (Item 5) 
 
10 
interests in India and his relationships and contacts with family members raise serious 
unmitigated concerns about his vulnerability to coercion and his heightened risk for 
foreign influence.  
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled without a hearing, 
Applicant’s demeanor or appearance cannot be evaluated, nor can positive 
determinations as to his truthfulness, sincerity, honesty, or openness be made. 
Additionally, in requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on 
the written record. However, in so doing, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the foreign influence security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of his connections to the United States. By failing 
to provide such information, and in relying on only a scant explanation in his response 
to the SOR, the foreign preference security concerns remain. Clearance is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, B, Foreign Influence:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs1.b and 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.j:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
