 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 12-01294 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct) and F (Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 8, 
2011. On June 25, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines E and F. DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 22, 2013, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on September 10, 2013. On September 11, 2013, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
 2
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on September 23, 2013. He responded on September 24, 2013, 
and submitted additional documentary evidence, to which Department Counsel did not 
object. The case was assigned to me on October 29, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b 
under Guideline E. He admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.d under Guideline F. 
His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old senior consultant employed by a federal contractor 
since October 2010. He received a bachelor’s degree in computer science in April 2006. 
He has never married.  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in September 2011, he disclosed that he 
used marijuana twice in March 2007 and used ecstasy twice in August 2007. (Item 4 at 
31-32.) During a personal subject interview (PSI) in October 2011, he told the 
investigator that he used marijuana twice in March 2007 and used ecstasy only once in 
August 2007, explaining that the entry reflecting that he used ecstasy twice was a 
typographical error. He affirmatively declared that there were no instances of drug use 
after 2007. (PSI, attached to Item 5 at 4.) However, in response to DOHA 
interrogatories on March 15, 2013, he disclosed that he used marijuana and ecstasy 
again in April 2010. (Item 7 at 3.) The record does not reflect what motivated Applicant 
to disclose his 2010 drug involvement. 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied intentional omission of relevant 
information from his SCA or during his PSI. He stated that when he submitted his SCA 
and was questioned during the PSI, he “did not recall from memory the specific dates of 
the use of marijuana and ecstasy.” As corroboration of his explanation, he cited his 
successful completion of a polygraph examination administered by another government 
agency. He did not state whether the polygraph examiner asked him to explain why he 
did not fully disclose his drug use in his SCA and PSI. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he also disclosed that he was currently 
delinquent on the payments on a home that was his previous residence. He stated that 
he had applied for modification of the loan and was awaiting a decision from the lender. 
(Item 4 at 36-37.) During his PSI, he stated that he had not made any payments on the 
loan since December 2009 or January 2010, that he was still awaiting a decision on his 
application for a loan modification, and that he intended to resume making payments 
when the loan modification was completed. He attributed his financial problem to poor 
budgeting. He told the investigator that he had no other financial problems. (PSI at 1.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau report (CBR) dated September 16, 2011, reflected a 
real estate mortgage in foreclosure with a balance due of $211,000; a real estate 
 
 3
mortgage in foreclosure with a balance due of $339,000; and a real estate mortgage in 
foreclosure with a balance due of $325,550 (Item 8 at 5, 10.) The property with the 
$211,000 mortgage was Applicant’s residence in another state before he moved to his 
current residence to accept a job with his current employer. (Item 4 at 8) The other two 
mortgages were on investment properties. In his PSI, Applicant stated that these were 
his father’s investment properties and he cosigned on the loans but had no other 
involvement with the properties. (PSI at 5.) When the real estate market declined, they 
were unable to rent or sell the investment properties and unable to afford the payments. 
The lender foreclosed on the investment properties in September 2009. (Attachment to 
Answer.)  
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant denied that he engaged in a “strategic 
default” after realizing that the two properties were a bad investment. He presented 
documentary evidence of the foreclosure action, but he produced no evidence of the 
sale prices for the two properties and no evidence showing whether he owed any 
deficiency after the foreclosure sales. 
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories in April 2013 and in his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that the mortgage holder on his former residence had approved a short 
sale. In his response to the FORM, he stated that the short sale had not closed, but he 
provided documentation showing that the lender offered to accept a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure.  
 
Applicant’s CBR dated March 5, 2013, reflected a delinquent medical bill for 
$450. (Item 9 at 1.) In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation that he 
had a payment arrangement for the delinquent medical bill and had made three $56.25 
payments in March, April, and May 2013. He stated that he was awaiting confirmation of 
his final payment of $281.25, and he provided a confirmation number for the final 
payment. As of the date he submitted his response to the FORM, he had not yet 
received written confirmation of the final payment. 
 
Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 2013. The mortgage 
holder on his former residence, the lender for his investment properties, and the creditor 
holding any deficiency after foreclosure on the investment properties are listed among 
the creditors in his bankruptcy petition. The schedule of creditors with unsecured claims 
lists a default judgment obtained by the mortgage holder on the investment properties, 
and the amount claimed is listed as $780,968, which does not correspond to any of the 
CBR entries. (Response to FORM.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant attached an email from his employer stating 
that he had received “an initial ISSATS clearance” and requesting that he receive a 
briefing in preparation for access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). In his 
answer to the FORM, Applicant stated that he had completed a polygraph examination 
and had been granted a clearance and eligibility for access to SCI. Based on these 
representations, I ordered Department Counsel to submit a supplemental brief 
addressing reciprocal clearances. Department Counsel responded and submitted 
 
 4
documentary evidence that Applicant had not received a clearance, but instead had 
received an “interim declination” of his application for a clearance. (Supplemental Brief, 
Exhibits A and B).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 5
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA when he deliberately failed to 
disclose his use of marijuana and ecstasy in 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges that he 
deliberately falsified material facts during his PSI by telling the investigator that he had 
no instances of illegal drug use after his uses of marijuana and ecstasy in 2007 (SOR ¶ 
1.b).  
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
  The disqualifying condition relevant to Applicant’s SCA is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . .” The disqualifying condition relevant to Applicant’s PSI is AG ¶ 
16(b): deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to 
an . . . investigator, security official . . . or other official government representative.”  
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and business experience are 
relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security 
clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 
2010). 
 
 6
 Applicant’s explanation for his failures to disclose his most recent drug use in his 
SCA and his PSI is that he remembered three isolated incidents of drug 
experimentation in 2007 but did not remember drug use that occurred shortly before he 
began his current job and only a year before he submitted his SCA. I find this 
explanation implausible and unconvincing. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) are 
established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant’s disclosure of his drug involvement in 
2010 was not prompt; it occurred 19 months after he submitted his SCA. The record 
does not reflect whether his disclosure was prompted by the other government agency’s 
security investigation or was a good-faith effort to correct the information. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s falsifications were not “minor,” because 
they undermined the integrity of the security investigation. It is a felony to knowingly and 
willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or representation in 
any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the 
United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. His falsifications were recent and did not occur under 
unique circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) is not established. Applicant has not acknowledged his intentional 
falsifications, but instead has offered an implausible, unconvincing explanation for them. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is established. Applicant’s eventual disclosure of his more recent drug 
involvement has eliminated his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 
 7
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges a delinquent medical collection account (SOR ¶ 2.a), a 
delinquent mortgage account in foreclosure (SOR ¶ 2.b), and two delinquent mortgages 
that have been foreclosed (SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d). The concern under this guideline is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his CBR, establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and did not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 8
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant has offered no explanation for the 
delinquent medical debt. In his PSI, he attributed his financial problem with the 
mortgage on his former residence to poor budgeting. However, his financial problems 
related to his investment properties were due to a downturn in the housing market, 
which was a circumstance beyond his control. He acted responsibly regarding the 
medical debt through a payment agreement and multiple payments. He acted 
responsibly regarding his former residence, by seeking a loan modification, exploring a 
deed in lieu of foreclosure, and obtaining approval for a short sale. He has submitted 
virtually no information about his efforts to rent or sell his investment properties, efforts 
to avoid foreclosure, and efforts to resolve any deficiency before resorting to Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. Applicant has received counseling in connection with 
his Chapter 7 bankruptcy. If a discharge is granted, his current financial problems will be 
under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is partially established. Good faith within the meaning of this 
mitigating condition means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 
1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A bankruptcy discharge does not constitute a 
“good-faith effort.” “[A]n applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied 
on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of this 
[mitigating condition.’”] ISCR Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). A security 
clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an individual’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) Even if a delinquent debt is legally unenforceable under state law, 
the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances surrounding 
an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). I conclude that AG ¶ 
20(d) is established for the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a and the past-due loan 
payments on Applicant’s former residence alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b, but not for the debts 
related to the investment properties alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 9
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E and F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is well educated. He has worked for his current employer for about 
three years. The record contains no information about his performance evaluations and 
no indication of his personal and professional reputation among his peers and 
supervisors. My ability to judge Applicant’s sincerity and credibility is limited, because 
he requested a decision based on the record. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guidelines E and F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns based on personal conduct and financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c-2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
