KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that the fact that Applicant had three outstanding credit card
debts that remained unpaid meant that the debts have not been mitigated by the passage of time. 
This conclusion is sustainable on this record.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-01212
DATE: November 6, 2013
In Re:
---------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-01212
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 8, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On August 20, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge James F. Duffy denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.    
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s decision.
The Judge found: Applicant is 40 years old.  Applicant has four delinquent debts totaling
$39,981.  Applicant is a 20-year veteran of the Navy.  While in the Navy, Applicant deployed
frequently and his wife handled their finances and was responsible for paying their bills.  In about
2007 she obtained a second mortgage loan on their home in both their names without consulting him.
Some of the debts were credit cards that Applicant’s wife maintained.  He acknowledged that he was
responsible for the second mortgage loan and the credit card debts.  Applicant attributed his current
financial problems to his wife’s unemployment for about a year and a half between 2008 and 2010.
While she was unemployed their only source of income was his military pay which was insufficient
to pay their bills.  They then used the credit cards.  After his wife obtained employment in 2010, the
creditors wanted lump-sum payments that they could not afford and the creditors would not agree to
repayment plans.  All of Applicant’s conversations with his creditors were over the telephone.  He
has not sent or received correspondence regarding proposed repayment plans.  A personal financial
statement prepared in February 2013 did not list any payments toward Applicant’s debts.  Applicant
made a payment on his second mortgage in July 2013 that brought the account current.  Applicant
indicated that he has not sought financial counseling or debt consolidation services.    
The Judge concluded: Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or
unwilling to satisfy for an extended period.  His wife’s unemployment was a condition beyond their
control that contributed to their financial problems.  Applicant must also show, however, that he acted
responsibly under the circumstances.  The second mortgage debt is being resolved.  Nevertheless,
Applicant provided no proof of payments toward the three credit card debts alleged in the SOR.
Applicant had no documentation to confirm his proposed repayment offers with these creditors, and
maintains that his communications with the creditors has been by telephone.  He has neither obtained
financial counseling nor consulted with a debt consolidation company in an attempt to resolve the
debts.  He presented no evidence to show that he has been setting aside money so that he could make
lump-sum payment offers.  His testimony that the creditors refused to enter into repayment plans is
insufficient to establish that he acted responsibly in attempting to resolve the three credit card debts
during the last three years.  His debts are ongoing, significant, and cast doubt on his current
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment.  Those debts are not under control and are not being
resolved.  Applicant presented no realistic plan for resolving them.  Despite Applicant’s honorable
service in the Navy, and the fact that he is considered a valued employee at his current company, he
has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F.    
Applicant asserts that he has entered into a Chapter 13 bankruptcy reorganization plan to
mitigate his outstanding debts.  This representation of his recent efforts to address his debts does not
appear in the record below, and is thus a new matter.  The Board cannot consider new evidence.  See
Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
Applicant states that the financial information and credit report presented at his hearing were
outdated and “made to appear recent.”  He then states that the few items in his credit report that are
delinquent are older and date from the period of his wife’s unemployment.  The Board construes this
argument as an argument that the Judge erred by not mitigating the debts because of their age.
Applicant has not established error on the part of the Judge.
As the Judge noted in his decision, the three credit card debts at issue remain unpaid and are
thus ongoing.  This fact provided a reasonable basis for the Judge to conclude that the debts have not
been mitigated by the passage of time.  Unpaid, delinquent debts constitute a continuing course of
conduct, thereby undermining any claim that the debts are not recent within the meaning of the
Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-01309 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 29, 2010).   
The Board does not review a case de novo.   After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs.
Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s
ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan  
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett       
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board.a1
DATE: 11/06/2013
