KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline F
DIGEST: Judge considered Applicant’s false statements in light of the record as a whole.  The
Judge’s weighing of the evidence was consistent with the record.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 12-09989.a1
DATE: 11/18/2013
DATE: November 18, 2013
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-09989
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 14, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline B (Foreign
Influence), and Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 5, 2013, after
the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Noreen A.
Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
2
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings
under Guideline B are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant came to the U.S. from Iran in the late 1970s, becoming a naturalized citizen a few
years later.  His wife is a naturalized citizen.  He has held a security clearance for about ten years.
Applicant traveled to Iran in the early 2000s.  He stated that, at the time, he had a U.S. passport, plus
authorization to enter Iran for three months and did not need to use an Iranian passport.  His original
Iranian passport expired in the late 1980s.  In his answer to the SOR, he stated that his U.S. passport
was the only one he had.
In 2003, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA).  In it he denied that
he held a foreign passport and acknowledged his visit to Iran.  Several years later, he completed
another SCA, again denying that he held a passport from a foreign country.  In completing the SCA
that is the basis of the current adjudication, Applicant acknowledged having held an Iranian passport
that had expired in the late 1980s.  He stated nothing about an Iranian passport that he may have
used in conjunction with his trip to Iran.
At the hearing, however, Applicant testified that he had in fact possessed a valid Iranian
passport during the time of his trip to Iran but that he had not used it.  “Applicant offered another
explanation at the hearing, stating that he had the [original] passport with another passport attached
to it.”  Decision at 3.  He stated that the papers that allowed him to travel to Iran must have been
accompanied by an Iranian passport.  The Judge took official notice that Iran does not recognize dual
nationality.  If a person was born in Iran, regardless of subsequent naturalization by another country,
then one must present an Iranian passport to enter the country.
Regarding Guideline F, the Judge found that Applicant had purchased several pieces of real
estate during the 1990s and 2000s.  He was not able to maintain the properties and, due to the poor
economy, could not find renters.  He filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in early 2010 and was
later discharged.  Applicant was able to keep his principal place of residence, which was subject to
two mortgages.  Applicant became delinquent in making payments on the second mortgage, which
was in the amount of $92,000.  He tried to settle this debt, but he was not successful.  He has
contracted with a law firm to repair his credit.  Applicant earns $128,000 a year.  He has $110,000
in a 401(k) account and other investments worth about $200,000.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised concerns under all three
Guidelines alleged in the SOR.  She resolved Guideline B in Applicant’s favor.  However, she
reached the opposite conclusion regarding the other two Guidelines.  She concluded that Applicant’s
statements regarding his Iranian passport were deliberately false, given his multiple inconsistent
statements.  The Judge concluded that Applicant’s debt problems were recent, as were his efforts
3
to resolve his remaining mortgage delinquency, and that Applicant’s conduct raised doubts about
his worthiness for a clearance which were not satisfactorily resolved.
Discussion
In concluding that Applicant had falsified his SCAs, the Judge complied with the
requirements of the Directive in that she evaluated Applicant’s conduct in light of the record as a
whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07551 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2011).  Moreover, despite
Applicant’s argument on appeal, the Judge’s weighing of the evidence under Guideline F was
consistent with the record that was before her.  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to demonstrate
that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-08063 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 19, 2013).   
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.” 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                  
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
4
Member, Appeal Board
