KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant has supplied insufficient evidence to overcome the rebuttable presumption
that he has ties of affection or obligation the immediate family members of his spouse in
Afghanistan.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 12-07647.a1
DATE: 11/07/2013
DATE: November 7, 2013
In Re:
-----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-07647
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 9, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
1Applicant’s information about this property is somewhat conflicting.  The Judge quoted Applicant’s answer
to a Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaire, to the effect that he owned 10 acres of land in
Afghanistan, worth about $1,000,000.  The answer stated that Applicant was unsure about what to do with the land.  In
a clearance interview, Applicant stated that the land was worth $10,000 and that he maintained the land because it had
been in the family for a long time.  Finally, in Applicant Exhibit A, a statement Applicant submitted in response to the
FORM, he stated that his share of the property was worth $10,000.  The Judge concluded that he could not find with any
degree of certainty that the land was worth $1,000,000.  “In all probability it is worth much less.”  Decision at 4.
2
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On June 28, 2013, after considering the
record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Wilford H. Ross
granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s application
of the mitigating conditions was erroneous and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was
erroneous.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline E are not at issue in this appeal.
Consistent with the following, we reverse.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is an employee of a Defense contractor.  Born and raised in Afghanistan, he is
married to a permanent resident alien of the U.S.  He has five children, two of whom were born in
another middle-eastern country and are naturalized citizens of the U.S.  His other children are
natural-born citizens of the U.S.
In addition to his wife, who is a citizen of Afghanistan, Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen
and resident of that country.  He has a brother-in-law, who is a citizen of Afghanistan and a resident
of another middle-eastern country.  Applicant’s wife contacts her mother three to four times a year
by telephone.  Applicant owns property in Afghanistan.  Applicant states that his share is worth
about $10,000.  He acquired this property by inheritance from his father.1
The Judge noted Administrative Notice documents concerning Afghanistan.  He found that
the country has a poor human rights record and that militant, extremist groups such as Al Quaida
and the Taliban are present there, openly attacking the police, military forces, local citizens, and
U.S. persons and interests.
The Judge’s Analysis
2The Judge found that three Guideline B disqualifying conditions applied: Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(a):
“contact with a foreign family member . . . who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;” 7(b): “connections to a foreign
person . . . that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information
. . . and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;” and 7(e): “a
substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country . . . which could subject the individual to
heightened risk of foreign influence of exploitation[.]”  
3
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s connections within Afghanistan raised security
concerns under Guideline B.2  In resolving these issues in Applicant’s favor, the Judge stated that
Applicant’s ties to Afghanistan are minimal, that he has no immediate family there, that his
relationships with his mother-in-law and brother-in-law are of minor importance to him, and that
the facts concerning his property, though confusing, are not such as to be of current security
significance.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge found little or no “potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress.”  Decision at 10.  
Discussion
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913
F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After the Government presents
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those
concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, the Board will review
the Judge's decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to
articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of
judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision
that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline B are not
supported by the evidence.  We find this argument to be persuasive.
The Judge properly concluded that the Government had presented substantial evidence that
Applicant’s family connections with, and property interest in, Afghanistan raised Guideline B
concerns.  Having so concluded, it was the Judge’s task to evaluate whether Applicant had met his
burden of persuasion under the Egan standard.  Regarding the issue of Applicant’s property, we note
the Judge’s characterization of the evidence as confusing, which was reasonable, given the record
that was before him.  The Judge’s finding that Applicant’s property holding was probably worth
3See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-05609 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2013)(“The presence of terrorist activity in a foreign
country is a significant factor in Guideline B cases.”)  
4
significantly less than $1,000,000 was not sufficient to resolve this confusion, given the Judge’s
application of 7(e) to the effect that, whatever its value, the property holding was substantial and
created a heightened risk of exploitation.  See note 2, supra.  The Judge’s conclusory statement that
the property was not of security significance was not based upon an analysis of any evidence that
would effectively mitigate his conclusion that 7(e) applied.
Concerning Applicant’s Afghani relatives, in-laws are a class of persons who can present a
security risk.  “As a matter of common sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members
of the person’s spouse.”  ISCR Case No. 09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011) (internal citation
omitted).  As Department Counsel argues, Applicant has supplied insufficient evidence to rebut this
presumption.  On this record, when Applicant’s property interests and family connections are
evaluated alongside evidence that terrorist organizations operate in Afghanistan,3 it is not reasonable
to conclude that Applicant has met his burden of persuasion or that the Judge has resolved all doubt
in favor of the national security, regarding either the mitigating conditions or the whole-person
factors.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-13175 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2009).  
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.    
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                    
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; James E. Moody                      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
