1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-00677
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 19, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On April 15, 2013, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive
5220.6, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline F for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 9, 2013, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 4.)
On August 27, 2013, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered eight documentary exhibits. (Items 1-8.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on October 16, 2013. Applicant did
submit a response, and the documents have been identified and entered into evidence
2
as Items A, B, and C. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on October
30, 2013.
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the FORM, and the additional documents offered into evidence by
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 36 years old, and she is unmarried. She graduated high school and
has taken some community college classes. Applicant is employed as a painter by a
defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with her
employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists nine allegations (1.a. through 1.i.) regarding financial difficulties
under Adjudicative Guideline F. The allegations will be discussed below in the same
order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a charged off account in the
amount of $7,305. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and added that
this debt was “charged off.” (Item 4.) In Applicant’s responses to interrogatories, she
wrote that this debt is “charged off, being removed 4/2013.” (Item 6.)  I find that this debt
is still due and owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $219. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR and added that she was
“arranging payments within next 30 days.” (Item 4.) No evidence has been introduced to
show that any payments have been made. I find that this debt is still due and owing and
has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $97.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR and added that she was
“arranging payments within next 30 days.” (Item 4.) No evidence has been introduced to
show that any payments have been made. I find that this debt is still due and owing and
has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $6,913.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR. (Item 4.) Department
Counsel wrote in the FORM that this debt is the same as the debt listed in 1.a., above,
and I concur. I find that this debt is only owing as listed on 1.a., above.
3
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $1,192.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and added that this
debt was “charged off.” (Item 4.) In a Personal Subject Interview (PSI), Applicant
indicated that she has been making payments toward this debt and only owes $574.
(Item 6.) However, a full data credit report shows that this is a charged off account with
$1,192 still owing. ( Item 7.)  I find that this debt is still due and owing and has not been
resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $4,725.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, but wrote that she is
“disputing claim. Medical charge from a Dr. I have never been a patient of.” (Item 4.) In
Applicant’s responses to interrogatories, she also wrote that she has “been disputing
[this debt] Never was a patient.” However, in a PSI, Applicant indicated that she
believed that “this is a dentist bill which has been paid off.” (Item 6.) Because of the
conflicting representations from Applicant about this debt, and the lack of evidence to
establish that Applicant has disputed this debt to the creditor, I find that this debt is still
due and owing and has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $279.  Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR, and added that this debt
was “charged off.” (Item 4.) I  find that this debt is still due and owing and has not been
resolved or reduced in any manner. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $215.  Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR and wrote that she is “going
to dispute” this debt. (Item 4.) No evidence has been introduced to show Applicant has
disputed this debt. I  find that this debt is still due and owing and has not been resolved
or reduced in any manner. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a collection account in the amount
of $218. Applicant admitted this SOR allegation in her RSOR and added that she was
“arranging payments within next 30 days.” (Item 4.) No evidence has been introduced to
show that any payments have been made. I find that this debt is still due and owing and
has not been resolved or reduced in any manner. 
Applicant indicated in her PSI that her financial difficulties occurred because of
her “lack of full time employment,” and she “is now capable of meeting her financial
obligations as she will begin her full time position shortly.” (Item 6.) However, she has
been employed at her current position since September 2011, and no evidence has
been submitted to show that any of Applicant’s debts have been resolved, reduced, or
disputed. (Item 5.)
Applicant did submit documents showing that she has paid one debt of $276.35
that was not listed on the SOR (Item A) and that she is making payments on a car loan
that was also not listed on the SOR. (Item B.)
 
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s explanation of periods of unemployment as the reason for her financial
difficulties could potentially make this mitigation condition applicable.
Applicant indicated she is now capable of meeting her financial obligations “as
she will begin her full time position shortly.” However, she has been employed at her
current position since September 2011, and no evidence has been submitted to show
that any of Applicant’s debts have been resolved, reduced, or disputed. I do not find that
Applicant has acted responsibly, and therefore, this mitigating condition is not applicable
in this case. 
Additionally, I do not find that AG ¶  20(d) is applicable, since Applicant has not
“initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,”
Finally, I do not find that any other mitigating condition applies to this case. Therefore, I
find Guideline F against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the lack of evidence to
establish that Applicant has made any attempt to resolve the past-due debts listed on
the SOR, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-
person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns  under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.c.; 1.e.-1.i.: Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.: For  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
