 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------1 )  ISCR Case No. 12-02918 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct, but failed to mitigate the drug involvement and personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2002, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Personnel Security Questionnaire (EPSQ) version of a Security Clearance 
Application.2 On November 10, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security Clearance Application.3 On 
an unspecified date, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a set of 
                                                          
1
 A suffix was incorrectly added to Applicant’s name in most of the documentation submitted. Although 
Applicant repeatedly attempted to have it deleted, it remained. 
 
2
 GE 5 (EPSQ, dated January 7, 2002). 
 
3
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated November 10, 2011). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on April 5, 2013.4 On another 
unspecified date, the DOD issued him another set of interrogatories. He responded to 
those interrogatories on April 5, 2013.5 On another unspecified date, the DOD issued 
him a Subject Interview Verification. He responded to that request on April 5, 2013.6 On 
June 19, 2013, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to 
Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR 
alleged security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct), H (Drug Involvement), 
G (Alcohol Consumption), and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant indicated that he received the SOR on July 28, 2013, a date which 
appears to be in error. In a sworn statement, dated July 24, 2013, Applicant responded 
to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on August 27, 
2013. The case was assigned to me on August 30, 2013. A Notice of Hearing was 
issued on September 11, 2013, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on 
September 25, 2013.7  
 
During the hearing, six Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 6) were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but offered no exhibits. The 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on October 10, 2013. The record closed on 
October 10, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under criminal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.), one of the three factual allegations under drug 
                                                          
4
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 5, 2013). 
 
5
 GE 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 5, 2013). 
 
6
 GE 4 (Subject Interview Verification, dated April 5, 2013). 
 
7
  The Notice of Hearing was issued 14 days before the scheduled date for the hearing, but Applicant and   
Department Counsel previously had telephone discussions regarding the time and location of the hearing. 
Accordingly, when specifically questioned regarding any objection to the period of actual notice, Applicant waived the 
15-day notice specified in the Directive (§ E3.1.8.). See Transcript (Tr.) at 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
involvement (¶ 2.b.), the factual allegation under alcohol consumption (¶ 3.a.), and the 
factual allegation under personal conduct (¶ 4.a.). He denied one allegation under drug 
involvement (¶ 2.a.), and failed to answer another (¶ 2.c.). He subsequently admitted 
the allegation he had failed to address. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein 
as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, 
and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a telecommunications technician 2 with his current employer since February 
2008. He was previously employed as a technician, bar back, clerk, and telemarketer.8 
He was unemployed from April 2001 until February 2002.9 A May 2001 high school 
graduate, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in February 2002, and served honorably in 
an enlisted capacity until February 2006, when he was released upon the completion of 
his required active service.10  
 
During his military service, Applicant was awarded the Army Commendation 
Medal, the Army Achievement Medal (two awards), the Army Good Conduct Medal, the 
National Defense Service Medal, the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the Army 
Service Ribbon, the Overseas Service Ribbon, the Iraq Campaign Medal, and the 
Parachutist Badge. He served in Operation Iraqi Freedom from November 30, 2004 until 
November 30, 2005.11 Applicant was granted a secret security clearance in 2002.12 He 
has never been married.13 
 
Alcohol Consumption, Drug Involvement, and Criminal Conduct  
 
One evening after work, in June or July 2011,14 while watching a live band 
perform over a two-hour period, Applicant consumed three bourbon and cokes at a 
hotel in Bahrain. He was alone.15 He did not consider himself to be in any way even 
partially impaired.16 He departed and was driving in a rental car to an unspecified 
destination when another driver failed to stop at a red light and struck Applicant’s 
                                                          
8
 GE 1, supra note 3, at 9-12; GE 5, supra note 2, at 2. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 3, at 13. 
 
10
 GE 6 (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated February 28, 2006). 
 
11
 GE 6, supra note 10. 
 
12
 GE 1, supra note 3, at 26-27.  
 
13
 GE 1, supra note 3, at 16.  
 
14
 Although Applicant stated the incident occurred in June 2011 in both his e-QIP and in his statement to an 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), he admitted the SOR allegation that it occurred in 
July 2011. See GE 1, supra note 3, at 22; see GE 4, supra note 6, at 1; see Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 1. 
 
15
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 1; Tr. at 21-22, 42. 
 
16
 Tr. at 42. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
vehicle.17 Under Bahraini law, “any sign of having consumed alcohol [while driving] may 
be taken as prima facie evidence of driving under the influence, which can lead to 
imprisonment and/or fines of up to 1,000 Bahraini dinars (about $2,700).”18 Likewise, 
“public drunkenness and disorderly behavior can result in arrest and one drink may be 
sufficient grounds for a drunken driving arrest.”19 Applicant was detained by the 
authorities, fined $1,500, lost his driving privileges for three months, and was required to 
pay for the damage to both the other vehicle and his rental car.20 He reported the 
incident to his supervisor. Applicant was subsequently issued a letter of reprimand, 
restricted to the military facility for about three months, directed not to consume alcohol, 
and required to attend three meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA).21 Applicant 
complied with all requirements and attended AA.22  
 
Other than attending the AA meetings, Applicant has never received any medical 
treatment or counseling related to the consumption of alcohol.23 He has never been 
evaluated or diagnosed for alcohol abuse or dependence.24  
 
Applicant still consumes alcohol, generally limited to two to three, or possibly 
four, glasses of bourbon, whiskey, or beer, on weekends at his residence, at a friend’s 
home, or elsewhere. In those circumstances, Applicant no longer drinks and drives, but 
either takes a taxi or is driven by friends. “I don’t get behind the wheel anymore. I don’t 
take a chance.”25 He denies drinking to intoxication,26 and there is no evidence to refute 
his contention.  
 
According to Applicant, early 2011 was a difficult period for him. His grandmother 
was ill, his parents were apparently separated, and they were going through rough 
times financially. Applicant was the shoulder they all leaned on, and he was supporting 
his mother financially.27 Between April and May 2011, Applicant smoked marijuana 
                                                          
17
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 1. 
 
18
 U.S. Department of State, Bahrain - Country Specific Information, dated June 20, 2013, at 7. 
 
19
 U.S. Department of State, Bahrain - Country Specific Information, supra note 17, at 5. 
 
20
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 1; Tr. at 43-44. Although he was fined by the authorities, there is no evidence to 
refute Applicant’s contention that he was never officially “charged” with driving under the influence. 
 
21
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 1. 
 
22
 Tr. at 48-49. 
 
23
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 2; GE 2, supra note 3, at 3. 
 
24
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 2; Tr. at 37. 
 
25
 Tr. at 35-36, 54-55. 
  
26
 GE 2, supra note 4, at 2. 
 
27
 Tr. at 25. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
cigarettes approximately six times.28 Although Applicant had previously been granted a 
security clearance, and had attended briefings regarding his responsibilities and 
substance abuse, he ignored his responsibilities and used marijuana.29 He attributed his 
use of marijuana to curiosity and unspecified peer pressure.30 Marijuana made him feel 
happy, hungry, and sleepy.31 A friend supplied the marijuana to him at no cost.32 On 
May 15, 2011, Applicant was driving in his car at the beach with the windows down, 
listening to music, and smoking a marijuana cigarette. A police officer approached him 
and had him pull over because of the music and the odor of marijuana.33 A search of the 
vehicle revealed a marijuana joint and a “grinder” used for preparing marijuana 
cigarettes.34 Applicant was cited for one count of possession of marijuana less than 20 
grams. He appeared in court, was fined, and entered into a pre-trial diversion program. 
He successfully completed the program in December 2011, and the charge was 
dismissed.35  
 
Applicant has never received any medical treatment or counseling related to the 
substance abuse.36 He has never been evaluated or diagnosed for substance abuse or 
dependence.37 Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred in May 2011, and he intends 
to refrain from such use in the future.38 He no longer associates with other substance 
abusers.39 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”40 As Commander in Chief, 
                                                          
28
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 3; Tr. at 30-32. 
 
29
 Tr. at 32-33. 
 
30
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 3. 
 
31
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 3. 
 
32
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 3. 
 
33
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 3. 
 
34
 Tr. at 27-29. 
 
35
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 3; Tr. at 28. Applicant offered no information regarding the nature or components of 
the program, and it is unclear if he was required to attend any drug education, therapy, or treatment components. 
 
36
 GE 3, supra note 5, at 3; Tr. at 37. 
 
37
 Tr. at 37. 
 
38
 Tr. at 53. 
 
39
 GE 4, supra note 6, at 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 1. 
 
40
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”41   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”42 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.43  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
41
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
42
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
43
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”44 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”45 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:  
      
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
22(a), alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent is potentially disqualifying. In Bahrain, Applicant was presumed to be 
driving under the influence because he had consumed alcohol before the incident. He 
was detained by the authorities, fined, lost his driving privileges for three months, and 
was required to pay for the damage to both vehicles. AG ¶ 22(a) has been established. 
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under AG ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where so much time has passed, or the behavior was so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
AG ¶ 23(a) applies. Although Applicant has apparently been consuming alcohol 
for a number of years, the incident in Bahrain was his only alcohol-related brush with 
                                                          
44
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
45
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
8 
                                      
 
the law. As noted above, one drink may be sufficient grounds for a “drunken driving 
arrest” in Bahrain. While there is no evidence that Applicant was, in fact, impaired or 
intoxicated, under the law as it existed, Applicant was considered to be driving under 
the influence. Applicant attended the AA sessions required by his employer. Applicant 
has never received any medical treatment or counseling related to the consumption of 
alcohol, and he has never been evaluated or diagnosed for alcohol abuse or 
dependence. Applicant still consumes alcohol, responsibly, and now avoids drinking 
and driving. When he drinks alcohol, he either takes a taxi or is driven by friends. He 
denies drinking to intoxication. Applicant’s two-and-one-quarter years of responsible 
alcohol consumption is viewed favorably. Applicant has furnished substantial evidence 
of positive actions taken regarding his consumption of alcohol that enables me to 
conclude that his isolated alcohol-related behavior has been put behind him and will not 
recur. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), any drug abuse (see above definition), is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, 
under AG ¶ 25(c), illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, may 
raise security concerns. Also, AG ¶ 25(g) may apply where there is any illegal drug use 
after being granted a security clearance.  
 
Between April and May 2011, Applicant smoked marijuana cigarettes 
approximately six times although he had previously been granted a security clearance 
in 2002, and had attended briefings regarding his responsibilities related to substance 
 
9 
                                      
 
abuse. Nevertheless, he ignored his responsibilities and used marijuana because it 
made him feel happy, hungry, and sleepy. His substance abuse was motivated by 
curiosity, unspecified peer pressure, and concerns regarding his grandmother’s health 
and his parents’ financial problems. On one occasion in May 2011, a search of his 
vehicle by police revealed a marijuana joint and a “grinder.” Applicant was cited for one 
count of possession of marijuana less than 20 grams. He appeared in court, was fined, 
and entered into a pre-trial diversion program. Because he successfully completed the 
program in December 2011, the charge was dismissed. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) 
have been established.  
  The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying conditions 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) minimally apply. Applicant’s marijuana abuse occurred in 
mid-2011, and ceased when he was cited by the police, only two-and-one-quarter years 
ago. Applicant has never received any medical treatment or counseling related to the 
substance abuse, and he has never been evaluated or diagnosed for substance abuse 
or dependence. While Applicant intends to refrain from such use in the future, he has 
never submitted a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any future violation. Applicant’s abstinence is viewed favorably, and he should be 
encouraged to continue it. He no longer associates with other substance abusers. 
However, because Applicant has not furnished a reasonable basis for ignoring his 
fiduciary responsibilities of holding a security clearance, but instead resorted to 
marijuana use, such use may recur, and the uncertainty continues to cast doubt on 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 
30:       
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses is potentially disqualifying. 
As noted above, Applicant was cited for driving under the influence in Bahrain. He was 
detained by the authorities, fined $1,500, lost his driving privileges for three months, and 
was required to pay for the damage to both the other vehicle and his rental car. He was 
also cited for one count of possession of marijuana less than 20 grams after he was 
detected smoking marijuana, and a search of the vehicle revealed a marijuana joint and 
drug paraphernalia. He appeared in court, was fined, and entered into a pre-trial 
diversion program.  AG ¶¶ 31(a) has been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Similarly, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply where there is evidence of successful rehabilitation: 
including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
As to both the alcohol-related incident, and the use and possession of marijuana 
and the possession of drug paraphernalia, AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. Applicant’s 
incident in Bahrain occurred in a country where just one drink may be sufficient grounds 
for a drunken driving arrest. He did not consider himself to be in any way even partially 
impaired. Nevertheless, he was fined and required to pay for property damage. The 
possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia resulted in his being fined and entered 
into a pre-trial diversion program. He successfully completed the program in December 
2011, and the charge was dismissed. Applicant has abstained from marijuana use since 
2011, and avoided any subsequent participation in any criminal activity. While he 
continues to consume alcohol, he does so responsibly, and avoids drinking and driving. 
Applicant’s former criminal behavior is unlikely to recur and no longer casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
11 
                                      
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(c), security concerns may be raised when there is: 
 
Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
AG ¶ 16(e) may apply where there is: personal conduct or concealment of 
information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person's personal, professional, or community standing. . . .  
There is no evidence of a failure by Applicant to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. The SOR allegation focuses solely on Applicant’s alcohol-
related incident, his possession of drug paraphernalia, and his use of marijuana while 
possessing a security clearance. AG ¶ 16(c) has not been established because the 
credible adverse information in at least one of the adjudicative issue areas is sufficient 
for an adverse determination under another single guideline. AG ¶ 16(e) has been 
established solely because of his personal conduct as it pertains to the marijuana 
issues. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Under AG ¶ 17(d), 
personal conduct concerns may also be mitigated where the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.  
 
As to Applicant’s alcohol-related incident, AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply. As to 
Applicant’s use of marijuana and his possession of drug paraphernalia while possessing 
a security clearance, AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply, and AG ¶ 17(d) minimally applies. One 
drink in Bahrain may be sufficient grounds for a “drunken driving arrest.” While there is 
no evidence that Applicant was, in fact, impaired or intoxicated, under the law as it 
existed, Applicant was considered to be driving under the influence. Applicant attended 
the AA sessions required by his employer. Applicant has never received any medical 
 
12 
                                      
 
treatment or counseling related to the consumption of alcohol, and he has never been 
evaluated or diagnosed for alcohol abuse or dependence. Applicant still consumes 
alcohol responsibly, and now avoids drinking and driving. When he drinks alcohol, he 
either takes a taxi or is driven by friends. He denies drinking to intoxication. Applicant 
has furnished substantial evidence of positive actions taken regarding his consumption 
of alcohol that enables me to conclude that his isolated alcohol-related behavior has 
been put behind him and will not recur. 
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana and his possession of drug paraphernalia while 
possessing a security clearance pose a more significant hurdle for Applicant to 
overcome. He knew he was violating both federal law and his fiduciary responsibilities 
when he resorted to using marijuana, but it apparently did not matter for he did so on 
several occasions until the police cited him. He no longer intends to use marijuana in 
the future, and he does not associate with other substance abusers. However, Applicant 
has never received any medical treatment, education, or counseling related to the 
substance abuse, and he remains significantly unaware as to his true motivation for 
turning to marijuana use. Without that knowledge, it is difficult to conclude that such 
inappropriate and illegal behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G, H, J, and E, in my analysis below.      
 
There is some mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept. Applicant 
has never been evaluated or diagnosed for alcohol abuse or dependence. He did attend 
three AA sessions required by his employer. Applicant still consumes alcohol 
responsibly, and now avoids drinking and driving. After consuming alcohol, he either 
takes a taxi or is driven by friends. He denies drinking to intoxication. Applicant’s two-
and-one-quarter years of responsible alcohol consumption is viewed favorably. 
Applicant has furnished substantial evidence of positive actions taken regarding his 
 
13 
                                      
 
consumption of alcohol that enables me to conclude that his isolated alcohol-related 
behavior has been put behind him and will not recur. Applicant’s abuse of marijuana 
abuse ceased when he was cited by the police two-and-one-quarter years ago. 
Applicant’s abstinence is viewed favorably, and he should be encouraged to continue it. 
He no longer associates with other substance abusers. 
 
There is also more substantial evidence supporting the security concerns. 
Applicant used marijuana and possessed drug paraphernalia while possessing a 
security clearance. He knew he was violating both federal law and his fiduciary 
responsibilities when he resorted to using marijuana, but it apparently did not matter for 
he did so on several occasions until the police cited him. He never received any medical 
treatment, education, or counseling related to his substance abuse. Applicant was also 
cited for driving under the influence in Bahrain.  
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.46 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with some questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security 
concerns, but failed to mitigate the drug involvement and personal conduct security 
concerns. (See AG && 2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated and overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
                                                          
46
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
