 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case: 12-07447 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns raised under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On March 13, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 13, 2013, the Department of Defense 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the 
guideline for Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On or about March 20, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected 
to waive his right to have a hearing on the allegations contained in the SOR. On July 31, 
 
2 
 
 
2013, Applicant changed that decision and requested a hearing, having been informed 
that a hearing could be held at a location near his residence. On September 9, 2013, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On 
September 16, 2013, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for October 4, 
2013. The case was reset to October 30, 2013, as a consequence of a government 
shutdown. It proceeded as rescheduled. Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
Exhibits (AX) 1 through 5 into evidence without objection. The record closed at the end 
of the hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript on November 14, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted the six factual allegations contained in the 
SOR. His admissions are incorporated into the findings herein.  
 
 Applicant is 51 years old and divorced since 1998. He enlisted in the U.S. Army 
in October 1983 and was on active duty until honorably discharged in December 1986. 
He was an E-4 at the time of his discharge, serving in the military police. He held a 
security clearance while in the Army. (Tr. 8.) In June 1992 he completed an associate’s 
degree in law enforcement. (Tr. 40.) 
  
  After leaving the Army in 1986, Applicant began a position with a city’s law 
enforcement department, where he remained for 12 years. He worked as a policeman, 
detective, and crime scene investigator. He is certified as a hostage crisis negotiator. 
He then worked in a temporary law enforcement position for 18 months before starting a 
position with a local city in January 2002. Eight years later, in January 2010, he suffered 
a heart attack and was on medical leave for six weeks. (Tr. 20.) He remained with that  
law enforcement department until August 2010, at which time he resigned having 
negotiated a resolution to a lawsuit he filed to collect unpaid medical benefits. (Tr. 20-
21; AX 2.)  
 
 Applicant was subsequently unemployed and underemployed from August 2010 
to November 2011, when he took a position with a school district. He remained with the 
school district until May 2012, earning $1,400 monthly. (Tr. 41.) He was again 
unemployed until March 2013, when he took a part-time position with a paint store, 
earning $450 every two weeks. (Tr. 37.) Throughout those past two years, he earned 
money as a part-time actor, and borrowed money from his sister. (Tr. 29.)  In July 2013 
Applicant started a part-time position with a local police department, which then became 
full-time in September 2013. (AX 3.) His net monthly income is $2,400. His expenses 
are less than that, leaving some monies remaining. (Tr. 34-36.)  
 
 Applicant submitted copies of various law enforcement courses and certifications 
he completed during his career as a policeman. He received numerous awards and 
accolades while in the Army, and during subsequnet work in law enforcement as a 
policeman and investigator. (AX 2, 5.)  
 
 
3 
 
 
 On May 3, 2012, a government investigator interviewed Applicant about his 
finances and delinquent debts as part of a security clearance investigation. Applicant 
explained that during his period of unemployment from August 2010 until November 
2011, he began to experience financial problems. In an effort to manage debts and 
living expenses, he withdrew about $47,000 from his pension plan, not realizing the 
resulting tax consequences. (Tr. 26; 44-45.) He attributed his over-all financial problems 
to legal problems resulting after his heart attack, and subsequent periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. (Tr. 22.)   
 
 Applicant explained that in the early 2000’s he experienced some financial 
difficulties when he attempted to obtain and market a patent for a device he invented. 
He subsequently resolved all debts related to that business venture. (Tr. 50-51; GX 2.) 
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated March 2012, February 2013, and 
June 2013, the SOR alleged six delinquent debts totaling $26,415, which accumulated 
between 2010 and 2012. The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
1. (¶ 1.a) The $18,000 debt is owed to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for 
taxes related to monies removed from Applicant’s pension. Applicant stated the current 
balance is $25,000. In September 2013 he began making automatic monthly payments 
of $300 from his bank account. He has made two payments as of the date of the 
hearing. He would have started payments sooner but did not have enough money until 
he obtained his full-time position in September 2013. (Tr. 24-26; AX 4: Tab A-1.) He will 
be able to renegotiate the amount in the future. (Tr. 46.)  The debt is slowly being 
resolved.  
 
2. (¶ 1.b) The $1,621 judgment owed to a condominium association was paid on 
June 14, 2012. (AX 4: Tab B-1.)    
 
3. (¶ 1.c) The $287 debt owed to a utility company was paid on September 20, 
2013. (AX 4: Tab C-1.) 
 
4. (¶ 1.d) The $361 debt owed to a cable company was paid on October 9, 2013. 
(AX 4: Tab D-1.)    
 
5. (¶ 1.e) The $1,383 debt owed to a credit card company was settled for $750 
and paid on October 7, 2013. (AX 4: Tab E-1.) 
 
6. (¶ 1.f) This $4,763 debt became delinquent in July 2011 when Applicant was 
unable to pay his car loan, resulting in a voluntary repossession. He has not had 
sufficient money to resolve this to date.  
 
 Applicant has learned an important financial lesson over the past couple years. 
He lives frugally and does not contemplate “falling into this situation again.” (Tr. 37.) He 
intends to pay the outstanding tax liability and automobile repossession debt. He will be 
 
4 
 
 
able to pay them quickly should he be granted a security clearance and begin work as a 
forensic investigator in the Middle East. (Tr. 34, 46-47.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
The security concerns pertaining to Financial Considerations are set out in AG ¶ 
8, and reads in pertinent part: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information.  
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Between 2010 and 2012, Appellant began accumulating delinquent debts, 
including a large tax penalty, which he was unable to pay. The evidence raised the 
above disqualifications. 
After the Government raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns 
under this guideline. AG ¶ 20 includes four conditions that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising under this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) has some application. Applicant accumulated debts as a 
consequence of an employment issue with a previous employer, resulting in legal 
action, and subsequent periods of unemployment and underemployment. The 
circumstances underlying Applicant’s financial situation are unlikely to recur, or 
continue, given his current full-time employment and efforts at resolving debts. Those 
circumstances do not cast doubt on his current trustworthiness. AG ¶ 20(b) also has 
partial application, as the conditions underlying the financial issues related to legal 
matters beyond his control. There is some evidence that he attempted to responsibly 
manage his debts after they began accumulating in 2010, albeit imprudently, with the 
withdrawal of pension monies.  
Applicant did not undergo financial counseling, but he demonstrated that he has 
the ability to manage his financial obligations without incurring additional delinquent 
debts. He documented the payment of four debts and establishment of a repayment 
plan for his largest debt, a tax liability. There are clear indications that his financial 
issues are coming under control through his good-faith efforts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
are therefore applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 51 years old. He is a former 
soldier, who honorably served four years and received commendations and awards. He 
began a successful law enforcement career during his military service, which continues 
into the present. He submitted evidence verifying his accomplishments.  
 
In most instances an outstanding tax liability of $25,000 and an unresolved 
automobile repossession debt of $4,700, would result in the denial of a security 
 
7 
 
 
clearance. However, after listening to his testimony and observing his behavior, I find 
Applicant to be credible, and have no doubt that he will continue to comply with his tax 
repayment plan and resolve a $4,700 automobile repossession debt as money 
becomes available. For the past couple years he has managed his limited finances and 
not accumulated additional debts. He will be able to renegotiate the tax debt in the 
future, after establishing a repayment track record. He expressed remorse over his 
financial history and acknowledged his ignorance of tax law as it related to his tax 
liability. The likelihood of a recurrence of similar security concerns is minimal, given his 
appreciation of the potential employment consequences, and extensive history in law 
enforcement.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
  
 
 
                                               
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
