 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-02802 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference concern. He has a long track record of 
preferring the United States over the interest of his parent’s birth country, Serbia. He 
also mitigated the personal conduct security concern, because his failure to register for 
selective service was unintentional. Notwithstanding Applicant’s history of fidelity to the 
United States, concerns persist about the potential that foreign influence could be 
exerted on him through his only child, who lives in Serbia. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging the security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline 
C (Foreign Preference), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). On June 10, 2013, 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On July 15, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case and, after coordinating with 
the parties, scheduled the hearing for July 30, 2013.1 At hearing, Government Exhibits 
(Gx.) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A and B were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel also submitted a proposed summary of facts 
regarding Serbia and U.S.-Serbian relations taken from official, unclassified U.S. 
Government documents. The proposed summary of facts was marked Gx. 4 for 
identification, but was not admitted. The source documents were marked as hearing 
exhibits (Hx.) I – IV and, without objection, were considered for administrative notice. 
Applicant testified in support of his request for a security clearance. The hearing 
transcript (Tr.) was received on August 7, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his mid-50s and is a dual citizen of the United States and Serbia. 
He was born in the United States, but at a young age moved overseas with his family. 
At around age 10, Applicant and his family moved back to Serbia (then Yugoslavia). 
Applicant was educated, started a family, and worked the majority of his adult life in 
Serbia. He received certain benefits as a citizen of Serbia, to include free education. He 
exercised his Serbian citizenship by applying for and receiving a Serbian passport and 
voting in at least one Serbian election. He did not register with the U.S. selective service 
because he has been living overseas until relatively recently. However, he has not 
served in a foreign military service or paramilitary group. (Tr. at 28, 33-36, 42, 50-51, 
59; Gx. 1, Gx. 3; Answer)  
 
 Applicant worked for the U.S. Government and U.S.-backed international 
organizations from approximately 1995 to about 2010. He underwent a 
counterintelligence background investigation by another government agency before 
being granted access to NATO bases. (Tr. at 28-29, 36-38; Gx. 3) His efforts 
contributed greatly to the U.S.-supported NATO mission in Serbia and surrounding 
countries. He was entrusted with millions of dollars in U.S. aid and received high praise 
for his work on behalf of the United States. (Ax. B; Tr. at 54-58) A U.S. military officer 
writes that: 
 
[Applicant] has displayed a positive attitude throughout extensive periods 
of physical stress . . . He has dealt with hostility from various groups in 
situations involving hostage taking and frustration with dealings with 
foreign organizations in a consistent, professionally detached manner 
displaying poise, and diplomacy.  
 
(Ax. B at 11) 
 
The section head for a U.S.-backed international organization writes about 
Applicant’s dedication and professionalism during an especially dangerous situation as 
follows: 
                                                          
1 Applicant requested an expedited hearing and waived the Directive’s requirement of 15 days 
prior notice of a hearing. (Tr. at 8-9) 
 
3 
 
 
[Applicant], as an interpreter on an observer team, was given a number of 
difficult and dangerous tasks due to his high level of competence and his 
ability to think clearly under extremely stressful circumstances. His ability 
to immediately analyze a situation and give clear accurate reports to his 
team leader and team members was instrumental in this Sector receiving 
no injuries or serious incidents during some particularly tense periods. 
[Applicant] personally put his life on the line standing between the 
observer team and an (sic) deranged refugee who was threatening them 
with an automatic weapon. [Applicant] talked calmly to the individual who 
was subsequently disarmed by the local militia thus preventing a possible 
tragedy for all concerned. He deliberately placed himself in danger to save 
the lives of others.  
 
(Ax. B at 10) 
 
 Applicant recently returned to the United States with his wife. Applicant’s wife is a 
permanent U.S. resident and works full time in the United States. Applicant has applied 
for a contract position as a translator for the U.S. Government in Kosovo, which 
requires, as a prerequisite, a security clearance. In order to facilitate his application for a 
security clearance, Applicant surrendered his Serbian passport to his facility security 
officer. Although he does not have any property or assets in Serbia and plans on 
remaining in the United States, he is unwilling to renounce his Serbian citizenship. (Tr. 
at 29-30, 38-39, 43-44, 47-48, 52-53, 58-59) 
 
Applicant has some close friends in the United States, but most of his close 
family members, except for his wife, live in Serbia. Applicant’s son, brother, and in-laws 
are citizen-residents of Serbia. Applicant’s son is currently going to school in Serbia and 
plays on a Serbian national sports team. Applicant’s brother works in the private sector 
in Serbia, while his in-laws are retired. Applicant has frequent contact with his family in 
Serbia. None of Applicant’s foreign family members work for the Serbian government or 
other foreign entity. (Tr. at 39-43, 52; Gx. 1 – 2; Answer) 
 
The Republic of Serbia2 
 
 In 1999, the United States broke off relations with the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia (FRY), a predecessor state that included Serbia, when it launched an ethnic 
cleansing and deportation campaign. A 78-day U.S.-backed NATO bombing campaign 
led to the establishment of U.N. missions and NATO-led forces in Kosovo, which 
permitted displaced persons and refugees to return to their homes.  
 
In October 2000, a coalition of democratic parties defeated Serbian strongman 
Slobodan Milosevic in presidential elections, overturning a regime that had plunged the 
country into bloody conflicts in the region, economic decline, and international isolation. 
Since then, Serbia has embarked on a transition toward Western democratic and free 
market standards.  
                                                          
2 The facts regarding Serbia and its relations with the United States were taken from Hx. I – IV.  
 
4 
 
 
In 2001, the United States reopened its embassy in Belgrade (Serbian capital). In 
2006, the state union of Serbia and Montenegro, which had succeeded the FRY 
dissolved and the Republic of Serbia was formed. It is a constitutional, multiparty, 
parliamentary democracy that recently held national and local elections, which 
international observers said respected fundamental rights and freedoms. 
Notwithstanding the significant progress Serbia has made in the past ten years, the U.S. 
State Department reports significant human rights problems in the following areas: 
discrimination and societal violence against minorities; corruption in healthcare, 
education, and multiple branches of government; and harassment of journalists. 
 
In 2006, Serbia joined NATO’S Partnership for Peace program and signed a 
Status of Forces Agreement with the United States, which has permitted greater 
bilateral military cooperation between the two countries. Currently, U.S.-Serbian 
relations are positive and continue to improve. However, Serbia’s refusal to accept 
Kosovo’s independence remains a major source of tension. Notably, following Kosovo’s 
declaration of independence in 2008, Serbian demonstrators sacked a portion of the 
U.S. Embassy in Belgrade. The U.S. State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens 
traveling to Serbia of strong anti-U.S. sentiment on the anniversary dates of certain 
events and national holidays, including the beginning of the 1999 NATO bombing 
campaign and Kosovo’s declaration of independence. 
 
In March 2012, after having judged that Belgrade had made sufficient progress in 
reaching and implementing agreements with Kosovo, the European Union (EU) 
accepted Serbia as a candidate for membership. EU-led talks have led to agreements 
regarding the normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo. The United States 
looks favorably upon the progress in Serbia-Kosovo negotiations, and Serbia’s EU 
integration. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
 
5 
 
 
the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility. 
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” 
AG ¶ 2(b). Furthermore, “[s]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on 
the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.4 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s wife (¶ 1.a), son (¶ 1.b), in-laws (¶ 1.c), and 
brother (¶ 1.d) raise the foreign influence concern. The foreign influence concern is 
addressed at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
                                                          
3 See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises 
regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
maintenance of a security clearance.”) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), 
cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
4 See generally Kaplan v. Conyers, et al., 2013 U.S. App. LEXIS 17278 at ** 23-24, 40-51 (Fed. 
Cir. Aug. 20, 2013) (federal courts will generally defer to the predictive judgments made by executive 
branch officials responsible for determining the eligibility of an applicant for a security clearance). 
 
6 
 
 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
An individual’s familial ties to a foreign country can raise the foreign influence 
concern. However, there is no per se rule against applicants who have such ties. 
Instead, in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
coercion, an administrative judge must consider the foreign government involved; the 
intelligence gathering history of that government; the country’s human rights record; and 
the presence of terrorist activity in that country.5 
 
 Applicant’s family members in Serbia, coupled with the still lingering tensions 
between the United States and Serbia over Kosovo, raise the foreign influence 
concern.6 This record evidence also establishes the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant’s foreign connections to Serbia do not end the foreign influence 
analysis. AG ¶ 8 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the security 
concern and the following were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 11-06619 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 2013).  
 
6 In light of his wife’s permanent U.S. residency status, her (now passive) dual citizenship no 
longer serves as a basis of foreign influence. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.a is decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
7 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Although Applicant’s foreign family members do not 
work for the Serbian government, they reside in a country whose government and a 
strong segment of the population strongly oppose and resent past and current U.S. 
policy in the region. Moreover, Applicant is seeking to work as a U.S. Government 
(USG) contractor in Kosovo – the key source of tension between the United States and 
Serbia. Under such circumstances, the possibility that a conflict of interest might arise 
between Applicant’s security responsibilities and the interest of his foreign family 
members is not a remote, hypothetical concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) applies in part. Applicant has proven his loyalty to this country under 
extreme situations and demonstrated his trustworthiness through his past work on 
behalf of the United States in dangerous situations. Applicant’s past conduct suggests 
that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. However, 
Applicant’s connections to the United States are tenuous, at best. He has only resided 
in the United States for a short period of time. Other than his wife, who is also a dual 
citizen of Serbia and the United States, he has no longstanding relationships in the 
United States. Furthermore, his sense of loyalty and obligation to his foreign family 
members, not the least of which is his only child, cannot be disputed. His son is in a 
particularly vulnerable position to even subtle foreign pressure, as his athletic future is in 
the hands of unknown Serbian government officials. Although Applicant may have been 
willing in the past to place the interest of the United States ahead of his own and would 
likely repel any attempts to influence him through his in-laws or his brother, it is a wholly 
different situation when a parent is asked to place the government’s interest above that 
of their children – in this case, an only child who is pursuing a life-long dream to play for 
his country’s national team on the international stage.7 The record evidence does not 
indicate that Applicant has faced this potential situation in the past and, thus, his 
response to such potential foreign influence is unknown.  
 
 Application of one or more mitigating conditions does not compel a favorable 
determination. An administrative judge is required to carefully weigh the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, as well as whole-person factors, before making a suitability 
determination. Consequently, resolution of the security concerns raised by Applicant’s 
foreign family members and the other matters addressed herein are set forth below 
under the whole-person section. 
 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009) (individuals may act in unpredictable 
ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved one). 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s acquisition of Serbian citizenship, work in 
Serbia between 2000 and 2010, and exercise of Serbian citizenship indicates a 
preference for Serbia over the United States. Under AG ¶ 9, the concern involving 
foreign preference arises “[w]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States.” Such an individual “may be 
prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the 
United States.” 
 
 Applicant’s exercise of the rights and privileges of Serbian citizenship, to include 
possessing and using a Serbian passport, raises this concern and also establishes the 
disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of 
foreign citizenship.”8 
 
 Applicant’s exercise of foreign citizenship was strictly due to his residency in 
Serbia for the majority of his life. However, he has repeatedly shown through his words 
and actions that his preferences lie with the United States. He credibly testified that he 
and his wife plan to remain in the United States, and surrendered his Serbian passport 
to his FSO. He established the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 11(e), “the passport has 
been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated.”  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s failure to register with selective service raises a 
security concern under the personal conduct guideline. AG ¶ 15 addresses the personal 
conduct concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant’s failure to register implicates the above concern and establishes the 
disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(c).9 
 
                                                          
8 Applicant was a minor when he acquired foreign citizenship and his work in Serbia from 2000 to 
2010 was in direct support of the United States. Neither of these matters raises a security concern under 
Guideline C. Therefore, SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.b is decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
9 Credible adverse information . . . which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not safeguard 
protected information. 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant’s failure to register with selective service was not a conscious, 
intentional act of disloyalty or preference for a foreign country. Instead, it merely reflects 
the fact that Applicant was living overseas for the majority of his life and unintentionally 
failed to register.10 Applicant has repeatedly demonstrated, through his prior service to 
the United States and current application to work as a translator in Kosovo, that his 
preference is to serve the United States Government. This one-time mistake has never 
been repeated and no longer casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. In short, Applicant established the mitigating condition at AG 17(c).11 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).12 Applicant has lived overseas in Serbia for the majority 
of his life. He recently moved to the United States and has applied to work as a federal 
contractor in the Balkans, a region he is familiar with and previously served as a USG 
contractor. He has demonstrated his reliability and trustworthiness to the United States 
in the past, including managing millions of dollars in U.S. aid without issue. These 
favorable whole-person factors, in conjunction with the mitigating conditions noted 
above, mitigate the foreign preference and personal conduct concerns.  
 
 On the other hand, the foreign influence concern is a far more complicated issue. 
In light of the geopolitical situation and hostility to the United States by a segment of the 
Serbian population, the possibility exists that Applicant may be placed in a position of 
having to choose between his security obligations and the interest of his only child living 
in Serbia. Notwithstanding Applicant’s long history of fidelity to the United States, 
questions and doubts linger as to his potential reaction if a foreign government or entity 
were to attempt to leverage his son’s vulnerable position. Such questions and doubts 
must be resolved in favor of national security. AG ¶ 2(b). Accordingly, although the 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 04-06216 (Mar. 30, 2006) (AJ Leonard) (security concerns mitigated 
because failure to register was unintentional,); ISCR Case No. 04-04139 (AJ Matchinski) (clearance 
granted because failure to register was unintentional); ISCR Case No. 01-03111 (July 31, 2001) (AJ Erck) 
(applicant genuinely did not believe he was required to register). Contrast with ISCR Case No. 03-02799 
(Jul. 26, 2004) (AJ Young) (intentional failure to register); ISCR Case No. 02-27728 (Apr. 26, 2004) (AJ 
Ablard) (not being told of requirement to register insufficient to mitigate concerns). 
 
11 The offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
12 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) 
the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; 
(5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
10 
 
 
record evidence presents an exceedingly close case, I resolve the foreign influence 
security concerns against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:          Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.d:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:         For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):            FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:               For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
