 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-01679 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 26, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. 
This action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 
1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD could not find under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s access to 
sensitive information. Applicant answered the SOR on July 3, 2013, and requested a 
hearing on July 14, 2013. The case was assigned to me on August 26, 2013. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Video 
Teleconference Hearing on September 12, 2013, setting the hearing for October 1, 
2013. However, the hearing was postponed due to a Federal Government shutdown. 
Another Notice of Video Teleconference Hearing was issued on November 4, 2013, and 
the hearing was held as scheduled on November 7, 2013. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and offered no exhibits. The record was left open until 
November 21, 2013, to provide Applicant an opportunity to submit additional matters. 
Applicant timely submitted exhibits (AE) A through J that were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on November 19, 
2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
that contractor since September 2010. She was initially a full-time employee, but moved 
to another state and now works for that company at home as a part-time employee. She 
graduated from high school in 2001, was awarded a bachelor’s degree in 2006, and 
recently earned a master’s degree. She married in 2007. Her husband served on active 
duty in the Navy for 20 years and retired in pay grade E-6 in May 2013. They have a 
son who is five years old. He has four children from a prior marriage, ages 11, 13, 14, 
and 20, who reside with them. This is the first time that she has sought to occupy a 
position of trust.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had 23 delinquent debts totaling $67,893 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a–1.w). The largest alleged debt (SOR ¶ 1.w) asserted that Applicant had 
combined student loans in the approximate amount of $52,902. In her answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted 15 allegations as identified below and denied the remaining 
allegations. Her admissions are incorporated as findings as fact.2 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to various reasons. First, she was 
unemployed from April 2008 to June 2009 and from December 2009 to August 2010. 
The first period of unemployment occurred because she had a high-risk pregnancy and 
her son was born 14 weeks early. Her son’s medical condition required her to stay 
home to care for him for almost a year after his birth. The later period of unemployment 
occurred when she and her husband moved to his new duty station. Second, she and 
her husband have custody of his four children from a prior marriage. The mother of 
those children is supposed to pay $825 a month in child support, but she usually pays 
about $300. Third, her father-in-law passed away last year, and her husband paid for 
his funeral expenses. Her husband has also been providing financial assistance to his 
mother. Finally, she noted that she was not provided financial support from her family 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6-7, 28-31; Applicant answer to the SOR; GE 1, 2.  
2 Applicant’s answer to the SOR.  
 
3 
 
 
while attending college and incurred periods of unemployment as a student. In her 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview, Applicant acknowledged that she 
was not knowledgeable about financial matters and was not taught how to manage 
money by her parents.3 
 
The status of the alleged debts is reflected in the following table:  
 
SOR/DEBT AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
SOR ¶ 1.a – 
collection account 
$3,115 Admitted. This debt arose from an 
apartment lease that Applicant 
cosigned for a friend. The friend 
defaulted on the lease. The debt was 
placed for collection in August 2012. 
Applicant stated her friend had made 
arrangements to pay this debt and was 
making payments until she lost her job. 
Applicant stated the friend intends to 
resolve this debt when she receives 
her next income tax refund. This debt 
remains unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 57-59;
GE 3; 
AE H. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – 
collection account 
$70 Admitted. This debt arose from a book 
of the month club membership. In her 
answer, Applicant indicated that she 
would pay this account on July 5, 2013. 
At the hearing she indicated that she 
had not yet paid it. In her post-hearing 
submission, she provided a letter from 
the collection company dated 
November 13, 2013, reflecting this debt 
was satisfied in full.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 59; 
AE E. 
SOR ¶ 1.c – 
collection account  
$177 Denied. This was a medical debt that 
was placed for collection in October 
2011. Applicant stated that she is not 
responsible for this debt because 
TRICARE should have covered it. 
Since this debt was incurred after her 
marriage, her explanation is plausible.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 59-60;
GE 3.  
SOR ¶ 1.d – 
collection account 
$1,007 Admitted. This was a credit card 
account that Applicant used in college. 
It had a date of first deficiency/date of 
last activity of May 2008. This account 
remains unresolved.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 60-61; 
GE 2, 3, 4. 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 28-39, 70-71; Applicant’s answer to the SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 
 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – 
collection account 
$689 Admitted. This was a medical debt that 
was placed for collection in February 
2008. It was incurred when Applicant 
was not covered by medical insurance.  
This debt remains unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 48, 
61; GE 2, 4. 
SOR ¶ 1.f – 
collection account 
 
$102 Denied. This was a bank account debt 
that was placed for collection in 
October 2010. Applicant claimed she 
paid this debt and later opened another 
account at that bank. Insufficient 
evidence was presented to show this 
debt was resolved.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 61-62;
GE 2, 3, 4. 
SOR ¶ 1.g –  
unpaid debt 
$196 Denied. This was a medical account 
that was placed for collection in August 
2007. In her answer, Applicant stated 
that she was unable to determine if it is 
a valid debt because she had no 
knowledge of it. This debt remains 
unresolved.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 62; 
GE 3, 4. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – 
unpaid debt  
$576 Denied. This was a medical account 
that was placed for collection in June 
2007. In her answer, Applicant stated 
that she was unable to determine if it is 
a valid debt because she had no 
knowledge of it. This debt remains 
unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 62; 
GE 2, 3, 4. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – 
judgment 
$100 Denied. This debt arose from an 
apartment lease. Applicant indicated 
that she intended to dispute this debt. 
Insufficient evidence was presented to 
show this debt was resolved.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 39-42, 
62, 66;  
GE 2, 4;  
AE J. 
SOR ¶ 1.j – 
judgment 
 
$2,202 Denied. This judgment arose from a 
deficiency Applicant owed after a 
vehicle repossessed in 2005 was sold 
at an auction. This debt remains 
unresolved.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 40-42, 
62-63; 
GE 2, 4. 
SOR ¶ 1.k – 
judgment 
 
$1,183 Admitted. This is a duplicate of the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.j, above. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 40-42, 
62-63; 
GE 2, 4. 
 
5 
 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l – 
collection account 
$708 Denied. This was a credit card account 
that Applicant had in college. In her 
answer, Applicant claimed she paid 
this debt. Insufficient evidence was 
presented to show this account is 
resolved.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 63; 
GE 2, 4. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m – 
collection account 
 
$1,113 Admitted. This debt arose from an 
overdrawn checking account. In her 
post-hearing submission, she provided 
a letter from the collection company 
dated November 12, 2013, reflecting 
this debt was satisfied in full.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 50-63;
GE 2, 4;  
AE G. 
SOR ¶ 1.n – 
collection account 
 
$516 Admitted. This debt arose from a gym 
membership. Although she had a 
month-to-month membership, she was 
charged a termination fee when she 
canceled the account. This debt 
remains unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 48-50, 
64-65; 
GE 2, 4. 
SOR ¶ 1.o – 
collection account 
$455 Denied. In her answer, Applicant stated 
that she was unable to determine if this 
was a valid debt because she had no 
knowledge of it. This debt remains 
unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 65; 
GE 2, 4. 
SOR ¶ 1.p –  
collection account 
 
$347 Admitted. This debt arose from an 
apartment lease. Applicant indicated 
this debt was a duplicate of the 
judgment in SOR ¶ 1.i. GE 4 indicated 
that this debt was placed for collection 
after that judgment. Insufficient 
evidence was presented to show this 
account is resolved.  
Answer; 
Tr. at 39-42, 
65-66; 
GE 2, 4;  
AE J. 
SOR ¶ 1.q –  
collection account 
 
$299 Admitted. This was a medical debt that 
was incurred when Applicant was not 
covered by medical insurance. This 
debt remains unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 66; 
GE 2, 4. 
SOR ¶ 1.r –  
collection account 
 
$205 Admitted. This debt arose from an 
overdrawn checking account. It was 
placed for collection in January 2010. 
In her post-hearing submission, she 
provided a letter from the collection 
company dated November 12, 2013, 
reflecting this debt was satisfied in full. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 50-51, 
67; GE 2, 4; 
AE F. 
 
6 
 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.s –  
collection account 
 
$84 Admitted. This debt arose from a check 
returned for insufficient funds. It was 
placed for collection in May 2006. This 
debt remains unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 47, 
51, 67;  
GE 4. 
SOR ¶ 1.t –  
collection account 
 
$50 Admitted. This debt arose from a check 
returned for insufficient funds. It was 
placed for collection in June 2006. This 
debt remains unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 47, 
51, 67-68;  
GE 4. 
SOR ¶ 1.u –  
collection account 
 
$45 Admitted. This debt arose from a check 
returned for insufficient funds. It was 
placed for collection in March 2006. 
This debt remains unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 47, 
51, 68; 
GE 4. 
SOR ¶ 1.v –  
unpaid debt 
 
$1,752 Admitted. This was a medical debt that 
was incurred when Applicant was not 
covered by medical insurance. This 
debt remains unresolved. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 42-43, 
68-69; 
GE 1, 2. 
SOR ¶ 1.w –  
combined student 
loans 
 
$52,902 Admitted. Applicant testified that her 
student loans were deferred. Her credit 
report confirmed they were deferred. 
Since she just completed her master’s 
degree, the student loans will remain in 
deferment for another six months. At 
that time, monthly payments will 
become due. She anticipates the 
monthly payments will be about $650. 
Answer; 
Tr. at 55-57, 
69; GE 3, 4. 
 
 
Applicant has received financial counseling from a friend and prepared a 
spreadsheet for making payments on her debts. However, she did not present that 
spreadsheet as an exhibit during this proceeding. In her OPM interview, she stated that 
she planned to pay one debt at a time due to her limited assets. At the hearing, she 
indicated that she could not remember the last time she made a payment toward any of 
the alleged debts. Applicant took a vacation to the Bahamas in 2010.4  
 
In May 2013, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) that 
reflected her and her husband’s total net monthly income was $7,142, that their total 
monthly expenses were $5,340, and that their monthly debt payments were $990, which 
left them a net monthly remainder of $812. Since his retirement from the military, 
Applicant and her husband moved to another state in July 2013. He obtained a civilian 
job in which his employer has matched his active duty military pay. His monthly income 
(retired pay and civilian salary) totals about $5,000. Applicant now works part-time from 
her home and her monthly salary is about $1,800. While their monthly income has 
deceased by about $342 since she submitted the PFS, their monthly expenses have 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 27-28, 31-35, 70-71; GE 1, 2.   
 
7 
 
 
also decreased by about $1,100 due to a reduction in rent and the elimination of day 
care expenses.5 
 
Applicant’s annual performance appraisal for 2012 reflected that she fully met 
expectations. A coworker stated that Applicant displays a professional and caring 
attitude and brings a wealth of knowledge and experience to the organization. A vice 
president of her company praised her contributions.6 
 
Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) In a memorandum dated November 19, 2004, the Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) indicated that trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply the procedures contained in the Directive before making a 
determination. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
                                                          
5 Tr. at 30-35, 51-55; GE 2.  
6 AE B-D. 
 
8 
 
 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts over an extended period 
that she was unable to satisfy. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
9 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
A trustworthiness adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a procedure 
designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.7 An 
applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he or she has resolved every 
debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve the financial 
problems and take sufficient action to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an 
applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.w alleged that Applicant had $52,902 in student loans. It did not allege 
that those loans were delinquent. The evidence established that these loans have been 
deferred and will remain in a deferment status for the next six months. I find in favor of 
Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.w. 
 
Applicant encountered a number of financial setbacks. These included a high-risk 
pregnancy and premature birth of her son that resulted in her unemployment from April 
2008 to June 2009. She and her husband also assumed custody of his four children 
from a prior marriage. Additionally, her husband’s father passed away. They paid for her 
father-in-law’s funeral expenses and have since provided financial support to her 
mother-in-law. These were financial conditions beyond her control. Many of her debts 
predate her marriage in 2007. She provided evidence establishing that she paid three of 
the alleged debts, totaling $1,388, and that she received financial counseling. She 
provided little documentary evidence about the status of the other debts or about the 
actions she has taken to resolve them. In her personal financial statement of May 2013, 
she disclosed a net monthly remainder of $812, but failed to present any evidence of 
systematic payments towards the debts. At the hearing, she could not remember the 
last time she made a payment toward the debts. In 2010, she took a vacation to the 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 
8 See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
10 
 
 
Bahamas while she was encountering these financial problems. Based on the record 
evidence, I also cannot find that Applicant established a meaningful track record of 
payments towards her delinquent debts, that she has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances in handling her debts, or that her financial problems are under control 
and are being resolved. Her delinquent debts continue to cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) does not apply. AG ¶¶ 
20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) partially apply. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.k. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is highly thought of by her coworkers and is a valued employee. 
Nonetheless, she has failed to present evidence to show that she is acting responsibly 
in resolving her financial problems. Her delinquent debts continue to raise security 
concerns for the reasons set forth above.   
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the alleged security concerns.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
11 
 
 
   PARAGRAPH 1, GUIDELINE F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
    
   Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.c:   For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.j:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.n – 1.q:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.r:    For Applicant  
   Subparagraphs 1.s – 1.v:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.w:    For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
