 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01194 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Corey Williams, Esq. 
 
 
November 15, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 22 delinquent debts totaling $81,956, identified on the Statement 
of Reasons (SOR). Applicant failed to produce sufficient documentation that 12 of her 
debts, totaling $64,269, have been addressed or are otherwise satisfied. She has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on 
August 4, 2011. On June 12, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the Guideline for 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on August 2, 2013, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on September 6, 2013. A notice of 
hearing was issued to Applicant on September 12, 2013, scheduling the hearing for 
October 16, 2013. On October 15, 2013, Applicant requested a continuance, which was 
granted. An amended notice dated October 15, 2013, set the hearing for October 18, 
2013. The hearing was convened, as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own 
behalf and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I and AA through OO, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
October 28, 2013. The record was left open until November 1, 2013, for receipt of 
additional documentation and Applicant’s closing statement. On November 1, 2013, 
Applicant presented AE J through AE N, and Applicant’s closing statement. Department 
Counsel had no objection to AE J through AE N and they were admitted into evidence. 
The record was then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 45 years old. She is a naturalized citizen of the United States. She is 
married and has five children, ages 17, 16, 15, 15, and 14.1 She testified she has 
worked for her employer for 17 years.2 She has held a security clearance since 1992, 
without incident. (Tr. 44-46, 109.) 
 
Applicant produced a letter of recommendation acknowledging her contributions 
Applicant is thought to be a “highly dependable employee with an outstanding work 
ethic.” She rated as “highly effective” in her performance review in 2012 and 
“Exemplary” in 2011. (AE AA; AE BB; AE CC; AE DD; AE EE.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 22 delinquent debts totaling $81,956. Applicant’s debts appear in credit 
reports entered into evidence. Applicant admitted the debts as alleged in subparagraphs 
1.c through 1.n, 1.p, 1.q, 1.t, and 1.u. She denied 1.a, 1.b, 1.o, 1.r, 1.s, and 1.v. 
(Answer; GE 1; GE 3; GE 4; GE 6; AE NN.) 
 
Applicant attributed her debts to medical problems and subsequent 
unemployment as a result of her medical problems. She testified she was on medical 
leave from her job beginning the end of 2008 due to foot surgeries. She stated she was 
                                                          
1
 Applicant’s two 15-year-old children are twins. 
 
2
 Applicant testified, and her e-QIP reflected, that she has been employed by her employer since June 
1997, despite her contradictory testimony that she was laid off and unemployed for nine months in 2008 
to 2009.  
 
3 
 
subsequently laid off from her position for approximately nine months. She indicated 
she began working again for her current employer in 2009, although no breaks in 
service or unemployment were listed on her e-QIP. She acknowledged receiving 
severance and unemployment pay during her period of unemployment. Her husband 
was fully employed during that time as well. In her Answers to Interrogatories, Applicant 
also indicated that legal expenses and the expense of having teenagers prohibited her 
from repaying the debts. (Answer; GE 5; 76-77, 87-89, 96, 107-108.) 
 
As a result of her financial delinquencies, in 2009 Applicant retained a debt 
consolidation attorney to advise her on repayment options. She testified that he helped 
her resolve a few bills, “then it was like for a while, I was busy on the job so I didn’t push 
him until I see the importance of the Clearance. Then I pushed, but I hired him since 
2009.” She stopped paying the debt consolidation attorney in 2011, and did not do 
anything about resolving debts until she rehired him sometime in 2012. A letter drafted 
by the debt consolidation attorney, dated October 14, 2013, indicated, “we anticipate the 
settlement process may take up to four years.” Applicant has not attended any financial 
counseling. (AE A; AE FF; AE GG; Tr. 94-96, 103, 106-108.) 
 
The status of her debts, as listed on the SOR, is as follows: 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection company for a telecommunications bill in the 
approximate amount of $1,248, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. In her Answer, 
she indicated she was disputing this debt. She testified that she no longer disputes this 
debt and believes the account to be settled, but offered no documentation to support 
her claim. (AE I; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent medical account in the approximate amount 
of $181, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. Applicant testified that she has been 
unable to contact this creditor. The credit report, dated October 17, 2013, reflects this 
debt as unpaid. The debt consolidation attorney is not representing Applicant on this 
debt. (GE 6; AE I; Tr. 55.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent medical account in the approximate 
amount of $25, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.c. Applicant admitted this debt. She 
submitted a copy of a check she wrote to this creditor. Applicant’s most recent credit 
report reflects that this account was satisfied. (GE 6; AE HH; Tr. 55.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent medical account in the approximate amount 
of $112, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d. Applicant admitted this debt. Applicant 
testified that this debt is satisfied, and produced a copy of the check she allegedly 
submitted to the creditor. However, the copy does not show the check was cashed or 
cancelled. Applicant’s most recent credit report reflects this debt as outstanding. The 
debt consolidation attorney is not representing Applicant on this debt. Applicant failed to 
establish that this debt is resolved.  (GE 6; AE I; AE HH; Tr. 55-56.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$447, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e. Applicant presented a copy of her bank 
 
4 
 
statement documentation that shows this debt was satisfied in full on July 15, 2013. 
This debt is resolved. (GE 6; AE I; AE II; Tr. 57-58.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a department store in the approximate amount of 
$6,789, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.f. This creditor agreed to settle the account 
for $1,697. Applicant presented documentation that shows she made the final payment 
on her settlement agreement on October 31, 2013. (GE 6; AE D; AE N; Tr. 58-60.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$9,992, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.g. Applicant testified that through her debt 
consolidation attorney she submitted an offer to settle this debt for $3,000. She plans to 
resolve it once she has negotiated a settlement amount. This debt remains unresolved. 
(GE 6; Tr. 60-62.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$459, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.h. Applicant documented that this creditor 
agreed to accept $282.18 to settle this debt. She produced a copy of her bank 
statement that showed she made a payment of $282.18 to this creditor on July 5, 2013. 
This debt is satisfied. (GE 6; AE JJ; AE KK; Tr. 62-63.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$2,321, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.i. Applicant testified that this debt had been 
settled and presented a settlement agreement with the creditor in which the creditor 
agreed to accept $830 to satisfy this debt. However, she failed to present 
documentation to show that she paid the agreed upon settlement. This debt remains 
unresolved. (GE 6; AE B; AE LL; Tr. 63.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$1,838, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.j. A debt bearing the same account number, 
with a slightly lower balance is listed in allegation 1.k. Applicant testified that 1.j and 1.k 
are the same debt. She testified that she contacted this creditor and was told, “It’s not 
eligible [to] settle. Not eligible for us to pay because it’s past four years.” She failed to 
present documentation to substantiate her claim. This debt remains outstanding. (GE 6; 
Tr. 64-65.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$15,520, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.l. Applicant testified that this debt was paid. 
In her post-hearing submission, she provided a letter dated July 31, 2013, from this 
creditor, agreeing to a reduced settlement of $3,881. However, she failed to present 
proof of payment. This debt is unresolved. (GE 6; AE M; AE OO; Tr. 65.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a department store on an account that was charged off in 
the approximate amount of $2,786, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.m. Applicant 
testified that the debt had been forgiven and that she was issued a Form 1099-C, 
Cancelation of Debt. She failed to present documentation to support her claim. This 
debt is unresolved. (GE 6; Tr. 66-67, 99.) 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection company for a bank in the approximate 
amount of $15,264, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.n. The Creditor filed a Complaint 
against Applicant in her state Superior Court. She produced a Demand for Production 
and Inspection of Documents; A Request for Admissions; Special Interrogatories; and 
Proof of Filing in the Superior Court into the record. She testified that the Complaint was 
dismissed, but there is no documentation in evidence to support this disposition. 
Applicant’s October 17, 2013 credit report reflects that this account is in collections . 
Applicant failed to show this debt is resolved. (GE 6; AE E; AE G; AE H; Tr. 67.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection company in the approximate amount of 
$357, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.o. Applicant testified that she has not been 
able to contact this creditor to verify this debt. However, Applicant’s October 17, 2013 
credit report reflects, “account paid for less than full balance.” This debt is resolved. (GE 
6; Tr. 68.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection company in the approximate amount of 
$7,724, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.p. Applicant testified that she offered the 
creditor $5,614 to settle the debt, but the creditor had not responded to her settlement 
offer. This debt is unresolved. (GE 6; AE I; Tr. 68-69.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection company in the approximate amount of 
$3,004, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.q. Applicant presented a letter from the 
creditor confirming the creditor’s agreement to accept $750 to settle the debt. 
Additionally Applicant’s October 17, 2013 credit report reflects this account was “paid for 
less than full.” This debt is resolved. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 6; AE C; Tr. 69.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection company in the approximate amount of $319, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.r. Applicant testified that she has not been able to 
contact this creditor. She presented no documentation of her efforts to contact this 
creditor or otherwise dispute the debt. This debt remains outstanding. (GE 3; Tr. 69-70.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection company in the approximate amount of $126, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.s. Applicant testified that this debt is a duplicate of 
the debt identified in 1.d, which is she claimed was resolved. Applicant’s credit report 
dated August 17, 2011 and March 8, 2013, identify allegations 1.d and 1.s with the 
same account number. The debt consolidation attorney is not representing Applicant on 
this debt. This debt is a duplicate of 1.d; however, as noted above, Applicant failed to 
submit proof that the debt alleged in 1.d is resolved. (AE I; GE 3; GE 4; GE 6; Tr. 70.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a collection company in the approximate amount of 
$2,501, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.t. She testified that the debt in the 
approximate amount of $2,352, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.u, is a duplicate 
entry. Applicant’s October 17, 2013 credit report indicates this was a single delinquent 
account and that Applicant “paid for less than full balance.” This debt is resolved. (GE 6; 
AE C; AE MM; Tr. 70.) 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection company in the approximate amount of 
$6,954, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.v. Applicant testified that she offered to 
settle the debt, but the creditor has not responded to her settlement offer. This debt is 
unresolved. (GE 3; Tr. 71.) 
 
Applicant testified that she and her husband will withdraw funds from their 
retirement savings plans to resolve the debts. Applicant’s husband has a retirement 
savings plan valued at approximately $416,000. Applicant’s husband took a $46,000 
loan from his retirement savings account on October 30, 2013, to help pay their debts. 
Applicant’s retirement savings plan totals approximately $326,000, although she has 
taken two loans against her retirement savings totaling approximately $33,000. (AE OO; 
AE J; Tr. 47-49.) 
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement indicates that she has approximately 
$800 left after meeting her monthly expenses. Her monthly expenses include 
approximately $2,000 per month for tutoring for her children. Her assets total over 
$1,000,000. She owns her home and a second investment property that she rents to her 
brother. (AE OO; AE L; Tr. 50-52, 74-76, 104-106.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
 
7 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. The relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems since at least 2008. Applicant has satisfied 
debts totaling approximately $5,910,3 identified in allegations 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.o, 1.q, 
and 1.t. Additionally, the debts listed in 1.j and 1.k (unpaid); 1.d and 1.s (unpaid); and 1.t 
and 1.u (paid) represent duplicate entries and should only be counted as one debt for 
each pair. However, that leaves Applicant indebted to 12 creditors in an approximate 
total delinquent amount of $64,269. Applicant has the means to resolve these debts, 
                                                          
3
 The figure was obtained by adding up the actual settlement amounts if known, instead the full amount of 
the debt past due as alleged. Where the settlement amount was unknown, the full amount of the debt was 
calculated.  
 
8 
 
given her significant income and salary, but has not made timely or significant progress 
in resolving these accounts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant indicated that her financial problems were the result of medical 
problems in 2008 and subsequent unemployment. Therefore, she argues they are 
unlikely to recur. However, she failed to show she acted responsibly once she resumed 
employment. Her remaining debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under Appeal 
Board precedent.4  She failed to show she has taken actions to resolve the debts in 
SOR subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 1.p, 1.r, and 1.v. While she 
asserted that some of these debts are resolved, the Appeal Board has previously noted 
that it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about 
the satisfaction of individual debts.5 As a result, her financial decisions cast doubt on 
her judgment. Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of AG ¶ 20(a).   
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant may have encountered financial difficulties 
due to her medical treatment and subsequent unemployment, but she did not produce 
                                                          
4
 ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008), citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 
16, 2002). 
5
 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008.) 
 
9 
 
evidence to show she acted responsibly with respect to her debt after she resumed full 
employment. She testified that initially she hired a debt consolidation firm, but allowed 
her agreement with that firm lapse until she realized that her finances could affect her 
security clearance. She did not act responsibly with respect to her debts during that 
time. Further, she testified that she pays $2,000 per month for a tutor to teach her 
children. Additionally, she has significant financial assets. The Appeal Board has held 
“Even if an applicant gets into financial difficulties because of circumstances beyond the 
applicant’s control, the Judge must consider whether the Applicant dealt with his or her 
financial difficulties in a reasonable manner.”6 Applicant has not dealt with her finances 
in a timely and reasonable manner, given her income, spending choices, and assets. 
 
 Applicant has received the assistance of a debt management company, which is 
helping her resolve some of her debts. However, there is little evidence that the debts 
alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 1.p, 1.r, and 1.v, 
are being resolved or are under control. These debts comprise the majority of 
Applicant’s non-duplicate SOR-alleged delinquent debt. Applicant failed to show any 
payments were made to these creditors. AG ¶ 20(c) does not provide mitigation 
concerning this majority of her delinquent debt. 
 
 Applicant has not provided evidence to establish she made a good-faith effort to 
pay or resolve her delinquent debts. As the Appeal Board opined: 
A Judge is not required to accept an applicant's statements at face value 
merely because they are not rebutted by Department Counsel. It is 
reasonable for a Judge to consider the record as a whole and use 
common sense in evaluating the absence of corroborating evidence. 
Failure to present documentation in support of an applicant's claims about 
financial matters is a factor to be considered by a Judge in evaluating 
such claims. . . Furthermore, some of Applicant's claims concerning his 
debt resolution efforts were, on their face, based on commitments made 
by Applicant to perform various acts in the future. Promises to take actions 
in the future, however sincere, are not a substitute for a documented track 
record of remedial actions. The possibility that Applicant might achieve 
resolution of his outstanding debts at some future date does not constitute 
evidence of financial reform or rehabilitation in the present. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). 
 While Applicant testified that she was prepared to resolve her remaining 
delinquent accounts with funds that her husband recently withdrew from his retirement 
savings plan, this reflects only a promise to take action on her remaining debts in the 
future. She has not provided sufficient evidence that she is addressing her remaining 
delinquent accounts, given her long history of ignoring these obligations. She has 
initiated settlement offers with some of her creditors (e.g., allegations 1.a, 1.g, 1.i, 1.l, 
1.p, and 1.v), offering to pay significantly less than is due, but she failed to document 
that she took actions to pay off these settlements or make payments on the accounts. 
                                                          
6
 ISCR Case. No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). 
 
10 
 
Applicant testified that she has been unable to contact other creditors (e.g., allegations 
1.b and 1.r) and that some creditors are unwilling to accept payments (e.g., allegations 
1.k and 1.m). However, she failed to document her efforts to resolve those accounts. 
The Appeal Board has indicated that good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts 
in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.”7 Applicant failed to show she acted with prudence and in adherence to her 
duty to resolve her financial obligations. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable to her remaining 
delinquencies. 
 
 Applicant failed to present documentary evidence to show that she was in the 
process of formally disputing any of her debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has supported the United States as a government contractor since 
1992. She has performed her duties in an exceptional manner. However, Applicant 
failed to produce sufficient documentation that her delinquent debts have been 
addressed or are otherwise satisfied. She has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns. She has gone through the security clearance process 
in the past, as she has held a clearance since 1992, and has been on notice that 
financial delinquencies are a concern to the government, yet she chose to disregard this 
concern until very recently. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
                                                          
7
 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 at 4 (App. Bd. October 12, 1999). 
 
11 
 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.s:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.u:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.v:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
