 
1 
 
 
+                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11723 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to timely file income tax returns for several years and acquired a 
substantial debt to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). His lack of diligence and 
responsibility toward his legal obligations raise doubts about his judgment and his 
willingness to comply with the law. His favorable evidence is insufficient to mitigate the 
financial considerations security concerns. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 28, 2013. 
The Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (undated) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant 
answered the SOR on June 11, 2013, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on July 10, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on July 16, 2013, scheduling a 
hearing for July 25, 2013.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered one exhibit (GE 1). Applicant testified, 
presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted four exhibits. (AE 1 - 4) All 
exhibits were admitted without objection. I left the record open until August 19, 2013, to 
allow Applicant time to supplement the record. He promised to submit one additional 
document, but he failed to do so. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 
6, 2013. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
The first notice of hearing was issued on July 10, 2013, scheduling a hearing for 
July 24, 2013. The second notice of hearing was issued on July 16, 2013, scheduling a 
hearing for July 25, 2013. Applicant was consulted and agreed to both hearing dates. At 
his hearing, Applicant stated he had sufficient time to prepare and was ready to 
proceed. He affirmatively waived his 15-day advanced notice of the hearing. 
 
At the end of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to 
conform to the evidence. Applicant did not object. I granted the amendment in 
accordance with Directive E3.1.17. SOR ¶ 1.a. was amended to read: “You failed to 
timely file federal and state personal income tax returns for tax years 2007, 2008, 2010, 
and 2011. A second paragraph was added: “SOR ¶ 1.b: You owe over $16,000 to the 
IRS for back-due taxes for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012.” 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the factual allegations in the original SOR. He admitted the two 
amended SOR allegations. After a thorough review of all the evidence, including his 
testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old electronics technician employed by a defense 
contractor. After graduating from high school in June 1988, Applicant enlisted in the 
U.S. Navy where he served on active duty from December 1988 to March 1995. He was 
discharged from the service pursuant to an administrative board for having a pattern of 
misconduct. His service was characterized as “under other than honorable conditions.”  
 
Applicant married his wife in 1992, and they separated in 2003. They have three 
children, ages 20, 15, and 12. He entered into a separation agreement with a monthly 
obligation to pay $700 in spousal support, and $1,000 in child support. He is current on 
his support obligations.  
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer, a government contractor, in March 
1996. Applicant’s supervisor testified on his behalf. He has known Applicant for the last 
15 years. During the first nine years they worked together, but he became Applicant’s 
supervisor six years ago. He considers Applicant to be an outstanding worker with good 
 
3 
 
 
character. In his opinion, Applicant is dependable, reliable, and a man of integrity. 
Applicant was up-front with his supervisor and disclosed to him his financial problems. 
Applicant possessed a top secret security clearance from August 2002 to July 2009. He 
failed to submit SCAs for the renewal of his clearance in 2009 and 2011, and his 
security clearance was not continued in 2009.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his January 2013 SCA (Section 26 – Financial Record) 
that he did not timely file his federal and state income tax return for tax year 2008, and 
that he had not filed his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2011 and 
2012.  
 
Applicant testified that although he separated from his wife in 2003, they filed 
joint federal and state income tax returns from tax year 2003 to 2009. His wife is 
medically disabled and works part-time. She receives tax documents from her state that 
need to be attached to their federal and state income tax returns. Applicant explained 
that he requested the tax documents from his estranged wife, but she failed to provide 
them to him. In 2009, he hired a tax preparer to assist him file his 2007, 2008, and 2009 
income tax returns. Because he was filing jointly, and he had sufficient money withheld 
from his earnings, he did not accrue a tax debt or was assessed any penalties.  
 
In 2010 and 2011, Applicant again asked his estranged wife for her tax 
documents. Instead of providing him with the documents, she filed on her own as a 
single tax filer. Applicant was forced to file his federal and state income tax returns as a 
single filer for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012. Applicant filed his federal and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012 in April 2013. (AE 1 – 3) 
Because he had taken dependent exemptions during those years, not enough money 
was withheld from his earnings to pay his assessed taxes. Applicant owes the IRS over 
$16,000 in past-due taxes for tax years 2010, 2011, and 2012.  
 
In June 2013, Applicant paid $995, and retained a tax services company to help 
him resolve his federal tax debt. He also contacted his estranged wife, and they are 
considering refiling their 2010, 2011, and 2012 income tax returns as joint filers. He 
believes that if they are allowed to refile jointly, he will be able to reduce his tax debt. If 
they cannot refile, he will negotiate a payment plan with the IRS. Applicant promised to 
pay his delinquent tax debt. However, he has not established a payment agreement, 
and has made no payments.  
 
Applicant acknowledged responsibility for filing his income tax returns late. He 
admitted being a procrastinator and waiting until the last minute to collect and organize 
his documents to file his income tax returns. He was unconcerned about filing late 
because he never owed any money previously. He was told by his tax preparer that as 
long as he did not owe any money, it was not that important to file late.  
 
Applicant repeatedly noted that he had little control over his wife, and he had no 
access to her documents. He believed he had no other choice but to wait until she 
provided him with her tax documents to file their income tax returns. He acknowledged 
 
4 
 
 
that he should have been more responsible and diligent in filing his income tax returns. 
Applicant credibly testified that he was not trying to avoid paying his taxes. 
 
Concerning his current financial situation, Applicant stated that he lives from 
paycheck to paycheck. He has little money left over at the end of the month after paying 
his support obligations and his day-to-day living expenses. Depending on his work 
hours, he may either have $500 left over at the end of the month, or he could have no 
money left. He needs his security clearance to retain his job, to be able to support his 
family, and to pay his debts. He noted that he possessed a top secret security clearance 
for many years without incident. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
 
5 
 
 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2007, 2008, 2010, and 2011. He owes the IRS over $16,000 for back-due taxes for tax 
years 2010 through 2012. Financial considerations disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(g): “failure to file annual Federal and state, or local income 
tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
6 
 
 
 Financial considerations mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing, he failed to timely file his income tax returns 
for four different years, and he owes a large debt.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Although Applicant did not have control over his 
estranged wife and could not obtain her tax documents, he still had the ability and the 
legal obligation to timely file his income tax returns. He could have filed as a married 
person filing separate, or as a single filer. Applicant procrastinated and did not file his 
2010 and 2011 income tax returns until 2013. He should have been more diligent 
concerning his legal obligation to timely file his income tax returns. He failed to act 
responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Applicant claimed he was under the mistaken belief that filing his income tax 
returns late was not that important as long as he did not owe any money. Considering 
his time in the service, his age, and his years working for a government contractor while 
possessing a security clearance, Applicant should have known better. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant showed some responsibility when he hired 
the assistance of a tax preparer to file his delinquent income tax returns, and when he 
retained a tax services company to help him resolve his tax debt. He also received 
credit for being upfront about his financial problems with his supervisor, in his SCA, and 
at his hearing. He is in the early stages of receiving counseling, and his problems are 
not yet resolved or under control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant has made no payments towards his IRS 
debt, and has not established a payment agreement. His actions so far are a good start 
and steps in the right direction, but they cannot be considered good-faith efforts to repay 
or resolve his debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant has worked for a defense contractor since 1996. He possessed a top 
secret security clearance from August 2002 to July 2009, without incident. He is 
considered to be an outstanding worker with good character. In his supervisor’s opinion, 
Applicant is dependable, reliable, and a man of integrity. Applicant disclosed his 
financial problems to his supervisor and in his 2013 SCA, and he was candid and 
forthcoming at his hearing. 
 
Applicant showed some responsibility when he retained the services of a tax 
preparer to file his delinquent income tax returns, and a tax services company to help 
him resolve his current tax debt. There is no record evidence to show that he had prior 
financial problems. He is current in his spousal and child support obligations.  
 
7 
 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s failure to timely file his income tax returns was not 
due to circumstances beyond his control. He procrastinated and was irresponsible 
complying with his legal obligations. Additionally, he does not have a payment 
agreement, and has made no payments towards his debt. Applicant’s lack of judgment 
and unwillingness to comply with the law raise questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Applicant’s favorable 
evidence is insufficient to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a & 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
