 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-12301 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding her husband, mother, and 
in-laws, all of whom are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
In a July 2011, security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that she had 
several relatives who were citizens and residents of Afghanistan. On March 14, 2013, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter notarized March 29, 2013, Applicant admitted all five allegations 
without elaboration and requested a decision without hearing. The Government 
 
 
 
 
2 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), which included a request for 
administrative notice regarding Afghanistan, on June 19, 2013. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM.  The case was assigned to another Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge on September 10, 2013, before it was 
assigned to me on September 24, 2013, for caseload considerations.  
 
After receiving the official case file, I reviewed its contents in its entirety. Noting 
no objections, I granted the Government’s request for administrative notice on certain 
facts regarding Afghanistan. Based on a thorough review of the case file and the 
FORM, I find that Applicant failed to carry her burden in mitigating security concerns 
arising under Guideline B. Consequently, eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the nation of Afghanistan. It was accepted into the record as part of 
the FORM. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
Government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Afghanistan were derived from the offered request and its attachments.  
 
The facts thus derived regarding Afghanistan are as follows: In May 2012 the 
United States and Afghanistan signed a ten-year strategic partnership agreement that 
demonstrated the United States’ enduring commitment to strengthen Afghan 
sovereignty, stability, and prosperity. Since that time, the core goal of the United States 
in Afghanistan has been to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaida and its affiliates, and 
to prevent their return to Afghanistan. Despite progress made since the Taliban was 
deposed, Afghanistan still faces challenges like defeating terrorists and insurgents, 
recovering from over three decades of civil strife, and rebuilding shattered physical, 
economic, and political infrastructure. 
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record has remained poor, and the Afghan-Taliban 
dominated insurgency has become increasingly sophisticated and destabilizing. Human 
rights problems include: armed insurgent groups’ killings of persons affiliated with the 
government and indiscriminate attacks on civilians; torture and abuse of detainees by 
security forces; extrajudicial killings; poor prison conditions; arbitrary arrests and 
detention; prolonged pretrial detention; judicial corruption; violation of privacy; 
restrictions on freedom of speech; and abuse of children. Overall, the State Department 
has declared that the security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains 
critical as no part of Afghanistan is immune from violence. U.S. citizens who are also 
citizens of Afghanistan may be subject to other laws that impose special obligations.  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old linguist working for a defense contractor. She was born 
in Afghanistan, where she completed secondary school and a technical school program. 
Her first husband died in 1989 while serving in the Afghani Army during an altercation 
with Russian forces. As a pregnant young widow and mother of one small child, she 
was encouraged to flee Afghanistan. She eventually arrived in the United States. She 
became a naturalized citizen in U.S 1999, the same year in which her second husband 
died in a car accident. Applicant admits that her current husband, mother, father-in-law, 
mother-in-law, and three sisters-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. She is 
currently in the process of sponsoring her husband, a private sector mechanic, to come 
to this country. His paperwork has thus far been stalled, but the reason for this is 
unclear.  
 
 The FORM reveals scant facts about Applicant’s relatives in Afghanistan. It is 
noted that her father abandoned Applicant and her mother years ago. He is believed to 
now be a United States citizen, but his current place of residence is unknown. 
Applicant’s current husband resides with his parents in Afghanistan. He does not 
entirely understand the type of work she does for a living. He and Applicant only speak 
by phone about once a month because calls to Afghanistan are costly. Applicant’s 
mother has always been a homemaker. She has no known affiliation with the Afghani 
government. She and Applicant speak by phone about once a month. The mother has 
no plans to come to the United States. Applicant’s parents-in-law manage their farm and 
have no known nexus to the Afghani government. Applicant has contact with her 
parents-in-law about 8-15 times a year by telephone. Two of Applicant’s sisters-in-law 
are teachers with no known connection to the Afghani government. The third sister-in-
law is a homemaker with no nexus to the Afghani government. Applicant converses with 
her sisters-in-law about 8-15 times a year by phone.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, 
or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but 
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant’s husband, mother, parents-in-law, and three sisters-in-law are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant maintains regular telephonic contact with all of 
 
 
 
 
5 
these relatives. Only Applicant’s husband seems to have a desire to emigrate from 
Afghanistan. His efforts, however, have thus far been rebuffed due to undisclosed 
administrative difficulties. Consequently, there is no evidence that the status of any of 
these relatives is soon to change. I find that the following disqualifying conditions apply 
under AG ¶ 7: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connection to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country 
by providing that information. 
 
Foreign family ties can pose a security risk even without a connection to a foreign 
government. This is because an applicant may be subject to coercion or undue 
influence when a third party pressures or threatens an applicant’s family members. 
Under these facts, a third party coercion concern potentially exists. In addition, I 
specifically note that AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The 
heightened risk required to raise a disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. 
Heightened risk denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. 
Terrorist groups and other criminal organizations operate within Afghanistan. They 
participate in nefarious activities. These facts are sufficient to find a heightened risk 
exists with regards to Applicant’s Afghani relatives. Given these considerations, the 
evidence provided is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate evidence sufficient to refute or mitigate the 
allegations.  
 
Here, the primary concern is Applicant’s relationships with her husband and 
mother. While they, like Applicant’s in-laws, initially seem unlikely candidates for third- 
party manipulation, the evidence available regarding these kin is too scant to make a 
thorough assessment. Similarly, the available evidence reveals little about Applicant 
and both her life in and ties to the United States. While there is no suggestion of 
disloyalty on the part of Applicant, more information is needed under the AG to assess 
her relationship to the United States, as opposed to any remaining loyalties she may 
have to her place of birth. Given these factors, I find that AG ¶ 8(a) and AG ¶ 8(b) do 
not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the three guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old linguist working for a defense contractor. Born in 
Afghanistan, where she completed secondary school and a technical school program, 
Applicant decided to immigrate to the United States after her first husband was killed in 
1989. She became a naturalized citizen in U.S 1999, the same year in which her 
second husband died. Applicant concedes that her current husband, mother, father-in-
law, mother-in-law, and three sisters-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
She offers many facts bolstering the Government’s case in this matter.  
 
With disqualifying conditions raised, however, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
proffer facts and evidence in mitigation of the security concerns raised. Here, her 
answers to the SOR were reduced to the bare minimum. She then declined to respond 
to the FORM. With so few facts upon which to assess both Applicant and her kin, I find 
that Applicant failed to meet her burden and that security concerns are left unmitigated. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
