1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-10700
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about his ties to family members and
associates who either are citizens and residents of Pakistan, or are Pakistani citizens
residing in the United States. He also mitigated security concerns about his monetary
assets and potential real property interests in Pakistan, as well as his acquisition of a
Pakistani identification card after becoming a U.S. citizen. Clearance is granted.
On May 29, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his work as
an employee of a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing
background investigation, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD) were
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 At hearing, Department Counsel waived objection to including in the record the attachments to Applicant’s3
Answer. (Tr. 11 - 12)
 See Directive E3.1.7. The Government’s request for hearing is included as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1.4
2
access to classified information.  On May 3, 2013, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement1
of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the
adjudicative guidelines  under Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline C (foreign2
preference).
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer), provided supporting documents,  and3
requested a decision without a hearing. However, Department Counsel timely requested
a hearing,  and the case was assigned to me on August 6, 2013. Applicant waived the4
15-day notice requirement (Tr. 9 - 11), and I convened the requested hearing on August
26, 2013. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on September 30, 2013. 
Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 7, which were
admitted without objection. (Tr. 19 - 29) The Government also asked that administrative
notice be taken of certain facts germane to the issues presented by the pleadings. I
granted that request and admitted, as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 2, Department Counsel’s
five-page memorandum, supported by nine enclosed documents (Tr. 23 - 30). Applicant
testified in his own behalf, but proffered no documentary information. At the close of the
hearing, I left the record open to receive from Applicant additional relevant information.
The record closed on September 27, 2013, when I received Applicant’s timely post-
hearing submissions. They have been admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit
(Ax.) A.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline B, the Government alleged that Applicant’s father (SOR 1.a),
two sisters (SOR 1.b), mother-in-law (SOR 1.c), and father-in-law (SOR 1.d) are citizens
of, and reside in, Pakistan. It was also alleged that his wife is a citizen of Pakistan
residing in the United States (SOR 1.e); that his father-in-law is a retired employee of
Pakistan’s government (SOR 1.f); that Applicant provides financial assistance to his
mother in Pakistan (SOR 1.g); that Applicant maintains an account in a Pakistani bank
with an estimated balance of $5,000 (SOR 1.h); and that he owns a portion of real
estate in Pakistan, with a share value of about $45,000 (SOR 1.I). Applicant admitted,
with explanations, SOR 1.b - 1.g. He denied, with explanations, SOR 1.a, 1.h, and 1.i.
(Answer)
3
Under Guideline C, the Government alleged that in February 2012, Applicant, a
naturalized U.S. citizen, obtained a National Identification Card for Overseas Pakistanis.
(SOR 2.a) Applicant admitted, with explanation, this allegation. (Answer)
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. Having reviewed
the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is a 44-year-old dual citizen of the United States and Pakistan. He was
born in Pakistan and emigrated to the United States in 2006 on a family visa sponsored
by his brother. Applicant earned U.S. citizenship in March 2011. He is currently
employed as a linguist by a defense contractor supporting U.S. military missions in
Afghanistan. He has held his current position since May 2012. In Pakistan, Applicant
was a biology lecturer at a Pakistani university. After arriving in the United States, he
found employment as a hotel laundry attendant, a grocer, a doughnut shop worker, a
waiter, and a retail clothing salesman. Most of the time, he held two jobs at once with an
average annual income of about $45,000. He applied for his current job at the behest of
his brother, who also is a linguist. Applicant has earned between $87,000 and $185,000
as a linguist. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Tr. 33, 41 - 45, 59 - 60)
Applicant came to the United States with his wife of 14 years and their two
children. They now have four children, ages 13, 11, 5, and 3. The younger two were
born in the United States. Applicant and his two older children became U.S. citizens in
2011. His wife is a stay-at-home mother. She has permanent resident alien (PRA)
status and is still trying to master the language requirements for naturalization. (Answer;
Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Tr. 40 - 41)
When Applicant was hired, he underwent a counter-intelligence (CI) screening
required by the military for civilian linguists being considered for assignment with
combat units. That process examined much of the same background information
contained in his eQIP, and included an interview of Applicant. Although the CI screening
noted that Applicant’s background presents possible CI issues, he was approved for
deployment to Afghanistan, where he has worked since June 2012. (Answer; Gx. 4 - 5)
Applicant has received two certificates of appreciation from the unit with whom
he has worked in theater. The senior enlisted supervisor of linguists for that unit praised
Applicant for his judgment, trustworthiness, and commitment to the troops and their
mission. Much of Applicant’s work for the first eight or nine months included supporting
patrols tasked with finding and clearing improvised explosive devices (IEDs) planted by
the enemy to ambush U.S. troops. On more than one occasion, Applicant was able to
translate intercepted radio communications that helped U.S. troops avoid IEDs and
ambush. Applicant also survived an enemy rocket-propelled grenade (RPG) attack on
the unit he was supporting. Applicant has also helped U.S. and Afghan officials in their
dealings with Taliban detainees. (Answer; Tr. 50 - 55)
Applicant’s father died in 1999. Between 2006, when Applicant left Pakistan, and
2013, the year his mother moved to the United States, he periodically gave her
4
monetary gifts totaling about $5,000. She has PRA status and has no plans to return to
Pakistan. Applicant also opened a bank account in Pakistan three days before he left for
the United States. The account had a balance of about $4,000 when he left, and was
set up to help his mother if an emergency arose. She only accessed the funds once,
withdrawing about $1,600 for medical expenses in 2011 or 2012. The account has been
declared dormant from non-use and the funds are waiting to be claimed from a
government escrow account. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Gx. 5; Tr. 32 - 35, 38, 60) 
Applicant’s two sisters are Pakistani citizens and still reside in one of Pakistan’s
major cities. They live in a house Applicant’s brother built for them. Applicant has
thought about buying the house sometime in the future, but he does not currently hold
an interest in that property. When Applicant’s father died, he left to Applicant and his
siblings, a two-acre farm worth about $40,000. Their mother continued living there after
the father died. However, even though she is now in the United States, the farm may
not be claimed until she dies. When that happens, a one-fourth interest in the farm will
vest in Applicant and each of his siblings. Applicant will not have to return to Pakistan if
he wants to claim his share of the estate. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Gx. 5; Tr. 47 - 50, 62)
Applicant’s wife’s parents are citizens of Pakistan and still live there. They have
also applied for entry to the U.S. as permanent resident aliens. They wish to become
U.S. citizens. Applicant has no contact with them. His father-in-law is a retired
kindergarten teacher in a provincial Pakistani school system. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 3;
Tr.64 - 65)
Now that his mother is with him in the United States, Applicant has little or no
contact with his sisters in Pakistan. Since the summer of 2012, when he deployed to
Afghanistan, he has had no contact with them. However, he has begun the process to
sponsor their immigration to the United States. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Tr. 57 - 58, 60 -
61)
Applicant has returned to Pakistan once since coming to the United States in
2006. In March 2012, he visited his mother for three weeks to get her started on her
emigration from Pakistan and because she was sick. He has a Pakistani passport that
expired before he became a U.S. citizen, and a U.S. passport he received in 2011. He
knew that if he traveled to his mother’s village and his only means of self-identification
was his U.S. passport, he may be targeted for kidnapping or worse. Rather than renew
his Pakistani passport, he renewed a Pakistani National Identification Card (NIC) that
expired before he became a U.S. citizen. Applicant entered Pakistan on his U.S.
passport and stayed in the city with his sisters. When he traveled to his mother’s village,
he left his U.S. passport at the house and carried the NIC as his only identification. His
time in Pakistan passed without incident. Applicant has since relinquished to his
company’s security officer his NIC and his expired Pakistani passport. (Answer; Gx.1;
Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Gx. 6; Gx. 7; Ax. A; Tr. 57 - 59, 60, 62 - 63, 66 - 71)
 This information was not contained in Hx. 2. I obtained this information sua sponte from the CIA W orld5
Factbook page regarding Pakistan at www.cia.gov. 
5
In response to Department Counsel’s request, I take administrative notice of the
following facts contained in Hx. 2:
Most of Pakistan’s western border abuts Afghanistan. To the southwest, Pakistan
shares a border with Iran. Extensive terror networks operate along the border with
Afghanistan in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) along the central
Afghanistan border, in the Khyber Pass region in northwest Pakistan, and in Balochistan
Province in southwest Pakistan. Chief among these terror networks are the Taliban, the
Haqqani Network, and al-Qaeda. They operate in many cases without meaningful
interference from the Pakistani government, and their activities consist of anti-U.S. and
anti-coalition military operations across the border into Afghanistan. The FATA, and
other areas mentioned above, provide safe havens from which terrorists have been able
to plan and launch attacks on U.S. and coalition troops and interests in Afghanistan.
Bombings and other acts of terror also have been reported throughout Pakistan, but the
main focus of terrorist activity in Pakistan consists of attacks in urban areas, such as the
capital city of Islamabad. Because of this information, the U.S. Department of State has
issued numerous travel advisories and warnings to U.S. citizens considering traveling to
Pakistan.
The United States and Pakistan have had diplomatic relations since Pakistan
obtained its independence from Great Britain in 1947. The countries’ interests have
been in general agreement for much of that time. Since 2001, Pakistan has helped the
U.S. in its global war on terrorism and has helped capture hundreds of Taliban and Al-
Qaeda personnel. However, as noted, efforts to deny areas adjacent to Afghanistan as
safe havens for terrorist organization have not been as effective as the U.S. would like.
Another issue related to terrorist activity in Pakistan is the fact that Pakistani
government and military entities have committed numerous human rights violations in
the name of counter-terror operations and investigations. Extra-judicial killings, arbitrary
arrests without access to due process, and other human rights problems are
commonplace.
Finally, I note  that the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is a federal republic made up5
of an executive, a legislative, and a judicial branch, whose powers and limitations are
contained in a national constitution. The legislature is comprised of representatives in a
bicameral parliament chosen through open elections from a multi-party system. A
president and prime minister, and appointed cabinet members make up the head of the
executive branch. Supreme court justices are appointed by the executive to oversee a
common law legal system influenced by Islamic Sharia law.
 See Directive. 6.3.6
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
6
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  8
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).9
7
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.9
Analysis
Foreign Influence 
The facts established by Department Counsel’s information and by Applicant’s
admissions raise security concerns about Applicant’s personal relationships and other
interests in Pakistan. The security concern about foreign influence is stated at AG ¶ 6
as follows: 
[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶
7 disqualifying conditions:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
Pakistan is an ally of the United States and is governed through a democratic
system modeled after Great Britain and the United States. Nominally an open society
with an independent judiciary, the reality is that terror groups in the western regions of
8
Pakistan have had a destabilizing influence on large parts of the country, mostly along
the to the west in the FATA, Khyber Pass and Balochistan regions. Although not state-
sponsored, they have been able to operate against U.S. persons and interests in
Pakistan, and against U.S. and coalition military forces across the western border with
Afghanistan. Because those groups create a heightened risk of violence against U.S.
interests, the presence of persons in Pakistan with whom Applicant has close personal
ties of friendship and affection is a security concern under Guideline B.
Applicant lives in the United States with his wife and children. His wife remains a
Pakistani citizen, but she also has PRA status here and is working towards becoming a
naturalized citizen. Her only known tie to Pakistan is her father, a retired kindergarten
teacher in the provincial school system. It is presumed from Applicant’s close
relationship with his wife that he is also close to his father-in-law. However, Applicant
rarely has contact with his father-in-law, and the government connection presented by
his former employment is too attenuated to be a viable security risk. 
Applicant’s mother also is a Pakistani citizen with PRA status in the United
States. However, she recently moved in with Applicant and his wife, and it is unlikely
she will return to Pakistan. Finally, Applicant has two sisters in Pakistan. Neither is
connected to the Pakistani government, and Applicant has begun the process to
sponsor their immigration to the United States. Now that their mother is with Applicant in
the United States, Applicant has no need to contact them, and he has not spoken to
either sibling in the 18 months he has been deployed to Afghanistan.
Before his mother left Pakistan, Applicant had provided occasional monetary gifts
over seven years totaling $5,000. These gifts were insignificant when compared to
Applicant’s total income and assets. The financial help for his mother, without more, is
not disqualifying; but it does provide evidence of a close foreign relationship.  
In 2006, Applicant also set up for his mother a bank account containing about
$4,000. She used about $1,600 of that money once when she was ill. The remainder
lies unclaimed in a Pakistan bank. After his father died, Applicant and his three siblings
each became eligible to receive a one-fourth interest in their father’s farm. However,
Applicant’s interest in the estate is speculative, because he cannot claim it unless and
until his mother predeceases him. As for the bank account, it is inactive and the
remaining money does not constitute a substantial financial interest or asset in
Pakistan.
All of the foregoing supports application of the following AG ¶ 8 mitigating
conditions:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
9
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation; and 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.
There is little question that the presence of Applicant’s sisters in Pakistan poses
a security risk. As more thoroughly discussed, below, the fact that Applicant renewed
his NIC out of concern for his safety while traveling to see his mother, supports a finding
that Pakistan poses a heightened security risk. However, on balance, and in
consideration of Applicant’s work in support of U.S. troops in Afghanistan, I am satisfied
that his decision in that instance showed sound judgment and discretion. Overall, the
record shows that his circumstances do not pose an unacceptable security risk with
respect to foreign influence. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the Guideline B security
concerns. 
Foreign Preference
Applicant renewed his Pakistani identification card (NIC) in 2012 and carried it
with him when he traveled to Pakistan in 2012 to see his mother. This conduct raises a
security concern because Applicant exercised foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen and while possessing a U.S. passport. These actions raise a security concern
about foreign preference that is expressed at AG ¶ 9, as follows:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
condition at AG ¶ 10(a):
exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current
10
foreign passport; and (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement,
social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country.
There is no foreign passport at issue here because Applicant chose not to renew
his expired Pakistani passport for his trip. Instead, he used his U.S. passport to enter
and leave Pakistan, but obtained and used his NIC to travel between his sisters’
residence and his mother’s village. The NIC allows Applicant to move about outside of
the United States as a Pakistani citizen rather than a U.S. citizen. I conclude that
obtaining the NIC is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 10(a)(1). Alternatively, AG ¶ 10(a)(3) applies
because Applicant used his ongoing foreign citizenship to obtain the NIC, which could
allow him to obtain other benefits of Pakistani citizenship.
By contrast, Applicant has relinquished his NIC, as well as his expired Pakistani
passport, to his company’s security officials. His company has stated that it will notify
DOD if Applicant seeks to reclaim those instruments. His actions in response to the
Government’s concerns in this regard require application of the mitigating condition at
AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated). Further, Applicant plausibly explained the
circumstances surrounding his acquisition and use of the NIC. On one hand, the need
to use a NIC while inside Pakistan highlights the security risks raised by the
Government’s information here. On the other hand, and more important, Applicant’s
limited use of the NIC demonstrated sound judgment and discretion by recognizing the
need to avoid attention as a U.S. citizen. While he chose to subject himself to the risks
of travel in Pakistan, he did what he could to limit that risk and he will not find himself in
such circumstances again. Applicant has no need to return to Pakistan, and his
personal and professional life are established in the United States. I found him credible
and straightforward in his testimony, particularly his explanations about why he felt
compelled to use the NIC when he traveled to see his mother. On balance, I conclude
Applicant has mitigated the security concern under this guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines B and C. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a mature,
responsible adult who has worked hard to establish a better life for him and his family
since arriving in the U.S. seven years ago. He has sponsored the immigration of his
mother as a PRA, and it appears likely his sisters will follow in the foreseeable future.
Now that Applicant’s mother is here, he has no reason to return to Pakistan. Applicant’s
ties and preferences are decidedly in the U.S.. His work as a linguist in support of the
U.S. military has been valuable and has subjected him to personal danger in the field.
His military counterparts have praised Applicant for his dedication, reliability, and
trustworthiness under arduous conditions. A fair and commonsense assessment of all
available information shows Applicant has the good judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness expected of one to whom the Government entrusts its interests. I
11
conclude the record as a whole shows that Applicant’s conduct and foreign ties do not
present an unacceptable security risk.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.I: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
