 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-10108 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 22, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 15, 2013, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 7, 2013. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on May 15, 2013. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 
 
2 
 
 
2013. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 9, 2013, scheduling the hearing for 
July 30, 2013. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were received into evidence without 
objection.  
 
I held the record open until August 19, 2013, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE H through 
P, which were received into evidence without objection. At Applicant’s request, I 
granted him an extension until September 12, 2013 to submit further documents. 
Applicant timely submitted AE Q, which was received into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 8, 2013. The record closed on 
September 12, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. with explanations, and denied SOR ¶ 
1.c with explanations. His answers and explanations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. I found Applicant’s testimony to be credible. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old project engineer, who has worked for his current 
employer, a defense contractor, since May 2013. He seeks to retain his secret security 
clearance, which is a requirement of his continued employment. (Tr. 17-18, GE 1.) 
Applicant had held a top secret security clearance for eight years while working for a 
previous employer, also a defense contractor. (AE I.) 
 
Applicant was awarded a bachelor of science degree in computer science in 
August 1999. He married in November 2000 and has two children, ages seven and 
two. He did not serve in the armed forces. (Tr. 18-21, GE 1.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges three separate debts consisting of a charged-off home 
equity line of credit for $32,164, a charged-off home mortgage for $177,000, and a 
charged-off credit card account for $707. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c.) 
 
Like many other home owners in the last decade, Applicant’s financial problems 
stem from the housing market crash. While housing markets were booming, he was 
counseled by his lender to use the equity from his first home as a down payment to 
purchase a second home, which he did. Having no reason to believe that he would be 
unable to sell his first home, he proceeded with the purchase of his second home. He 
 
3 
 
 
moved out of his first home and into his second home in approximately September 
2006. Unfortunately, the crash occurred around the time he and his family had moved 
into their second home. Applicant was in the precarious position of owning two homes 
with his lender holding three mortgages – one on his first home, one on his second 
home, and a home equity line of credit (HELOC) loan that provided him with the down 
payment to purchase his second home. For two years Applicant was unable to sell his 
first home and in the process exhausted his savings trying to keep his mortgages 
current. (Tr. 22-24, 46, 55.)  
 
Unable to sell his first home, out of cash, and unable to continue making two 
house payments, Applicant sought professional help from a bankruptcy attorney in 
mid-2009. In the process, he consulted with 11 attorneys before retaining his current 
attorney. He was dissatisfied with the advice of the first 11 attorneys because their 
solution to his financial problems was to declare bankruptcy. Applicant was unwilling 
to file bankruptcy with his goal “to do the most responsible thing we could” at the time. 
His current attorney counseled Applicant not to make any further payments on his first 
home, let it go into foreclosure, and attempt to sell that home on a short sale. (Tr. 24-
26, 43-44.) 
 
Following is a description of Applicant’s three debts and their current status: 
 
CHARGED-OFF HOME EQUITY LINE OF CREDIT IN THE AMOUNT OF 
$32,164. Applicant’s current credit report dated July 22, 2013, in reference to this 
account states “Paid, Closed. $32,164 written off.” Applicant provided a letter from the 
bank dated September 19, 2012, which states, “We are pleased to inform you that we 
have approved your Home Equity account for participation in a principle forgiveness 
program offered as a result of the Department of Justice and State Attorneys General 
global settlement with major mortgage servicers . . . You will receive a full forgiveness 
of the remaining principal balance of $31,204.36 on your Home Equity Line of Credit 
Account,” adding that Applicant no longer owed the money and the bank was waiving 
any outstanding fees and accrued interest. The bank also provided Applicant with a 
2012 Form 1099, Cancellation of Debt, which he included on his income tax return. 
ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (SOR ¶ 1.a, SOR response, Tr. 26-31, AE A, AE B, AE C, 
AE D.) 
 
CHARGED-OFF MORTGAGE IN THE AMOUNT OF $177,000. This account 
became past-due in June 2008 when Applicant was unable to continue making two 
house payments. Until then Applicant was making the $3,000 house payments on the 
first house. When he retained his attorney, he was advised to discontinue making 
payments on the first home. Applicant attempted to sell his first home as a short sale 
five times and provided documentation of those five separate attempted short sales, 
which occurred on March 9, 2008, July 15, 2008, October 21, 2008, March 12, 2009, 
and June 30, 2009. Offers ranged from a low of $103,890 to a high of $237,000. The 
bank rejected all five short sale offers. Applicant also tried unsuccessfully to rent the 
first home. Since Applicant stopped making payments in June 2008, the bank has not 
pursued him and he continued to follow his attorney’s advice throughout the process. 
 
4 
 
 
It is unclear why the bank did not pursue this arrearage, but at this time the statute of 
limitations has been tolled. (SOR ¶ 1.b, SOR response, Tr. 31-34, 43-44, 47-57, AE I.) 
While the tolling of the statute of limitations is not viewed as an acceptable defense in 
this venue, the fact remains that the creditor has charged-off this debt and it is no 
longer legally enforceable. Applicant demonstrated a good-faith effort by making 
payments on his first home for two years until it was no longer possible to do so, by 
attempting to short sell this first home five times, and by trying to rent it. ACCOUNT 
RESOLVED. 
 
Applicant’s attorney had also counseled him to default on his second home 
because it was “upside down.” Applicant refused to follow that advice because 
although it may have been financially smart, he did not believe that it was the morally 
right thing to do. His goal throughout the process was to do the best he could with the 
financial resources available to him. (Tr. 58-60.) 
 
CHARGED-OFF CREDIT CARD ACCOUNT IN THE AMOUNT OF $707. 
Applicant stated that if this account appeared as late as it did in earlier credit reports 
submitted by the Government, it was an error. Applicant previously acknowledged this 
debt as his during an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview in March 2010 
and later verified that debt as his in response DOHA interrogatories in October 2012. 
He explained during cross-examination that he did not have his financial records with 
him during his March 2012 OPM interview and confused that account with another 
account and mistakenly confirmed the information as correct in response to DOHA 
interrogatories. Applicant’s noted that this creditor’s entry on his July 22, 2013 credit 
report stated, “Paid. Closed/Never late.” Post-hearing, Applicant submitted an e-mail 
dated September 12, 2013, further documenting his efforts to contact this creditor. He 
contacted three separate divisions of this creditor – the banking department, the credit 
card division, and the mortgage department. All three divisions had no record of this 
account. Applicant contacted the credit bureaus and they were also unable to confirm 
the existence this account. Applicant followed up with a written dispute to the creditor 
and they did not respond to his inquiry. This “charged-off” account has not appeared 
on Applicant’s credit report since May 2011.  Applicant would have been better served 
had he advised the OPM investigator in March 2010 that this was not his account and 
more importantly had he been more thorough when he later submitted his response to 
DOHA interrogatories. While much of the discussion regarding this account could 
have been avoided, I am satisfied that this account was reported in error and/or has 
been successfully disputed. ACCOUNT RESOLVED.  (SOR ¶ 1.c, SOR response, Tr. 
34-40, GE 2, GE 3, AE B, AE I, AE K, AE L, AE Q.) 
 
Applicant did not seek formal financial counseling apart from the advice he 
sought from his attorney. His annual salary is $87,000 his wife’s annual salary is 
$54,000, for a total of $141,000. Applicant’s personal financial statement, taking into 
account his income and the income of his wife, reflects a net monthly remainder of 
about $4,000. Applicant and his wife do their best to provide for their two children by 
ensuring their son has good quality day care and their daughter is able to participate 
outside activities. He is current on all his debts and has about $424,000 in total assets. 
 
5 
 
 
As noted, Applicant owns his own home and is current on his mortgage.  He has 
approximately $15,000 in his checking account, $5,000 in his savings account, and a 
credit score of 701. Applicant’s monthly budget reflects that he and his family live a 
measured and responsible lifestyle and live within their means. (Tr. 62-69, GE 5, AE 
E, AE F, AE G, AE J.) 
  
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted two reference letters from a former project officer, and the 
vice president and facility security officer of a former employer. He also submitted 
performance evaluations covering the years 2010 to 2012.  These individuals and 
evaluations describe in detail the significant contribution that Applicant has made, not 
only to their company, but also to the national defense. Applicant’s references provide 
a favorable insight into his good character and trustworthiness. (AE M – AE P.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable 
security decision.  
 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
7 
 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
The housing market crash in the last decade wreaked financial havoc on 
countless homeowners, homeowners who had otherwise been current on their 
monthly expenses. Following the advice and encouragement of his lender, Applicant 
chose to upgrade the family home, and to do so borrowed against the equity of their 
home and used those funds as a down payment to purchase a second home. At the 
time he did this, the housing market was robust and he had no reason to believe that 
he would have had any difficulty selling their original home. With hindsight, one can 
debate the prudence of his choice, but what he did was not unusual at the time and 
was consistent with the advice and encouragement of his lender. While the market 
crash was beyond Applicant’s control, his choice to purchase a second home was 
within his control and application of AG ¶ 20(b) has limited applicability. To Applicant’s 
credit, he did remain in contact with his lender during this process, discussed infra.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable even though Applicant did not seek “formal” 
financial counseling. Recognizing that he could no longer continue paying a mortgage 
on his previous and current residence as well as a HELOC after having done so for 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
8 
 
 
two years, he consulted 11 bankruptcy attorneys before settling on his current 
attorney. He chose his current attorney because he was willing to pursue an avenue 
that did not involve bankruptcy. Additionally, Applicant has produced ample evidence 
that he is living within his means and has since regained financial responsibility. There 
are clear indications that his financial problems are resolved.  
 
Furthermore, there is sufficient information to establish partial if not full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2 After making payments for two years on two homes and 
a HELOC, Applicant had exhausted his financial resources. He documented five 
attempts to short sell his first home from March 2008 to June 2009 with offers ranging 
from $103,890 to $237,000. All offers were rejected by the lender. I note that the 
charged-off mortgage is $177,000. The debt is now charged-off and legally 
unenforceable. If Applicant had followed the advice of the first 11 attorneys he 
consulted, he would have filed for bankruptcy and this debt as well as the other debts 
most likely would have been discharged. 
 
Applicant disputed the $707 charged-off credit card debt. As noted, much of the 
discussion surrounding this debt could have been avoided had Applicant not 
acknowledged this debt as legitimate during his OPM interview and certifying it as 
accurate in subsequent DOHA interrogatories. However, once Applicant realized the 
debt was not his, he took sufficient steps to contest it, which triggers application of AG 
¶ 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
 
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s service as a defense contractor weighs heavily in his favor. He is a 
law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-
day expenses, lives within his means, and all of his SOR debts have been addressed. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
While one may take issue with Applicant’s choices that led to and contributed to 
his financial difficulties, I note after having had an opportunity to observe him, assess 
his credibility, and consider the steps he has taken to return to financial responsibility 
that he has certainly done more than most in same or similar circumstances. Applicant 
did not simply “walk away” from his obligations on his first house, but rather tried to 
pay his mortgage as long as he could and then tried to short sell it – five times. It is 
 
10 
 
 
unclear why the lender did not accept any of the offers, particularly when Applicant 
located buyers who were willing to pay more than what was owed on the mortgage. 
His $32,164 HELOC loan has been forgiven, the lender has issued a Form 1099, and 
Applicant included it on his income tax return. His $707 credit card debt has been 
successfully disputed.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s service as a defense 
contractor, his years of successfully holding a security clearance, his years of financial 
responsibility, his substantial steps taken to resolve his financial situation, his potential 
for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and responsible manner in 
which he dealt with his adverse situation, his reference letters and work performance 
evaluation, and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-
person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
