 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00522 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR)1 to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted a notarized response to the SOR on August 13, 2013, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on September 5, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s name was misspelled in the SOR. The SOR was amended to correct the misspelling. 
 
2 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 12, 2013, scheduling the 
hearing for October 8, 2013. The hearing was cancelled due to the government 
shutdown. DOHA issued another notice of hearing on October 16, 2013, scheduling the 
hearing for October 23, 2013. The case was reassigned to me on October 23, 2013. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 31, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer for almost ten years. He seeks to retain his security clearance, 
which he has held without incident since 2007. He has a master’s degree. He is married 
with two minor children.2 
  
 Applicant was born in a foreign country (Country A). His father was a diplomat. In 
1991, Applicant’s father was assigned to Country A’s embassy in the United States as 
the deputy ambassador. Applicant came to the United States with his parents and two 
of his siblings. His third sibling remained in Country A to finish school. Applicant’s father 
was assigned to the embassy for about seven years, after which he returned to Country 
A. Shortly thereafter, Applicant’s mother received an assignment at the same embassy 
as a secretary3 to the ambassador, and Applicant’s father accompanied her back to the 
United States.4  
 
 Applicant attended college and graduate school in the United States, earning a 
bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. While in college he met a native-born U.S. 
citizen and later married her. Their two children were born in the United States. 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2003.5 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Country A. Applicant’s father is 
not currently working. His mother works for an intergovernmental organization (IGO) 
that helps developing countries to combine their efforts and expertise to promote their 
common interests in the international arena. She is a secretary to the chair of the board 
of the IGO. The chair of the board is the former president of Country A.6 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 31-34, 41-46; GE 1; AE A. 
 
3 In this decision, secretary is used in the traditional sense as defined by Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary 
as: “a person whose job is to handle records, letters, etc., for another person in an office.” See 
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/secretary. 
 
4 Tr. at 31-37. 
 
5 Tr. at 33-34, 37-39; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 52-54, 60, 65-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE F. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant has three siblings. Two of his siblings live in the United States as 
permanent residents. One of his siblings is a citizen and resident of Country A.7  
 
 Applicant does not own any assets in Country A; all his assets are in the United 
States. He visited Country A in 2000 and 2011. His parents occasionally visit Applicant 
and his siblings in the United States. Applicant and his parents maintain regular contact 
through electronic means. Applicant’s father draws a pension from the government of 
Country A, but Applicant’s parents are self-sufficient without relying on the pension. 
Applicant sends his parents about $100 to $200 per month as a sign of respect and 
appreciation for what they have provided him. His parents would like to immigrate to the 
United States within the next few years, after his mother retires.8 
 
 Applicant and his father operated a small business from about 2009 to 2011. 
Applicant’s father imported precious and semi-precious gemstones from Country A, and 
Applicant helped him sell them through eBay and a web site created by Applicant. The 
venture never generated much income, and they chose to close the business.9  
 
 Applicant is highly regarded professionally and personally. His supervisor 
testified to Applicant’s excellent job performance, work ethic, reliability, dependability, 
strict adherence to rules and regulations, and loyalty to the United States.10 
 
 The United States enjoys close relations with Country A.11 The U.S. Department 
of State posted the following about the relationship between the United States and 
Country A: 
 
The United States established diplomatic relations with [Country A] in 
1961. The United States and [Country A] have a deep partnership 
characterized by mutual respect, mutual interest, shared values, and 
aspirations for a more peaceful and prosperous future. The United States 
respects [Country A’s] record of democratic progress, which has made it a 
model for the region and beyond, and supports [Country A’s] continuing 
efforts to strengthen the institutions of democracy. The United States is 
committed to working with [Country A] on nutrition and food security, 
energy, women’s and children’s health, HIV/AIDS, and sustainable 
development.12 
 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 50-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 47, 52-57, 61; GE 1, 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 67-68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 17-29. 
 
11 AE B-E. 
 
12 AE B. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that 
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a 
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, 
group, or country by providing that information; and  
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the 
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 Applicant’s parents and sibling are citizens and residents of Country A. The U.S. 
Department of State described the relationship with Country A as “a deep partnership 
characterized by mutual respect, mutual interest, shared values, and aspirations for a 
more peaceful and prosperous future.”  
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”13 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly 
governments must be made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
6 
 
sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged 
in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United 
States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the 
foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
In this case, the potential conflict of interest and heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion are predominantly created 
by Applicant’s father’s status as a retired diplomat and Applicant’s mother’s position with 
the IGO as the secretary to the former president of Country A. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have 
been raised by the evidence. 
Applicant and his father stopped conducting their gemstone business in about 
2011. Applicant does not have a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country. AG ¶ 7(e) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 1.d is concluded for Applicant. 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Applicant has been in this country for more than 20 years, and he has been a 
U.S. citizen since 2003. He received his education in the United States. His wife is a 
native-born U.S. citizen, and their children are U.S. citizens who were born here. He has 
two siblings who are U.S. permanent residents. Applicant has a successful career. He 
has held a security clearance without incident since about 2007.  
The United States enjoys close relations with Country A, and there is no 
indication that Country A is involved in espionage against the United States. 
Notwithstanding Applicant’s father’s status as a former diplomat and his mother’s 
 
7 
 
employment as a secretary for a former president, I find that it is unlikely Applicant will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the Country A 
government and the interests of the United States. I further find there is no conflict of 
interest, because Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are applicable.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has lived in the United States since 1991, and he became a U.S. 
citizen in 2003. He attended college and graduate school in the United States, earning a 
bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. His wife is a native-born U.S. citizen who he 
met in college. Their two children were born in the United States. He has a good job 
where he is highly regarded. He has held a security clearance without incident since 
2007. Applicant is somewhat connected to the Country A government through his 
parents. However, that connection does not create an unacceptable security risk.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
