 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00056 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He defaulted on two 
debts that became delinquent in 2006, totaling over $23,000. He failed to establish 
financial responsibility in the handling of his debts. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant originally submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in January 
2011, but failed to answer financial interrogatories provided to him by the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) in June 2011, and his application was closed in 
August 2011. He submitted his most recent SCA on March 31, 2013. On June 19, 2013, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
listing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
answered the SOR on July 1, 2013, and elected to have his case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
A copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated August 19, 2013, was 
provided to him by transmittal letter date August 20, 2013. Applicant received the FORM 
on August 27, 2013. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and 
to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. His response was due on September 
27, 2013. As of October 16, 2013, he had not responded to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on October 17, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the two factual allegations in the SOR. After a thorough review 
of the evidence of record, including his two SCAs, his answers to the SOR, his answers 
to interrogatories, and three credit bureau reports, I make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a government contractor. He attended 
college and completed a bachelor’s degree in May 2006. He married his first wife in 
August 1997, and was divorced in January 1998. He married his current wife in June 
2011. Applicant has two children, ages five and two. Applicant’s work history indicates 
he worked as a bartender from May 1991 until September 2004. He has been part-time 
self-employed since 1999. He started working full-time for his current employer, a 
government contractor, in March 2007. 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in June 2003, and his 
dischargeable debts were discharged. He presented no information concerning how he 
acquired the debts that were discharged, whether they were delinquent, and how he 
addressed those debts before his bankruptcy filing.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his March 2013 SCA (Section 26 – Financial Record) that 
he had two charged-off delinquent credit card accounts. The background investigation 
addressed his financial problems and confirmed the two charged-off debts alleged in the 
SOR, totaling over $23,000. The SOR debts are established by the credit reports 
submitted by the Government, Applicant’s SCAs, his February 2013 letter to DOHA, and 
his February 2011 report of interview. 
 
Applicant explained that in 2005, he opened the two credit card accounts alleged 
in the SOR and used them to purchase supplies for his new business venture. He 
started his business in January 2006. The business failed and he closed it in November 
2011. Applicant claimed he made some payments on the credit card accounts until he 
realized that his payments were not lowering the balance owed because of the penalties 
and interest assessed. He also claimed that he attempted to renegotiate the terms of 
the debts with the creditor, but the creditor refused. Both accounts were charged off in 
2006. Applicant failed to present documentary evidence showing that he made any 
payments.  
 
 
3 
 
 
In his 2013 SCA, and consistent with his February 2011 statement and his 
February 2013 letter to DOHA, Applicant acknowledged these were his delinquent credit 
card accounts. He stated that he had no intention of paying these debts. In 2011, he 
told the investigator that he did not have a legal obligation to pay these debts because 
the state’s four-year statute of limitations had run. According to his calculations, the 
debts would be removed from his credit reports in 2013. Applicant stated in his 2011 
interview that he had no other financial difficulties during the last seven years. He 
considered his current financial situation stable, and his income sufficient to pay his 
debts. He had not participated in financial counseling.  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the two SOR allegations, and 
indicated that the delinquent debts were deleted from his most recent credit report. The 
credit report he submitted with his answer to the SOR shows he has no other delinquent 
debts. 
 
Applicant started working full-time for his current employer in March 2007, and he 
has been working part-time (self-employed) from 1999 to present. He presented no 
information concerning his current monthly earnings, expenses, debts, and net 
remainder. He failed to explain why he was financially unable to pay the two debts 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant presented no evidence to show he has received financial 
counseling.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
 
4 
 
 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
The evidence established the two delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, totaling 
over $23,000, that became delinquent in 2006. Financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
5 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that the evidence is insufficient to 
establish that any of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. 
Applicant was discharged of his legal obligations under a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
protection filing in 2003, and he defaulted on the two charged off debts alleged in the 
SOR in 2006.  
 
 Applicant has been fully employed with a government contractor since March 
2007, and he has been part-time self-employed since 1999. He presented no evidence 
concerning his monthly income, expenses, debts, and net remainder from 2007 to 
present. He presented no documentary evidence of any debt payments, or that he 
otherwise attempted to resolve the two delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He has not 
participated in financial counseling.  
 
 The financial considerations concern is broader than the possibility that an 
individual might knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money. It 
encompasses concerns about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities 
essential to protecting classified information. (See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. 
Bd. May 1, 2012).) An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Applicant’s evidence failed to establish his financial responsibility. In light of 
the scant evidence available, Applicant’s unresolved debts cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor since 2007. He 
defaulted on two debts that became delinquent in 2006. He failed to submit sufficient 
documentary evidence to establish financial responsibility in the handling of his financial 
obligations.  
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a & 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
