 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00559 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 21, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Item 4). On July 12, 2013, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns 
under Guideline B (foreign influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. 
The SOR detailed reasons why DoD could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for him.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 10, 2013, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on August 22, 2013. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Government 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Items (Item 1-6), was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.   
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on October 5, 2013, and returned it to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). He timely submitted a document that I marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and 
admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel. I received the case 
assignment on October 21, 2013. 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Afghanistan. (FORM; Item 6 (1-9).) Counsel provided nine supporting documents to 
show detail and context for those facts. Applicant did not object to the documents, and I 
grant Department Counsel’s request.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. He 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c and 1.e and offered explanations. His 
admissions, including those made in a September 2008 Counterintelligence Focused 
Security Screening Questionnaire and Interview, are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. (Items 3, 5; AE A.)  
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan in 1960, and is 53 years old. He attended high 
school and graduated from a teacher’s college there in 1978. He served as a Colonel in 
the Afghan Army from 1980 to 1992, and subsequently served in its Inactive Reserves. 
He received an honorable discharge. He resided in Afghanistan until October 1994, at 
which time he left the country and went to another Middle Eastern country where he 
received refugee status. In March 2001 he entered the United States as a refugee. In 
May 2007 he became a naturalized U. S. citizen. He has a current U.S. passport that 
expires in 2017. (Items 4, 5.)  
 
After arriving in the United States in March 2001, Applicant was unemployed until 
November 2002 when he obtained a position as a security guard for a private company. 
He worked for that company until March 2011, at which time he accepted a linguist 
position with a defense contractor and deployed to the Middle East. (Item 4.) 
 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s spouse was born and raised in Afghanistan. They married in 1982, 
while living in Afghanistan. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen and works as a cashier. 
Applicant’s four children were born in Afghanistan. All four are naturalized U.S. citizens 
and residents. Applicant’s parents were citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Both are 
deceased. (Item 5; AE A.) He maintained monthly contact with his mother until her 
death about two months ago. Applicant has two brothers, both were born in 
Afghanistan. One brother is deceased. He was a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. 
Applicant maintained contact with that brother until his recent death. His other brother is 
a citizen and resident of France. He does not have contact with this brother. (Items 3, 
4.) Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
They are unaware of his work as a linguist. He stated in his response to the FORM that 
he has not had contact with them for more than a year, although he stated previously to 
a security specialist that he spoke to them once a month. He also noted in that 
response that his wife does not have “much” contact with them because she works. 
(Items 3, 5; AE A.) It is unclear how often he and his wife are in communication with his 
in-laws.  
 
Applicant wrote in his response to FORM that “for the last three years [he has] 
been working with the US military and [does not] have any contact with any foreigners 
outside of [his] duties as a linguist.” (AE A.) He and his family are happy living in the 
United States. He feels “responsible to do [his] best to support and serve the US Army 
in [the Middle East] by all means.” (Id.) He left Afghanistan because of the extremists in 
power. (Id.) 
 
Applicant submitted a Letter of Appreciation from a First Lieutenant in the Marine 
Corps with whom he worked for six months. The First Lieutenant wrote in May 2012 that 
Applicant was one of the top five linguists he supervised during deployments to the 
Middle East. He said that Applicant’s “efforts were critical to the success of our 
operations.” (AE A.) Applicant also submitted two Certificates of Appreciation for his 
work with the U.S. Marines from 2011 to 2012. (AE A.)   
 
Afghanistan 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents (FORM) concerning Afghanistan, which are incorporated herein by 
reference. Of particular significance are Afghanistan’s history of political unrest, and the 
presence of the Taliban and al-Qaeda, terrorist organizations, which continue to assert 
power and intimidation within the country. Safety and security are key issues because 
these terrorist organizations target United States and Afghan interests by suicide 
operations, bombings, assassinations, car-jacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this 
time, the risk of terrorist activities remains extremely high. The country’s human rights 
record remains poor and violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. 
Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans 
and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is 
safe or immune from violence, and the government has difficulty enforcing the rule of 
law.  
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Executive Order 
10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a 
preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th 
Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven 
conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. 
See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere circumstance of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Afghanistan with the United States places a significant but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his family members living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family member living in Afghanistan.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with his mother-in-law and father-in-law 
living in Afghanistan creates a potential conflict of interest because this relationship is 
sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist family members in 
Afghanistan by providing sensitive or classified information. That relationship and his 
12-year military background with the Afghan army, raise the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.   
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
Those with potential application in mitigating the above security concerns in this case 
are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. After leaving Afghanistan Applicant 
maintained contact with his mother and brother, who were citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan until their recent deaths. Although he stated that he has not had 
communication with his Afghan in-laws for a year, he previously contacted them 
monthly. While his loyalty and connections to his in-laws in Afghanistan are positive 
character traits, for security clearance purposes, those connections negate the 
possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence 
to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with 
his relatives who are Afghanistan citizens] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.”  
 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8(b) has some application. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has 
some connections to the United States. In 2001 Applicant and his family moved to the 
United States as refugees. In 2007 he became a U.S. citizen. His wife and four adult 
children are naturalized U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. He worked in the 
United States since 2002. Since March 2011 he honorably served as a linguist for the 
U.S. Marine Corps in a Middle Eastern country. There is no evidence that he owns real 
estate or personal property in the United States, or has established other longstanding 
connections here.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
   
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s history of 
connections to Afghanistan. Applicant, his parents, and siblings were born and resided 
there. He was educated at an Afghan college. He served as a colonel in the Afghan 
army for 12 years. There is no information as to the scope of his duties or the length of 
time he was in the army’s inactive reserves. His wife and children were citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan until they arrived in the United States in 2001. Details about 
their connections or communications with family members in Afghanistan are absent. 
Applicant and his communicate with his in-laws in Afghanistan, but the extent of said 
communication is unclear. His role as a linguist for the U.S. Army creates a greater risk 
of potential coercion, should terrorists learn of his military background.  
 
Applicant established some connections to the United States, including his U.S. 
citizenship for the last six years, as well as his wife and children’s U.S. citizenship and 
residency. He and his wife have worked in the United States. He expressed loyalty to 
the United States, and has served the U.S. Marine Corps for over two years. Although 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
these factors weigh in favor of approval of Applicant’s security clearance, they are not 
sufficiently persuasive to outweigh the factors against its approval, including a 
significant history of personal connections to Afghanistan, including 12 years of military 
service.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with sufficient doubt and questions as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He has not carried 
his burden to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:        For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:        For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:        For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:        Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
