1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 13-00388
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
November 19, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On May 1, 2013, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines C and B for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on May 13, and June 3, 2013,
and he requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.
(Item 2.)  On July 23, 2013, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case.
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In
the FORM, Department Counsel offered nine documentary exhibits. (Items 1-9.)
Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on September 12, 2013. Applicant
submitted no additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge
2
on October 21, 2013. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel requested in the FORM that I take administrative notice of
certain facts relating to the country of Serbia that were reviewed in the FORM. The
documents upon which the facts were based have been referred to in the FORM as
Items 6 through 9. The brief summary of the facts administratively noticed are set out in
the Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the FORM, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 48 years old. He was born in Serbia, where he graduated from high
school in 1983. From October 1983 to September 1984, he served in the Yugoslav
Army. (Item 14.)
Applicant lived in Serbia until September 2003, when he emigrated to the United
States. He became a naturalized United States citizen in April 2011. He has not
renounced his Serbian citizenship, and he is currently a dual citizen of Serbia and the
United States. (Item 3.) Applicant served in the Yugoslav Army under compulsive
service from October 1983 to September 1984. (Item 14.)  Applicant is employed by a
defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his
employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference) 
It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant acted in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign county over the United States by the following: 
1.a. Applicant maintains his Serbian citizenship to protect his property ownership
in a house and agricultural land in Serbia worth approximately 150,000 to 200,000 U.S.
Dollars (USD.) Applicant estimates his current United States assets at $70,000. (Item
4.)
1.b. Applicant retains a Serbian passport that he received in September 2009,
and that will not expire until September 2019. Applicant received his Serbian passport
before he became a United States citizen. While Applicant did technically surrender his
Serbian passport to his Facilities Security Officer (Item 5), he intends to use his Serbian
passport as proof of Serbian citizenship to sell his property in Serbia. Applicant stated
that he believes if he relinquishes his Serbian passport prior to selling his property, the
Serbian Government can take his property away from him.  (Item 4.)
3
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence)
The SOR lists eight allegations, (2.a. through 2.h.) regarding Foreign Influence,
under Adjudicative Guideline B, which will be reviewed in the same order as they were
listed on the SOR. Applicant has admitted all of the allegations listed in his RSOR. (Item
2.):
2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s wife is a dual citizen of Serbia and
United States. In his Security Clearance Application (SCA) Applicant confirmed that
since July 1988 Applicant has been married to his wife, who was born in Serbia and is
now a United States citizen. (Item 3.) 
2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s son is a citizen of Serbia and
resident of United States. Applicant confirmed that his 23 year old son is a Serbian
citizen, who resides in the United States. (Item 3.) In his RSOR, Applicant  alleged that
his son is now a dual citizen of the United States as well as Serbia, but no evidence was
introduced to establish his son’s United States citizenship. 
2.c. It is alleged in the SOR, and Applicant confirmed in his SCA, that his father is
a dual citizen of Serbia and United States, and he resides in United States. (Item 3.)
2.d. It is alleged in the SOR, and Applicant confirmed in his SCA, that his mother
is a citizen of Serbia and she resides in United States. (Item 3.) In his RSOR, Applicant
alleged that his mother became a United States citizen on Mach 25, 2013, and is now a
dual citizen of the United States as well as Serbia. However, no evidence was
introduced to establish his mother’s United States citizenship. 
2.e.  It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s brother, sister-in-law, and niece are
citizens of Serbia. In his SCA, Applicant’s noted that his brother is a dual citizen of
Serbia and the United States, now living in the United States. (Item 3.) He also indicated
on his RSOR that his sister-in-law and niece are dual citizens of Serbia and the United
States. Again, no evidence was introduced to establish the United States citizenship of
his sister-in-law and niece. 
2.f. It is alleged in the SOR, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he has an
uncle and aunt, who are citizens and residents of Serbia. This uncle farms the land in
Serbia that is owned by Applicant. (Item 2.)
2.g.  It is alleged in the SOR, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he has a
friend, who is a citizen and resident of Serbia. (Item 2.) Applicant communicates with
him by telephone on a monthly basis. (Item 4.) No information was provided as to
Applicant’s friends occupation or any association with the Serbian Government.
2.h.  It is alleged in the SOR, and Applicant admitted in his RSOR, that he owns
a house and separate land in Serbia, valued at approximately 200,000 USD, referred to
in 1.a. and 1.b., above. (Item 2.) Applicant indicated that he would like to sell his
Serbian property, but he has not done so because of Serbia’s poor economy. (Item 4.)
4
Current Status of Serbia
In 1999, the United States broke off relations with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, the predecessor state that included Serbia, when it launched its ethnic
cleansing and deportation campaign against noncombatant citizens. In October 2000, a
coalition of democratic parties defeated Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic in
presidential elections, overturning a regime that had plunged the country into bloody
conflicts in the region, economic decline, and international isolation in the 19990's.
Although the United States has reestablished formal relations with Serbia, U.S.-Serbian
relations, positive in many respects, have been nonetheless negatively affected by the
leading role played by the United States in promoting Kosovo’s independence from
Serbia. 
After the U.S. recognized Kosovo independence in February 2008, rioters
attacked the U.S. embassy in Belgrade and set it on fire. Violent demonstrations have
occurred as recently as August 2011. People who are citizens of both United States and
Serbia may be affected by certain laws that put special responsibilities on Serbian
citizens. (Items 6 through 10.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
5
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
 Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
Applicant’s application, receipt, and retention of a passport from Serbia and dual
citizenship with Serbia raises foreign preference concerns under Disqualifying Condition
AG ¶ 10 (a) as the “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship.”  I
find that subparagraphs (1), (2), and (5) under AG ¶ 10 (a) apply as Applicant has
indicated that he will not invalidate his foreign passport because he wants to use it to
prove his Serbian citizenship to protect his real property interest in Serbia. Applicant
also served in the Serbian military.  
Since Applicant has not renounced his Serbian citizenship to the authorities, and
he continues to maintain a Serbian passport, I do not find that any mitigating condition
applies to this case under Guideline C.  After considering all of the evidence of record
under Guideline C, I conclude that the disqualifying evidence is strongly controlling. I,
therefore, resolve Guideline C against Applicant.
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding Foreign Influence: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
6
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The applicable conditions in this case include: AG ¶ 7(a) “contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.” This applies
because all of Applicant’s family members are citizens of Serbia, a country of
heightened risk, and several of his family members and a friend reside in Serbia. 
I find AG ¶ 7(b) “connections to a foreign person, group government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information  . . . and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information” is also applicable in this case. 
I also find that because of Applicant’s Serbian house and property, valued at
approximately $200,000, ¶ 7(e) “a substantial business, financial or property interest in
a foreign country . . . could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence
or exploitation,” is applicable.
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Because of
Applicant’s continuing relationship with his family members, who are citizens and
residents of Serbia, and because of Applicant’s valuable Serbian property, of which he
clearly has a significant interest,  I cannot find that AG ¶ 8(b) “there is no conflict of
interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” or ¶ 8(f) “the
value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such
that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used to effectively influence,
manipulate, or pressure the individual” is applicable to this Applicant. Finally, I do not
find that any other mitigating factor is applicable to this case. Therefore, I resolve
Guideline B against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the reasons cited above
as to why the disqualifying conditions apply under Guidelines C and B, and why no
mitigating conditions apply, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.h.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
