 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00464 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Curtis Charles Van de veld, Esq. 
 
 
November 27, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had five delinquent debts totaling $35,221.39, identified on the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR). Applicant has repaid one debt. He is making payments 
on another. A third is being satisfied through involuntary garnishment. Two other debts 
remain delinquent. Despite having means to satisfy all of his accounts, he has filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on 
September 7, 2012. On June 10, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on August 7, 2013, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on September 13, 2013. A notice of 
hearing was issued to Applicant on October 15, 2013, scheduling a video-
teleconference hearing for November 5, 2013. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant’s Counsel 
objected to GE 1, GE 2, GE 4, and GE 5 as not relevant or probative of Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. I overruled the objections. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf, called one witness, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through O, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on November 15, 2013. The record was left open for receipt of additional documentation 
and Applicant’s closing statement. On November 14, 2013, Applicant presented a 
written closing statement and AE P through AE T. On November 23, 2013, Applicant 
presented AE U. Department Counsel had no objection to AE P through AE U and they 
were admitted into evidence. The record was then closed. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.2, E3.1.3, E3.1.7, and 
E3.1.13 of the Directive, the SOR was amended by stipulation of the parties to correct a 
typographical error. The original SOR identified two different debts as ¶ 1.d. The SOR 
was amended to reflect the second ¶ 1.d to be identified instead as ¶ 1.e. (Tr. 71-72.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He is married and has a son, age 4, and a 21-year-old 
stepson. He testified he has held a security clearance in connection with his 
employment since 2005. (GE 1; Tr. 128.) 
 
Applicant produced performance evaluations from 2006 to 2012 that show he is a 
“hardworking and dedicated employee.” He “far exceeds” and “exceeds” all of his 
evaluation criteria during this time period. (AE P.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified five delinquent debts totaling $35,221.39. Applicant’s debts appear in credit 
reports entered into evidence. Applicant admitted the debts as alleged in subparagraphs 
1.a through 1.e. (Answer; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.)  
 
Applicant attributed his debts to his wife’s mismanagement of their accounts. 
Applicant gave his wife power of attorney to act for Applicant in creating and discharging 
 
3 
 
debts in 2004. Unbeknownst to Applicant, his wife developed a gambling addiction that 
she hid from him and caused her to go into debt. In 2007, she was arrested for theft 
from her employer. She lost her job at that time and was unemployed until 2010. During 
her unemployment, she gave birth to Applicant’s son. She told Applicant about her 
gambling problem at the time of her arrest, but continued to hide the extent of their 
indebtedness created as a result of her gambling problem. Applicant’s wife continued to 
maintain their family’s finances after her incarceration because Applicant wanted to give 
her a second chance to “prove herself.” Applicant only became aware of their debts 
when he completed his security clearance background reinvestigation in September 
2012. He indicated in his e-QIP that he intended to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy to resolve 
these delinquent debts. Applicant acknowledged during his testimony that he needed to 
pay more attention to his finances. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 53-58, 96-102, 117-124.) 
 
Applicant elected not to follow through with filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy because 
he thought it would disqualify him from possessing a security clearance. Instead, in 
June 2013, Applicant retained counsel to advise him on repayment options. Counsel 
began negotiating with Applicant’s creditors on his behalf. Applicant also had 
discussions with his attorney on how to avoid debts in the future. (Tr. 125, 133.) The 
status of his debts, as listed on the SOR, is as follows: 
 
Applicant was indebted to a credit union on a bad debt charged off in November 
2008 in the approximate amount of $9,751, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. This 
debt is being repaid through an involuntary payroll garnishment. Every two weeks, 
$456.38 (or 25% of Applicant’s pay) is garnished and applied toward the repayment of 
this debt. Applicant’s earnings statements indicate he has repaid $7,302 on this debt in 
2013. (AE M; AE Q; Tr. 55, 64-65, 72-81, 83, 108-109.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent debt in the approximate amount of 
$7,714.20, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. This debt was reduced to a judgment, 
but Applicant’s wages cannot be further garnished because the garnishment would 
exceed the statutorily allowable amount. Applicant, through his attorney, initiated 
settlement negotiations with this creditor, but no payments have been made to this 
creditor. This debt is not resolved. (AE H; Tr. 72-74, 82-90, 106.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$8,051.16, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.c. Applicant, through his attorney, 
initiated settlement negotiations with this creditor, but Applicant has not made any 
payments to this creditor. This debt is not resolved. (AE H; Tr. 72-74, 82, 90, 106, 108.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$5,453.16, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d. Applicant presented documentation 
that shows he settled this debt for $2,710. This debt is resolved. (AE G; AE I; AE O; Tr. 
75-76, 82, 91, 108.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on a delinquent account in the approximate amount of 
$4,251.40, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e. Applicant’s wife testified that she has 
been making $200 payments per month to this creditor. Applicant’s November 2013 
 
4 
 
account statement shows that this debt has been reduced to $3,351.40. Applicant is 
addressing this account. (AE K; Tr. 76-77, 82, 91, 104-105, 108.) 
 
Applicant’s wife testified that she recently inherited $35,500. She presented 
documentation showing that amount is available in her accounts. She testified that if 
Applicant receives his clearance and is permitted to continue in his position with the 
government contractor that she would use her inheritance to pay off their remaining 
debts. It appears, however, that Applicant and his wife have abandoned that plan and 
have filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy instead, as evidenced by their November 12, 2013 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing. All of Applicant’s remaining delinquent accounts are listed 
on the Chapter 13 petition. In total, Applicant listed 13 creditors claiming $68,722 in 
debt. The documents provided with the Chapter 13 petition did not show Applicant’s 
assets. It reflected that Applicant and his wife completed credit counseling on November 
7, 2013. (AE A; AE B; AE D; AE F; AE J; AE L; AE O; AE S; AE U; Tr. 78.) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement indicates that he has approximately 
$376.72 left after meeting his monthly expenses. He presented documentation to show 
that he has recently resolved several other large debts that were not listed on the SOR. 
(AE C; AE R; Tr. 65-68.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
5 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. The relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems since at least 2006 due to his wife’s 
mismanagement of their finances and her incarceration. Applicant has satisfied the debt 
in subparagraph 1.d for $2,710 and has reduced his debt on subparagraph 1.e to 
$3,351.40 through monthly payments. The debt listed in subparagraph 1.a is being 
satisfied involuntary through garnishment, not through voluntary action on Applicant’s 
behalf. This garnishment continues to contribute to his inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy other debts. The debts in subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c remain unresolved. 
Applicant has the means to resolve these remaining debts, given his wife’s recent 
 
6 
 
inheritance, but has elected to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy instead of managing the 
repayment of his remaining debts on his own. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant made a financial decision to give his wife power of attorney to manage 
their finances. After she was arrested and incarcerated, as a direct result of her theft of 
her employer’s funds, he again elected to place his trust in her. Unbeknownst to 
Applicant, she continued to incur delinquent debt. Applicant testified that he would 
monitor their finances henceforth, but failed to offer proof that he has taken any 
concrete steps to insure future financial difficulties would not occur.  He demonstrated 
little actual knowledge of their financial situation at the present time during his 
testimony. As a result, his decisions cast doubt on his judgment. Applicant’s conduct 
does not warrant application of AG ¶ 20(a).   
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant may have encountered financial difficulties 
due to his wife’s mismanagement of their funds prior to her incarceration and her 
subsequent unemployment, but he did not produce evidence to show he acted 
responsibly once he was aware of her gambling habit. Applicant was placed on notice of 
their financial problems in 2007 when his wife was incarcerated. However, he placed 
misguided trust in his wife after her incarceration and let her manage their finances 
without any oversight. Applicant bears responsibility for neglecting his financial situation 
at that point. The Appeal Board has held “Even if an applicant gets into financial 
 
7 
 
difficulties because of circumstances beyond the applicant’s control, the Judge must 
consider whether the Applicant dealt with his or her financial difficulties in a reasonable 
manner.”1 Applicant has not dealt with his finances in a timely and reasonable manner.  
 
 The Appeal Board opined: 
A Judge is not required to accept an applicant's statements at face value 
merely because they are not rebutted by Department Counsel. It is 
reasonable for a Judge to consider the record as a whole and use 
common sense in evaluating the absence of corroborating evidence. 
Failure to present documentation in support of an applicant's claims about 
financial matters is a factor to be considered by a Judge in evaluating 
such claims. . . . Furthermore, some of Applicant's claims concerning his 
debt resolution efforts were, on their face, based on commitments made 
by Applicant to perform various acts in the future. Promises to take actions 
in the future, however sincere, are not a substitute for a documented track 
record of remedial actions. The possibility that Applicant might achieve 
resolution of his outstanding debts at some future date does not constitute 
evidence of financial reform or rehabilitation in the present. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). 
 While Applicant testified that he was prepared to resolve his remaining 
delinquent accounts with funds that his wife inherited, this reflected only a promise to 
take action on his remaining debts in the future. After making this promise, he changed 
his mind and decided to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant received financial 
counseling pursuant to his bankruptcy. He submitted documents showing he filed under 
Chapter 13, but the documents contain no plan approved by the court. He has not 
started on the repayment of the debts through Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The process is 
not sufficiently advanced at this time for a finding that there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) is only partially applicable.  
 
The Appeal Board has indicated that good-faith “requires a showing that a 
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to 
duty or obligation.”2 While I acknowledge that he has satisfied a number of debts that do 
not appear on the SOR, his actions on his remaining accounts are not yet sufficient to 
qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. He 
first planned to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy, but failed to file. Then, he indicated he would 
repay the debts with his wife’s inheritance. He did not follow through on that promise, 
but instead decided to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He has yet to establish a repayment 
plan under Chapter 13. His actions fail to show reasonableness, prudence, honesty, 
and adherence to duty or obligation. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable to his remaining 
delinquencies. 
 
 Applicant failed to present documentary evidence to show that he was in the 
process of formally disputing any of his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable.  
                                                          
1 ISCR Case. No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). 
2 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 at 4 (App. Bd. October 12, 1999). 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a hardworking and dedicated employee who performs well on the 
job. However, Applicant failed to produce sufficient documentation that his delinquent 
debts have been addressed or are otherwise satisfied. He has not mitigated the 
Financial Considerations security concerns. He has gone through the security clearance 
process in the past, as he has held a clearance since 2005, and has been on notice that 
financial delinquencies are a concern to the government. However, he chose to 
disregard this concern until very recently and leave the management of their finances to 
his wife. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    For Applicant 
   
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
