 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00544 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 27, 2013, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 18, 2013. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
and she received it on September 23, 2013. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She declined to 
submit any additional information. The case was assigned to me on November 6, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted all the allegations in SOR. The 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. She is married and has one adult child and a stepchild. 
She has worked for her current employer, a defense contractor, since July 2011. She 
has had past periods of unemployment including: December 2010 to July 2011, and 
June 2007 to October 2008. She has a bachelor’s degree. She has no military service, 
but has held a security clearance in the past.1  
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by credit reports from November 2011 
and March 2013. The SOR sets out nine debts amounting to about $43,215. Applicant’s 
finances became a concern because of her periods of unemployment described above, 
her own unspecified medical issues from June 2007 to June 2008, and caring for her 
parents because of their medical issues in 2008. By 2011, her parents were self-
sufficient again. She is now assisting her daughter with college expenses and with 
some medical issues. Applicant states that all these financial issues have prevented her 
from addressing the SOR-related debts.2  
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a pet-related account in the amount 
of $571. Applicant admits purchasing the account, but claims she attempted to cancel 
the account in early 2011 when she no longer possessed the pet. She failed to provide 
any documentation concerning this account. This debt is unresolved.3 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a medical account in the amount of 
$295. Applicant admits this account, although she believes it should have been paid by 
her insurance company. She resubmitted the claim to her insurance company in 2007 
and thought it was resolved. When she examined her credit report in 2011, she 
discovered that the debt was not resolved. She contacted the creditor, but took no 
further action. She failed to provide any documentation concerning this account. This 
debt is unresolved.4 
 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Items 4, 6. 
 
3 Items 4, 8. 
 
4 Items 4, 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c - 1.e and 1.g – 1.i are credit card 
accounts in the amounts of $15,000, $6,701, $3,464, $6,409, $9,286, and $1,158 
respectively. Applicant admits to the underlying debt for each account. She stated she 
tried to use her company’s “financial resources to consolidate the balances” on SOR 
debts ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, but the effort was not successful. She contacted the creditor for 
SOR debt ¶ 1.e in early 2012 to establish a payment plan, but because the creditor 
required her to set up automatic draft payments from her bank account, she refused to 
accept this term and the account remains unresolved. The remaining accounts also are 
unresolved. Applicant’s response to these accounts is that she requires “debt 
assistance to make arrangements to pay off outstanding balances.” She does not 
describe what debt assistance she is seeking or when she will seek it. These debts are 
unresolved.5 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is a telecommunications account in the 
amount of $331. Applicant admits the debt, but claims a dispute about returning 
equipment to the creditor. She later sent back the equipment and “hoped this was 
settled with [the creditor].” She failed to provide any documentation concerning this 
account. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
 Applicant’s financial worksheet indicates that she has a disposable income after 
paying all expenses and debt obligations at the end of each month of about $1,200. She 
indicated that she recently paid the balances on five credit cards not related to the SOR, 
but did not supply any documentation.7 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
                                                          
5 Item 4, 6 (p. 16), 7-8. 
 
6 Items 4, 6 (p. 10), 8. 
 
7 Item 6 (p. 15, 22). 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
  
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 All of Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. She did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply. Applicant provided evidence of her unemployment and of her own 
and her family’s medical issues, which contributed to her financial problems. However, 
in order for mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) to fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate 
responsible behavior in light of the circumstances. Although she recently contacted at 
least one creditor to settle her debt and apparently sought some assistance from an 
employer-sponsored debt relief program, she provided insufficient evidence to show she 
acted on the remaining debts. The totality of her actions does not rise to the level of 
responsible behavior under these circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant presented evidence of some financial counseling; however, there is no clear 
evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under control 
because the debts remain unpaid. There is no evidence that she has made a good-faith 
effort to pay the debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) partially applies and 20(d) does not apply. 
Applicant failed to document her dispute concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f, therefore, AG 
¶ 20(e) does not apply to those debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s periods of 
unemployment and family medical problems and how they contributed to her debt 
problems. However, she has not shown a track record of financial stability. The record 
lacks evidence that Applicant has made an overall good-faith effort to resolve her debts. 
Therefore, she failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
