 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00116 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
I, psychological conditions, and G, alcohol consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 20, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline I, 
psychological conditions, and Guideline G, alcohol consumption. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 On January 10, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
2 
 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 12, 2018, and the hearing was held 
on August 9, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was marked as 
hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, but did not offer any exhibits at the hearing. 
Although Applicant did not request to have the record remain open after the hearing, he 
submitted an email to Department Counsel which contained substantive information that 
I will consider. The email is marked as Applicant exhibit (AE) A. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 17, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the SOR allegations, with explanations. 
The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He is married and has four adult children. He has 
worked for his current defense contractor-employer since December 2008. He served 
honorably in the Army for 20 years before retiring as a sergeant first class (E-7) in 2004. 
He served in Iraq in 2003 where he was awarded the Bronze Star for valor. He holds a 
bachelor’s degree.1   
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant: (1) was diagnosed with unspecified trauma related 
disorder and alcohol use disorder (moderate) in October 2017, which are conditions that 
may impair judgment, stability, reliability, or trustworthiness; and (2) continues to 
consume alcohol despite his alcohol use disorder diagnosis. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a). 
  
 In 2003, while deployed to Iraq, Applicant was involved in a combat mission 
where his vehicle convoy was exposed to a mine field. The vehicle behind Applicant’s 
vehicle was directly exposed to an explosion and casualties resulted. Applicant risked 
his life to remove some of the survivors from the area. This is the act for which he 
received his Bronze Star. During this same deployment, Applicant also witnessed other 
unit casualties including the loss of his commander. All these incidents had a profound 
effect on Applicant, especially with him dealing with the survivor’s guilt that he felt.2 
 
 Applicant testified that he was given a Department of Veteran’s Affairs (VA) 
disability rating of 70 percent for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). He received 
some counseling for his PTSD in late 2004 or early 2005 when he was ordered by a 
court to attend counseling after an arrest for animal cruelty when he killed some pet rats 
that his wife had in their house. He attended six sessions of counseling. Since then, he 
has not attended any further counseling for his PTSD or otherwise.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5, 16, 19; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 19-20, Answer (including attachments). 
 
3 Tr. 17-18, 23-24, 29, 31-32. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant disclosed his alcohol history, including three alcohol-related incidents, 
early in his Army career. He admitted that during his younger days in the Army that 
alcohol use was part of the culture. He stated that his use of alcohol has decreased as 
he has gotten older. He described his current alcohol use as drinking about three nights 
a week where he may have up to three beers a night. On weekends he will consume a 
12-pack of beer (unclear if he meant each day of the weekend or for the whole 
weekend). He further admitted drinking to intoxication at least once a week. He has not 
had any alcohol incidents (arrests or work-related incidents) since 1989.4  
 
 In June 2017, Applicant consented to participating in a psychological evaluation 
requested by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF). In October 2017, Dr. 
N, a licensed psychologist, conducted an independent assessment and prepared a 
written report, which reflected his findings, diagnosis-prognosis, and conclusions. When 
asked about his current alcohol use, Applicant stated that he drinks between one and 
four drinks per night, rarely to the point of intoxication. Dr. N found that Applicant’s 
PTSD was the underlying cause of the 2005 incident in which Applicant killed his 
spouse’s pet rats. Applicant was diagnosed with “Unspecified Trauma Related Disorder 
(provisional)” and “Alcohol Use Disorder, Moderate.” His prognosis is “Guarded.” Dr. N’s 
report concluded as follows:  
 
Based upon his clinical interview, the subject is motivated to maintain a 
successful career and reach retirement. These intentions are evidenced 
by his decreased alcohol use and absence of domestic abuse and 
neighborhood conflict reports. However, to date, the subject still 
experiences symptoms related to military trauma, and is not receiving 
mental health treatment. Because of these symptoms, I have concerns 
about the subject’s capacity to maintain good judgment and impulse 
control in the face of potential life stressors. To be clear, with bona fide 
mental health treatment, I believe that the subject could resolve residual 
trauma symptoms, learn coping skills to help manage his alcohol 
consumption and help ensure that he does not have future incidents like 
those in his record. Without treatment, however, it seems as though the 
patient’s alcohol use, impulse control and judgment could all be 
threatened by serious life stressors in the future. 
 
Applicant did not produce evidence of any current “bona fide mental health treatment.” 5 
 
 An attachment to Applicant’s answer was a letter from his former brigade combat 
team commander who described Applicant as “a consummate professional and having 
outstanding leadership traits. He also described Applicant’s heroic action when he 
                                                          
4 Tr. 22, 24-25, 34; GE 2; Any reference to alcohol incidents not alleged in the SOR will only be 
considered by me as they may relate to judging Applicant’s credibility, or weighing mitigating conditions, 
and in applying the whole-person factors. 
 
5 GE 3-4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
provided first aid to a wounded soldier. Applicant also assisted in the construction of a 
church while in Iraq.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
                                                          
6 Answer (attachment); AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions 
 
The security concern for psychological conditions is set out in AG ¶ 27: 
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline and an opinion, including 
prognosis, should be sought. No negative inference concerning the 
standards in this guideline may be raised solely on the basis of seeking 
mental health counseling.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 28. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition that may impair judgment, stability, reliability, or 
trustworthiness. 
 
Dr. N expressed concern about Applicant’s capacity to maintain good judgment 
and impulse control because of his untreated diagnoses of unspecified trauma related 
disorder and alcohol use disorder, moderate. AG ¶ 28(b) applies.  
 
The adjudicative guidelines also include examples of conditions that could 
mitigate security concerns, as set forth in AG ¶ 29, but since Applicant has an ongoing 
medical conditions and has not sought treatment for his diagnosed conditions, none of 
the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
6 
 
 
 (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and  
 
 (d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant’s regular consumption of alcohol to the point of weekly intoxication and 
his diagnosis of alcohol use disorder support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Although Applicant claims he has reduced his alcohol input, his current use of 
alcohol is multiple times per week and to the point of intoxication at least once a week. 
Applicant presented no evidence of treatment programs attended. AG ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b), 
and 23(d) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
and heroic military service, and the recommendation from his former commander. 
However, I also considered that he has two significant diagnosed medical conditions 
that, without treatment, could impair his judgment. Applicant failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the psychological conditions and alcohol consumption security 
concerns. If Applicant were to receive proper medical treatment for his diagnosed 
conditions in the future, that action would certainly be positively viewed were he to 
submit a reapplication. 
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines I and G. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline I:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph   1.a:     Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
___________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
