KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: About six years ago, Applicant’s security clearance was revoked, in part, because
Applicant wrongfully used a company computer to view pornographic images; solicited
prostitutes on more than 50 occasions from about 1990 to 2008; and provided his second wife
with $30,000 after she threatened to expose his illicit sexual activities to neighbors; and
frequented strip clubs after his SCI access was revoked.  Applicant has stated that his last
encounter with prostitutes was in 2008, but he has since had sexual encounters with women other
than his cohabitant.  He paid for massages from these women and sometimes ran errands for
them. He views these women as “friends with benefits.”  This sexual activity involved three or
four women from 2013 to 2016.  He engaged in this activity about a dozen times in both 2014
and 2015, and a handful of times in 2016.  He has not told his cohabitant about his sexual
activity with the other women.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 16-03763.a1
DATE: 11/20/2018
DATE: November 20, 2018
In Re:
----------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-03763
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 1, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline D (Sexual
Behavior) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On July 27, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard granted Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.1  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is in his 50s, has been working over 30 years for his employer.  Divorced
twice, he has lived with a cohabitant for over the past ten years.  
About six years ago, Applicant’s security clearance was revoked in a DOHA proceeding. 
In that case, which raised security concerns under multiple guidelines, the Judge concluded, in part,
that Applicant wrongfully used a company computer to view pornographic images; solicited
prostitutes on more than 50 occasions from about 1990 to 2008; was diagnosed with alcohol
dependence; provided his second wife with about $30,000 after she threatened to expose his illicit
sexual activities to neighbors; and frequented strip clubs after his SCI access was revoked.  None
of those matters were alleged in the current SOR, “as the Department presumably decided those
matters were no longer a concern.”   Decision at 3.  
  
Applicant has reapplied for a security clearance.  In responding to DoD interrogatories, he
stated that his last encounter with prostitutes was in 2008, but disclosed he has since then had sexual
encounters with women other than his cohabitant.  He paid for massages from these women and
sometimes ran errands for them, but he did not pay money for sex.  He referred to his relationship
with these women as “friends with benefits.”  Decision at 4.  This sexual activity involved three or
four women from 2013 to 2016.  He engaged in this activity about a dozen times in both 2014 and
2015, a handful of times in 2016, and not at all in 2017.  He testified that he would cease to engage
in any sexual encounters outside his primary relationship.  He has not told his cohabitant about his
sexual activity with the other women.      
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant gave full, frank, and candid responses to pertinent questions in answering the
interrogatories and in testifying during the hearing.  The Judge stated:
1 The hearing in this case was held on July 13, 2017.
2
This case has two main issues.  The first is whether Applicant’s sexual
activity during 2013-2016 with multiple women outside of his primary relationship
poses undue security concerns under Guideline E and D.  The second is whether
Applicant’s sexual activity, which is unbeknownst to his cohabitant, poses undue
security concerns under Guideline E.
The former is mitigated because Applicant’s sexual activity with other
women during 2013-2016 was private, casual, consensual behavior in which he
exercised caution (e.g., use of condoms) and discretion (e.g., it took place at private
residences and he was attentive to signs of prostitution).  It is further mitigated
because his sexual activity with other women ceased in 2016, and he has pledged to
not engage in similar behavior.  Accordingly, the behavior no longer serves as a basis
for coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
The latter is mitigated because, although Applicant has not disclosed his
sexual activity to his cohabitant, by stopping the behavior in 2016 and pledging to
not engage in similar behavior, he has taken sufficient positive steps to reduce or
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  In reaching this
conclusion, I note Applicant’s willingness to disclose to the Department matters of
a highly personal nature.  His willingness to voluntarily and fully disclose such
matters suggests that he will voluntarily self-report any potential security infraction
or violation or other matter related to his eligibility for access to classified or
sensitive information.
* * *
Applicant is a flawed and imperfect person, as we all are, and he was not an
acceptable security risk when his previous case was decided in 2012.  But there has
since been a substantial change of circumstances, and he is now an acceptable
security risk.2
Discussion
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”   Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of
the national security.”  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s
2 Decision at 8-9.
3
decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After
the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
rebut or mitigate those concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-02322 at
3 (App. Bd. Mar. 14, 2018).
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  Id.  
Department Counsel contends the Judge erred in his analysis of the case.  He argues that the
Judge took a narrow, piecemeal approach in analyzing the evidence; minimized or ignored the
security significance of Applicant’s conduct; and substituted a favorable credibility determination
for record evidence.  Department Counsel’s arguments have merit.   
Department Counsel argues that the Judge was naive in failing to conclude that Applicant
paid to engage in sexual activity with the masseuses from 2013-2016.  We need not address that
issue.  The current SOR did not allege that Applicant solicited or hired prostitutes.  Instead, it
alleged that he engaged in high-risk sexual conduct on multiple occasions since 2013 and did so
unbeknownst to his cohabitant.  Although the Judge did not make any findings or conclusions that
specific disqualifying conditions applied, he apparently concluded some applied because he
conducted a mitigation analysis that addressed both Guideline E and D.  
Department Counsel asserts that the Judge summarily dismissed Applicant’s prior
unfavorable security clearance adjudication.  In this regard, he highlights the Judge’s finding that,
because that previous conduct was not alleged in the current SOR, “Department Counsel presumably
decided those matters were no longer a concern.”3  Department Counsel also notes the absence of
a detailed whole-person analysis in the decision and argues the Judge elected to not consider
Applicant’s previously adjudicated conduct in conjunction with the current allegations in his
3 Contrary to the Judge’s finding that Department Counsel presumably no longer had a concern about the
previous conduct, Department Counsel informed the Judge at the beginning of the hearing that the unfavorable security
clearance decision was being offered into evidence “because it lends itself to showing the whole person analysis and a
pattern of concerns.”  Tr. at 26. 
4
analysis.  At the hearing, Department Counsel offered into evidence Applicant’s unfavorable
clearance decision as well as an affidavit, which pre-dates that decision.  Government Exhibits (GE)
5 and 8.  Those exhibits detailed Applicant’s previous conduct.  It is well established that a Judge
is required to consider all the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-03019 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jul. 5, 2017).  As we have also stated, a Judge may consider non-alleged conduct (a) in assessing
an applicant’s credibility; (b) in evaluating an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or
changed circumstances; (c) in considering whether the applicant has demonstrated successful
rehabilitation; and (d) in applying the whole-person concept.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-07369
at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 16, 2017).4  In admitting the prior unfavorable clearance decision into evidence,
the Judge stated that to exclude that evidence would “essentially result in me putting blinders on and
compartmentalizing . . . .”  Tr. at 172.  The Board agrees.  For the same reason, it was reversible
error for the Judge to have analyzed Applicant’s more recent alleged conduct without relating it to
his prior misconduct of a similar nature as reflected in the prior adverse adjudication and other
record evidence.5 
More specifically, it merits noting that Applicant testified that he last engaged in sexual
activity with a masseuse in December 2016, which was about seven months before the hearing.  Tr.
at 148.  The Judge erred in failing to address Applicant’s 26-year history of sexual indiscretions in
analyzing whether his cessation of such behavior for about seven months was a sufficient period of
reform and rehabilitation to conclude he mitigated the alleged security concerns.  Additionally,
Applicant also testified extensively about his enjoyment of sex and the sexual dysfunction between
4 Both parties addressed the issue of the non-alleged conduct in their briefs.  In general, our decisions state that
a Judge may consider non-alleged conduct for certain purposes.  Id.  See also, ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd.
Oct. 26, 2006)(using the term “may”) and ISCR Case No. 14-03497 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2015) (using the phase “It
is permissible for DOHA to consider non-alleged conduct and circumstances . . . .”).  On the other hand, we have also
routinely concluded that a Judge may commit error by failing to consider relevant evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
17-00569 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2018) and ISCR Case No. 15-07539 at 7 (App. Bd. Oct 18, 2018).  Whether a
Judge’s failure to consider non-alleged conduct or circumstances constitutes harmful error depends upon the significance
of that evidence.  Normally, the proper disposition when non-alleged conduct becomes a significant factor in the outcome
of a case is to remand it to the Judge with instructions to amend the SOR and give the parties an opportunity to address
that conduct.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02952 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 3, 2018) and ISCR Case No. 08-02404 at 5
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2009).  Given the circumstances in this case, however, such action is not needed.  The non-alleged
conduct was previously adjudicated at a DOHA proceeding.  Applicant was afforded due process rights under the
Directive to address that conduct at the prior proceeding.  Department Counsel sent Applicant the prior unfavorable
clearance decision and related documents as proposed Government exhibits on March 29, 2017, which was more than
three months before the current hearing.  Tr. at 15-16.  Applicant was placed on notice that his prior non-alleged conduct
would be presented to the Judge for consideration.  He is collaterally estopped from attacking the findings and
conclusions of the prior DOHA Judge.  See generally ISCR Case No. 03-24233 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Oct 12, 2005).  As
discussed below, the Judge’s favorable analysis under Guidelines E and D is not sustainable in light of the evidence as
a whole.  Based on the foregoing, we conclude no purpose would be served by remanding the case to amend the SOR.
5 In the prior decision, the Judge found “Additionally, starting in about 1990, he solicited prostitutes
approximately 50 times.  This often occurred at massage parlors.”   GE 8.  In the current proceeding, Applicant was
asked, “And how is it that you meet the women who you are qualifying as friend with benefits?”  He responded, “Well,
these are women I had known for years before . . . .  I suppose most of them were people that I had massages from.” 
Tr. at 139. 
5
him and his cohabitant.6  Tr. at 114-127 and 134.  The Judge did not address Applicant’s testimony
about those matters to determine whether his high-risk sexual conduct is unlikely to recur.  Those
omissions undercut the Judge’s mitigation analysis.   
The Judge concluded that Applicant was a credible witness, that he ceased engaging in
sexual activity with other women in 2016, and that he pledged to not engage in similar behavior. 
While we must give deference to a Judge’s credibility determination (Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1), such
deference is not without limits.  Where, as here, the record contains evidence that detracts from a
favorable credibility assessment, the Judge should address that aspect of the record, explicitly
explaining why he or she finds an applicant’s version of events to be worthy of belief in light of the
contrary evidence.  Failure to do so suggests that a Judge has merely substituted a favorable
impression of an applicant’s demeanor for record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-23504 at
6 (App. Bd. Dec. 12, 2007) (in holding for Applicant, the Judge relied too heavily on his
interpretation of Applicant’s demeanor and did not evaluate Applicant’s credibility in light of the
record as a whole).  See also Fieldcrest Cannon, Inc. v. N.L.R.B., 97 F.3d. 65 at 69-70 (4th Cir.
1996), to the effect that a Judge’s credibility determinations can be rejected if they are unreasonable,
contradict other findings of fact, are based on an inadequate reason, or on no reason at all.  In this
case, the Judge’s failure to analyze the evidence discussed in the preceding paragraph undermines
his conclusion that Applicant would never engage in problematic sexual conduct again. 
Security clearance determinations must be “an overall common sense judgment” based on
the adjudicative guidelines and whole-person concept.  Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(c).  In this
case, Applicant has a 26-year history of engaging in sexual indiscretions.  He solicited prostitutes
on more than 50 occasions from 1990 to 2008 and provided his ex-wife with $30,000 in 2004 after
she threatened to expose his illicit sexual activities.  GE 8.  His prior security clearance adjudication
placed him on notice of the security significance of sexual indiscretions.  Despite having his security
clearance previously revoked, in part, for sexual behavior, he engaged in problematic sexual conduct
with various masseuses on about 30 occasions from 2013-2016 without the knowledge of his
conhabitant.  No record evidence reflects that his cohabitant has ever been informed of his recent
sexual indiscretions.  Applicant himself characterized his conduct as adulterous.  GE 6,
Interrogatories, at 9.  He continued to engage in high-risk sexual conduct even after he reapplied for
a security clearance in January 2016, underwent a background interview in March 2016, and
responded to interrogatories in September 2016.  GE 1, 3, and 6.  He only ceased engaging in that
problematic conduct about seven months before the hearing.  The timing of Applicant’s decision to
cease engaging in such conduct impacts upon the degree to which mitigating factors apply.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 21 2009).  When the record evidence is viewed in its
totality, Applicant’s high-risk sexual conduct from 2013-2016 continues to cast doubt on his
judgment and continues to place him in a situation in which he could be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress. 
6 The Judge found that Applicant described his sexual relations with his cohabitant as “bad sex” (Decision at
4-5), but the Judge failed to address that finding in his analysis.  
6
We conclude that the Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious,
and contrary to law.  It fails to consider important aspects of the case and runs contrary to the record
evidence.  The record evidence, viewed as a whole, is not sufficient to mitigate the Government’s
security concerns under the Egan standard. 
7
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan         
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy              
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
8
