 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02536 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision on Remand 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior) 
and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 4, 2015. On 
October 27, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines D and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes resulting 
from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 26, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
18, 2017, and the case was assigned to an administrative judge on August 14, 2017. The 
administrative judge conducted the hearing on September 7, 2017. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, 
consisting of five letters attesting to Applicant’s trustworthiness, good judgment, and 
reliability, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
September 15, 2017. On April 11, 2018, the administrative judge granted a clearance.  
 
 Department Counsel appealed the administrative judge’s favorable decision. The 
appeal focused on GX 2, which consisted of DOHA interrogatories asking Applicant to 
verify the accuracy of the summaries of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted on 
March 17, 2016, and telephonic interviews on April 6, 2016, and April 19, 2016. Applicant 
responded to the interrogatories on September 4, 2016, stating that the PSI summary 
was not accurate. He stated, “This report is incomplete, inaccurate and misleading.” He 
pointed out that pages 1-3 of the report were missing. He listed out omissions and 
inaccuracies on pages 4-9. He ended his comments by stating, “In summary, this report 
is inaccurate, incomplete and due to numerous instances of the use of subjective and 
prejudicial comments is gross misleading.” However, he answered “Yes” to the final 
question: “Subject to any additions or deletions made above, do you agree with and adopt 
the investigator’s summaries as accurate reflections of your interviews?”  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant initially did not object to the admission of GX 2, but he 
later objected to it, stating “the whole thing is wrong.” The administrative judge adhered 
to his admission of GX 2 but recognized that Applicant objected to parts of it. After the 
hearing adjourned, the administrative judge reopened the record for additional evidence 
or argument regarding GX 2. Neither party submitted additional evidence, and the 
administrative judge made no additional findings or rulings. 
 
 The Appeal Board reviewed the record and concluded that the administrative 
judge’s failure to make specific findings regarding the portions that Applicant did or did 
not adopt was harmful error. The Appeal Board explained:  
 
It is well settled that a judge has broad discretion in writing a security 
clearance decision. However, the Judge’s decision must be written in a 
manner that allows the parties and the Board to discern the findings the 
Judge is making and what conclusions he or she is reaching. [Citation 
omitted.] Whether an applicant has adopted statements in an interview 
summary is a question of fact. In this case, despite the prehearing, hearing, 
and post-hearing exchanges on the admissibility of Applicant’s interview 
summary, the Judge failed to make findings as to which of the key 
statements in the interview summary Applicant either adopted or did not 
adopt. In other words, we are unable to discern whether key statements 
were admitted into, or excluded from, evidence. 
 
 
3 
 
The Board remanded the case to the administrative judge for “processing consistent with 
the Directive.” The Board also ordered that “[i]f another Judge is assigned to this case on 
remand, each party shall be provided the opportunity to request another hearing.” 
 
 As of the date of the Appeal board decision, the original administrative judge was 
no longer serving as an administrative judge in DOHA. The case was assigned to me on 
September 11, 2018. On September 12, 2018, Department Counsel requested another 
hearing.  
 
 On September 24, 2018, DOHA notified Applicant that his hearing on remand was 
scheduled for October 15, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. In Applicant’s 
answer to the SOR, he denied all the allegations, and he adhered to his denials at the 
hearing on remand. With the consent of the parties, GX 1, GX 2, AX A, and the testimony 
of Applicant’s character witness at the first hearing were incorporated into the record of 
the hearing on remand. Department Counsel presented the testimony of a witness to 
authenticate the PSI contained in GX 2. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing on 
remand (Rtr.) on October 22, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is 71 years old and has been employed by federal contractors for more 
than 30 years. He has held a security clearance since about 1970. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Air Force from March 1970 to May 1975. He earned a bachelor’s degree 
in June 1969, a master’s degree in December 1980, and a doctorate in July 1982. He 
married in September 1973, divorced in September 1988, married again in December 
1988, and divorced in February 2012. He has five children, ages 37, 35, 32; 28, and 26. 
 
 The PSI at issue in this case was conducted in March 2016. The PSI covered 
Applicant’s employment history, military service, personal references, family and 
associates, and financial record. In his response to the inquiries asking him to verify the 
accuracy of the PSI summary, he pointed out numerous errors and omissions in these 
portions of the PSI summary.  
 
At the hearing on remand, instead of relying on self-authentication of the PSI 
summary, Department Counsel presented the testimony of the special agent from the 
Office of Personnel Management who conducted the interview. The special agent testified 
that she has a bachelor’s degree and has worked as a special agent for 12 years, during 
which time she has conducted “thousands” of interviews. Before conducting an interview, 
she reviews the SCA and checks for omissions or discrepancies that need to be clarified. 
She described her style of interviewing as “conversational, confrontational.” She uses a 
friendly, conversational tone during questioning, which becomes “confrontational” if the 
questioning develops something that is not covered in the SCA. She takes handwritten 
notes but does not record the conversation. She stated that she does not paraphrase the 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
4 
 
information from the interviewee. She writes down “exactly what they say.” After the 
interview, she types her report of investigation from her handwritten notes. Her 
handwritten notes are retained for 30 days after the case is “closed,” meaning that it is 
adjudicated by the DOD CAF, at which time her notes are destroyed. (Rtr. 23-28.) 
 
The portion of the PSI summary that is the basis for the SOR and the Appeal Board 
decision is captioned as “Illegal Activity/Foreign Contacts/Activities/Travel.” The special 
agent testified that, as she went through the information in Applicant’s SCA, Applicant 
stopped her and asked her to go back to a question about contracts with foreign nationals, 
and at that point he volunteered information about a relationship with Ms. V. (Rtr. 53.)  
 
 At the time of the hearing, the special agent had no independent recollection of 
what Applicant disclosed, except for his disclosure that Applicant asked his daughter to 
leave his timeshare vacation home because a woman (Ms. V) was coming to the 
timeshare to have sex with him. The special agent testified that she remembered that 
disclosure because “it is the only time someone has ever disclosed something like that to 
me.” The special agent had no information about Ms. V because she was not listed 
anywhere in the SCA. She testified that her interview summary was “100 percent” 
accurate because it reflects what she had in her notes. (Rtr. 29-33.) She testified that she 
uses symbols or shorthand for her questions, but she writes down the answers using 
whatever words the interviewee uses. (Tr. 61.) The subject of the interview is not given 
an opportunity to review the interview summary after it is typed. (Rtr. 67.) 
 
The PSI summary reflects that Applicant told the special agent that he met Ms. V 
in November 2014 at an expo where adults in the adult-sex industry have informational 
booths. Applicant watches live streaming adult pornography at home and has viewed 
pornography in which Ms. V participates in sexual activity with men. He was interested in 
Ms. V and looked up more information when he returned home from the expo. He began 
having contact with Ms. V in November 2015 through social media. He learned that he 
could join a “fan club” for $100, which offered live pornographic videos showing Ms. V 
participating in sexual activity. He learned from Ms V that she was willing to have sex with 
him. On about five occasions, he paid Ms. V $1,200 to have sex with him. He has traveled 
to several cities in several states to meet her. They usually meet for dinner and then go 
to a hotel room where he pays her for sex. (GX 2 at 10-11.) He told the investigator that 
he thought Ms. V was 23 or 24 years old, but was not certain. (Rtr. 101.).  
 
 Applicant told the special agent that on one occasion, he invited Ms. V to a vacation 
home where Applicant’s oldest daughter and her boyfriend were staying with him. He 
asked his daughter and her boyfriend to leave the vacation home for a few hours so that 
he could have it for himself while Ms. V visited. (GX 2 at 10.) 
 
 Applicant told the investigator that he knew Ms. V was born in a South American 
country but he did not know if she was a dual citizen. He told the investigator that he 
admires Ms. V’s business and enterprising spirit and that he had provided her suggestions 
for improving her website. He told the investigator that he considers himself Ms. V’s 
customer and friend. (GX 2 at 10.) 
 
5 
 
 The special agent asked Applicant if he knew that prostitution was illegal and he 
responded, “not in all states.” The investigator asked if he knew that prostitution was a 
crime, and he answered, “yes.” He told the investigator that he contacts Ms. V only when 
he has extra money and can afford her $1,200 fee. (GX 2 at 11.) The special agent 
testified that the reference to prostitution was in her report because Applicant mentioned 
it. (Rtr. 56-57.) 
 
 On cross-examination by Applicant, the special agent testified that she did not 
remember him. She knew from retrieving the interview records that they had one personal 
interview and two telephone conversations. She did not remember receiving a telephone 
call from Applicant. (Tr. 36-37.) 
 
 When Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories and commented on the 
accuracy of the PSI in GX 2, he described Ms. V as “one of my NY dear friends.” (GX 2 
at 4.) At the first hearing, he testified that he told the investigator that he had a “superficial 
relationship” with Ms. V and he denied that he had sex with her at any time. (Tr. 30, 32.) 
At the hearing on remand, Applicant testified that he and Ms. V were “friends, 
acquaintances.” He explained that he believes “friends” and “acquaintances” are “about 
the same.” He testified that Ms. V was not a “close friend.” He explained: “She didn’t know 
my birthday. She didn’t know my address, didn’t know anything about my work. Those 
kind of things did not come up.”(Rtr. 76-77.) However, he admitted that he was open to 
the possibility that they were “moving toward the path of having a friendship, a 
relationship, maybe boyfriend and girlfriend.” (Rtr. 105.) He admitted that he gave Ms. V 
“a few hundred dollars” and gifts of nominal value, but denied paying her for having sex 
with him. (Rtr. 78.) He testified that the relationship ended about two and a half years ago 
when “she just stopped” after she lost her phone and did not provide Applicant with her 
new contact information. (Tr. 48; Rtr. 105.) 
 
 Applicant admitted in the PSI and at the hearing on remand that he and the 
investigator discussed the fact that prostitution is illegal. However, he insisted at the 
hearing that the investigator introduced the topic, and he denied that he solicited 
prostitution. (GX 2 at 11.)  
 
 Applicant’s 37-year-old daughter, who holds a security clearance, submitted a 
letter describing him as a reliable, responsive, and wise parent. She has worked with 
Applicant professionally and attests that he is respected and trusted in the workplace. 
She considers her father one of the most honest, trustworthy, and reliable people she 
knows. She has observed his good judgment, respects him, and aspires to be like him. 
(AX A at 5.) She was staying in Applicant’s timeshare vacation home when Ms. V visited 
him, and, according to the PSI summary, she was asked by Applicant to leave so that he 
and Ms. V could be alone. However, she submitted no testimonial or documentary 
evidence regarding the accuracy of the PSI summary. Applicant testified his children, all 
of whom are older than Ms. V, were aware of his relationship with Ms. V. His oldest 
daughter advised him to look for older friends, but his three other children “have not been 
quite so expressive.” (Rtr. 114.) 
 
 
6 
 
 A retired member of the senior executive service and a current federal contractor 
testified at the initial hearing and submitted an affidavit attesting to Applicant’s 
trustworthiness, good judgment, prudence, and reliability. The witness bases his 
evaluation of Applicant on working closely with him on sensitive projects since 1993. (Tr. 
60-65; AX A at 1.) He believes that the security concerns in this case are based on 
Applicant’s social relationship with a woman involving “dinner and pleasantries and 
nothing more than a normal social relationship.” (Tr. 66.) I have considered this witness’s 
testimony and affidavit in my decision. 
 
 Three other affidavits were received during the initial hearing, and I have 
considered them in my decision. The affiants have known Applicant for many years, and 
they have attested to his honesty, trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. These 
affiants did not indicate whether they were aware of the allegations in the SOR. (AX A at 
2-4.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
7 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG 12:  
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of judgment 
or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, may raise 
questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Sexual behavior 
includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, electronic, or 
written transmission. . . .  
 
 The issue underlying the remand order has been resolved by the testimony of the 
investigator who prepared the PSI summary. The PSI summary has been authenticated 
in accordance with Directive ¶ E3.1.20, and I have admitted it in its entirety. While I have 
some doubts about the special agent’s claim of virtual 100% accuracy, I am not 
persuaded that the entire recitation of Applicant’s relationship with Ms. V is a fabrication, 
as he has claimed. “Government officials are entitled to a presumption of regularity and 
good faith in the discharge of their official responsibilities.” ISCR Case No. 15-07539 at 5 
(App. Bd. Oct. 18, 2018). Applicant has not rebutted that presumption. The PSI summary 
is sufficient to establish that Applicant paid for sexual relations with Ms. V on several 
occasions in multiple states, thus raising the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 13(a): sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the 
individual has been prosecuted; 
 
AG ¶ 13(c): sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and 
 
AG ¶ 13(d): sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of 
discretion or judgment. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 14(b): the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 14(c): the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
AG ¶ 14(d): the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 AG ¶ 14(b) is not established. Applicant’s relationship was recent, frequent, and 
did not occur under unusual circumstances making recurrence unlikely. His relationship 
with Ms. V was continuing as of the date of the PSI. He testified that it ended about two 
and a half years ago. However, he did not affirmatively stop the relationship; it ended 
when Ms. V stopped responding to his attempted contacts and changed her contact 
information without telling him. 
 
 AG ¶ 14(c) is not established. Applicant testified that his children are aware of his 
relationship with Ms. V, but there is no evidence that he has otherwise disclosed it. To the 
contrary, he continues to deny having a sexual relationship with Ms. V. 
 
 AG ¶ 14(d) is established. According to the facts recited in the PSI, Applicant’s 
conduct was private and consensual, and there is no evidence that it was not discreet.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s sexual conduct under this guideline. It does 
not allege any falsifications during the security-clearance process. The concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
 
9 
 
Applicant’s sexual conduct establishes the following disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. . . ;  
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . ; and  
 
AG ¶ 16(g); association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(g): association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
10 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established for the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG 
¶ 14(b). AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) are not established, because Applicant has not 
acknowledged his behavior or taken any steps to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 17(g) is established, but its mitigating effect is diminished 
because Ms. V, not Applicant, terminated the relationship. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline D and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. I have considered Applicant’s long history of service 
in support of national defense, while holding a security clearance without incident. I have 
considered the testimony and affidavits of experienced and respected members of the 
defense community regarding Applicant’s good judgment, trustworthiness, honesty, and 
reliability. However, this evidence is outweighed by the evidence of Applicant’s poor 
judgment in his relationship with Ms V. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guidelines D and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the 
whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
sexual conduct and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D (Sexual Behavior):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
