KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Directive states that it is an applicant’s job to submit evidence in mitigation of the
concerns raised by an SOR.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  This includes character evidence, should an
applicant choose to provide it. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-02243.a1
DATE: 11/30/2018
DATE: November 30, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
 
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-02243
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Danel A. Dufresne, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 29, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On September 25, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr. denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis
was erroneous in that he failed to consider the entirety of the evidence, thereby rendering his
decision arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has a history of failing to file and pay his Federal income tax returns.  He did not
file them in a timely fashion from 2005 through 2010, and the IRS has placed liens against
Applicant’s assets due to non-payment.  In 2015, the IRS levied over $197,400 against Applicant’s
assets.  Applicant has had payment plans with the IRS, but his actual payments have been sporadic. 
In October 2015 the IRS levied $730 from Applicant’s retirement pay.  Applicant’s state has also
filed liens against his assets.  Court records disclose a lien of over $45,000 due to Applicant’s failure
to have paid his state taxes.  Applicant has been in touch with state taxing authorities but has not
been able to secure a payment plan.
Applicant attributed his failure to file his Federal returns to a friend of his wife.  During a
period when Applicant and his wife were separated, the friend was supposed to file the returns but
did not do so.  Applicant stated that he only found out about this after he and his wife reconciled. 
The Judge found this explanation to be lacking credibility, noting, for example, evidence that the
IRS sent him inquiries about his delinquent returns, which should have placed him on notice of the
problem.  Applicant’s problems were also affected by his financial support to his son.  The Judge
found that the documents  Applicant submitted were not clear and that he had not submitted
evidence that might have shown a history of payments.
The Judge’s Analysis
Although Applicant did provide evidence that he had attempted to contact the IRS in an
effort to secure installment plans for repaying his Federal tax debt, his financial support for his son
diverted funds that could have been spent on resolving his tax problems.  The Judge concluded that
there are no clear indications that Applicant’s tax problems are being resolved.  Applicant did not
submit character references which might have supported a favorable result under the whole-person
concept.
Discussion
2
Applicant contends that the Judge’s observation that Applicant did not submit character
references demonstrates that he devoted undue attention to that matter and failed properly to
evaluate the record as a whole.  He states that the Judge shifted the burden to Applicant to provide
evidence of good character and that the Judge did not consider the favorable evidence that was
contained in the record.
The Directive states, however, that it is an applicant’s job to submit evidence in mitigation
of the concerns raised by an SOR.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  This includes character evidence, should
an applicant choose to provide it.  See, e.g., ISCR Case 14-03754 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2015), in
which a Judge noted an absence of character evidence in his analysis.  Applicant’s argument that
the Judge somehow improperly shifted the burden of persuasion to him is without merit.  We
construe the challenged sentence about character references as simply a comment on the overall state
of the evidence.  We have previously noted that a Judge may find that, in a given case, none of the
mitigating conditions are sufficient per se to mitigate an applicant’s security concerns but
nevertheless conclude that the record as a whole will support a favorable decision through the
whole-person analysis.  See ISCR Case No. 02-05110 at 5 n.7 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2004).   The Judge
in the case before us appears to have concluded that there is nothing in the record that would support
a favorable decision in this manner.  Our examination of the record1 persuades us that the Judge
evaluated Applicant’s concerns in light of the record that was before him, as the Directive requires. 
Directive ¶ 6.3.           
As noted above, Applicant cites to evidence that the Judge did not explicitly discuss, arguing
that he failed to consider it.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the
record, and Applicant’s arguments are not enough to rebut that presumption.  Neither are they
sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02145 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 10, 2018).  A Judge is
not expected to discuss every piece of evidence, which would be a practical impossibility.      
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as filing tax
returns and paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and
reliability required of those granted access to classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-
01256 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 3, 2018).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record. 
“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See
1Applicant also submitted new evidence to include his Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty
(DD 214).  The arguments in the brief suggest that the Judge should have considered the content of the DD 214.  Of
course, the Judge could not consider documents that were not part of the record.  The Board is not permitted to consider
new evidence.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
3
also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
