 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00891 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant responded to the SOR on July 14, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 30, 2018. 
Scheduling of the case was delayed at Applicant’s request. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 13, 2018, scheduling 
the hearing for August 18, 2018. The case was reassigned to me on July 26, 2018. An 
amended notice was issued on August 6, 2018, changing the courtroom location, while 
keeping the date and time. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
 Applicant’s request to introduce classified information during the hearing was 
denied. In response, Applicant submitted a motion in limine to preclude the Government 
from introducing certain evidence. That motion was denied.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
GE 3 and 4 were admitted over Applicant’s objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 through 9 and 11 through 20, which were admitted without 
objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Biographical information 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked in 
some capacity for his current employer since 2009. He graduated from a military service 
academy in 1980. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1980 until he retired 
as a senior officer with an honorable discharge in 2007. He has a master’s degree. He 
is married with an adult stepchild.1 
 
Events leading to Applicant’s wife’s felony conviction 
 
The facts in this section are derived primarily from a statement of facts signed by 
Applicant’s wife as part of a plea agreement with the United States Attorney and a letter 
agreement between Applicant and the United States Attorney in which the United States 
agreed not to prosecute him. Except for minor facts not germane to this decision, unless 
specifically identified otherwise, I adopt the facts in his wife’s statement of facts and 
Applicant’s letter agreement over any contrary evidence presented at the security 
clearance hearing. 
 
In the late 1990s to 2002, Applicant was assigned as the defense attaché at the 
U.S. Embassy in a foreign country. As such, he was authorized to make visa referrals 
recommending that a foreign citizen be issued a United States visa. The referral went to 
the consular officer or consular associate who adjudicated the visa application. His wife 
also worked at the U.S. Embassy as a consular associate. She processed visa 
applications. A consular associate’s decision to approve any given visa application was 
subject to review by a supervisory official, but such review was not required.  
 
Based upon Applicant’s position and his wife’s generous and outgoing nature, 
they became acquainted with a number of people in the local economy and 
government, some of whom were incredibly wealthy. Their friends included a U.S. 
citizen (Mr. A) with many connections in the foreign country and a foreign billionaire (Mr. 
B). 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23, 141; GE 1.  
 
 
3 
 
Mr. A was general manager of a company (Company X) based in the foreign 
country. The company was a subsidiary of a holding company (Company Y) for some of 
the largest business concerns in the foreign country. Company Y was owned by Mr. B. 
Employees of Companies X and Y periodically traveled to the United States for their 
companies’ business purposes. Those employees were required to obtain non-
immigrant visas for their business travel to the United States. Mr. A had a financial 
interest in the favorable adjudication of visa applications submitted by Company X and 
Company Y employees. 
 
In June 2002, which was a few months before Applicant and his wife were 
scheduled to transfer back to the United States, they entered into a loan agreement with 
Mr. A, in which they would receive an interest-free loan of $750,000 that would be 
repaid at $30,000 a year for 25 years. On the same day, Applicant’s wife flew to the 
United States and two days later signed a contract to buy a house for $675,000. She 
then returned to the foreign country and resumed her work as a consular associate. 
 
Applicant and his wife closed on the property for $675,000 in August 2002. The 
purchase was made in cash using the funds that were wired to them by Mr. A. Applicant 
described it as an investment for Mr. A. Applicant and his wife would make 
improvements and eventually sell the property. Once sold, Mr. A would be repaid and 
receive 60% of the appreciation of the property.  
 
Applicant’s wife regularly adjudicated visa applications submitted by employees 
of Companies X and Y and close associates and relatives of Mr. A. This continued 
throughout her tenure as a consular associate, including the periods before and after 
the loan agreement with Mr. A. She knew that some of the applicants on such visa 
applications were employees of Companies X and Y and close associates and relatives 
of Mr. A.  
 
Applicant’s wife did not disclose her financial relationship with Mr. A to any 
United States official responsible for her appointment as a consular official and no 
United States official authorized her to maintain a financial relationship with Mr. A while 
also adjudicating visa applications submitted by employees of Companies X and Y and 
Mr. A’s business and personal associates. The loan and her partnership with Mr. A 
regarding the property in the United States created a conflict of interest with respect to 
her adjudication of visa applications submitted by employees of Companies X and Y 
and Mr. A’s business and personal associates. She knew that she had this conflict of 
interest. 
 
In October 2002, Applicant and his wife returned to the United States and lived in 
the property. In the same month, they applied for a $100,000 home equity loan from a 
federal credit union. The loan application called for information about all financial 
obligations, but Applicant and his wife did not list anywhere on the loan application their 
$750,000 debt to Mr. X. The loan was approved and $100,000 was disbursed to 
Applicant and his wife. They made regular and timely payments on the home equity 
loan and ultimately fully repaid the loan. 
 
 
4 
 
In October 2004, Applicant and his wife applied for a $175,000 home equity loan. 
The loan application called for information about all financial obligations, but Applicant 
and his wife did not list anywhere on the loan application their loan and remaining debt 
to Mr. X. The loan was approved and $175,000 was disbursed to Applicant and his wife. 
They made regular and timely payments on the home equity loan and ultimately fully 
repaid the loan. 
 
Legal proceedings 
 
Applicant and his wife were eventually investigated for the above actions. In May 
2008, his wife entered into a plea agreement with the United States Attorney in which 
she signed a statement of facts. Applicant signed a letter agreement with the United 
States Attorney in which the United States agreed not to prosecute him. He admitted 
the facts pertaining to him that were in his wife’s statement of facts. She agreed to plead 
guilty to the following felony charge:  
 
Between on or about June 24, 2002, and on or about September 30, 
2002, at the United States Embassy in [foreign country], the defendant, 
[Applicant’s wife], being an officer and employee of the executive branch 
of the United States Government knowingly and willfully participated 
personally and substantially as a Government officer and employee, 
through decisions on applications, specifically, applications for United 
States non-immigrant visas, in which the defendant and the defendant’s 
spouse had a financial interest. (In violation of Title 18, United States 
Code, Sections 208(a) and 216(a)(2)) 
 
The maximum penalties for the offense were five years of imprisonment, a fine of 
$250,000, a special assessment, and three years of supervised release. The parties 
agreed that probation was reasonable, but the court was not bound by their agreements 
and sentencing recommendations. She agreed to pay $505,000 to the United States, 
which was the proceeds plus interest from the sale of the house, net of all liens and 
outstanding mortgage obligations, except the loan to Mr. A. The United States also 
agreed that it would not criminally prosecute Applicant for the specific conduct 
described in the statement of facts, any alleged offenses relating to his tax return for tax 
year 2002, or the conduct described in the letter agreement between the United States 
and Applicant. 
 
Applicant’s wife pleaded guilty to the charge in May 2008. She was sentenced to 
supervised probation for 12 months. She successfully completed the terms of her 
probation.  
 
Applicant’s position 
 
Applicant accepts little responsibility for the events leading to his wife’s 
conviction. He contended that they were victims of a “witch-hunt,” and she was unfairly 
prosecuted. He asserted that as a consular associate, she did not have the authority to 
approve visas. He believes the government was targeting Mr. B in order to seize his 
 
5 
 
assets. He stated that she accepted the plea agreement because the investigation was 
dragging out, they had exorbitant legal fees, and they had family problems associated 
with his wife’s child and grandchild. He asserted that neither Mr. A nor his associates 
ever asked him or his wife to do anything illegal, unethical, or immoral. He stated that in 
hindsight, what they did was a bad idea and they would never do it again, but they did 
not think so at the time. He also stated that his wife’s statement of facts and his letter 
agreement were inaccurate. He testified that he “believe[s] witnesses were coerced.”2  
 
Applicant believes the investigation resulted because the government at least 
initially thought his wife was “selling visas for money.”3 He wrote in a 2006 letter to the 
Secretary of State: 
 
I believe the lead investigator [Investigator] is unfairly manipulating the 
investigation in order to obtain an unwarranted indictment. [Investigator] 
needs an indictment in order to discredit me and cover up his own criminal 
wrongdoing. In the course of his investigation, [Investigator] has tried to 
intimidate witnesses into signing false statements, he tried to pressure one 
of my former NCOs into improperly revealing classified and [remainder 
redacted for security and privacy reasons].4 
 
Applicant stated that he and his wife did not tell anyone in the U.S. Government 
about the loan from Mr. A, but they did not attempt to hide it. He stated that on a 
previous occasion, military bureaucracy unfairly forced his wife to leave a post in 
another country. He stated that if they asked anyone about accepting the loan, they 
might receive the same type of unreasonable response. Mr. A asked them not to tell 
anyone about the loan. Applicant surmised that Mr. A did not want his extended family 
members to find out about the loan. Applicant did not know why Mr. A agreed to the 
deal, but Applicant and his wife guessed that Mr. A wanted to get a foothold in the real 
estate market or he wanted to curry favor with Mr. B, who was friendly with Applicant’s 
wife.5  
 
Applicant admitted that they did not reveal their loan from Mr. A when submitting 
their home equity loan applications. In response to the SOR, he wrote that “[i]n 
hindsight, that was probably a mistake, but at the time [they] did not think the loan from 
[Mr. B] was pertinent to the loan requests.” He later testified that they informed the first 
loan officer of the loan, who advised them that it did not have to be reported because 
Mr. A did not have a lien on the property. Applicant acknowledged that the loan officer 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 13-14, 24, 30-40, 47, 51, 61, 71-76, 82, 87-98, 120-121, 141-142; Applicant’s response to SOR; 
GE 2; AE 1, 4.  
 
3 AE 8.  
 
4 AE 8.  
 
5 Tr. a 40-44, 62-63, 81, 104-106, 110-111, 116-117, 152-155; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE 1, 
4.  
 
6 
 
was not the approval authority for the loans. They had a different loan officer for the 
second home equity loan.6 
 
Applicant stated that he and his wife repaid Mr. A about $10,000 in 2003. Mr. A 
then told them not to pay anymore, and that he would recoup the amount owed when 
the house sold. Applicant stated that the plan was that after the house sold and any 
home equity loans were paid off, Mr. A would receive his remaining $740,000 from the 
loan and split the profit. That is inconsistent with the statement of facts that Mr. A would 
receive 60% of the appreciated value of the property. Applicant’s explanation for why 
the home equity loans, minus the cost of improvements, would come out of Mr. A’s 
profit was that Applicant “did not think [Mr. A] really cared.”7  
 
Applicant and his wife sold the house in 2008 for $875,000. Mr. A was never 
repaid because the proceeds, after paying off the costs and home equity loans, went to 
the U.S. Government as part of the plea agreement. Mr. A forgave the loan. Applicant 
estimated that they paid about $125,000 for improvements to the property. Applicant 
initially asserted that he and his wife never benefitted financially from the deal. When 
confronted with the math that showed they made about $200,000 (loan ($750,000) plus 
home equity loans ($275,000) minus cost of house ($675,000), repayment to Mr. A 
($10,000), and cost of improvements ($125,000) equals $215,000), he admitted that he 
had not thought of that as profit because it went to pay their attorneys.8 
 
Character evidence 
 
Applicant submitted documents and letters attesting to his excellent performance 
of duties. He is praised for his leadership, personal courage, and lasting dedication.9  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 52-56, 67-68, 110; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE 1.  
 
7 Tr. at 135-139; GE 2; AE 2, 4. 
 
8 Tr. at 53, 56-61, 64-65, 114, 128-131, 135-139; GE 2; AE 2, 4, 19. 
 
9 AE 6, 15. 
 
7 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
8 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant was involved in events that led to his wife’s felony conviction. He and 
his wife accepted $750,000 from an individual with substantial foreign connections, part 
of which they used to buy a house for $675,000. Applicant’s wife regularly adjudicated 
visa applications submitted by employees of Companies X and Y and close associates 
and relatives of Mr. A throughout her tenure as a consular associate, including the 
periods before and after the loan agreement with Mr. A. Neither of them informed any 
member of the U.S. Government about the payment. They provided false information on 
applications for two home equity loans when they failed to divulge the loan from Mr. A. 
As part of his wife’s plea agreement, the United States agreed not to prosecute 
Applicant. 
 
Applicant’s conduct reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(c), and 16(e) are applicable.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
9 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur;  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 The events in question occurred more than 13 years ago. However, despite the 
passage of time, I have lingering concerns. Applicant accepts little responsibility for the 
events leading to his wife’s conviction. He contended that they were victims of a “witch-
hunt,” and she was unfairly prosecuted. He also stated that his wife’s statement of facts 
and his letter agreement were inaccurate and that he “believe[s] witnesses were 
coerced.” I found much of Applicant’s testimony to be self-serving and not credible.  
 
 Among the many things that concern me are that Applicant initially stated that he 
and his wife did not benefit financially from the deal. When applying the figures supplied 
by Applicant, they profited somewhere in the area of $200,000. The fact that they had 
expensive legal fees does not change the profit equation.  
 
 Another matter of concern is why Mr. A would agree that the home equity loans 
would be paid in full before the profits would be split. This is a subtle but significant 
change from what was in the statement of facts. By analysis, the house sold in 2008 for 
$875,000, which was $200,000 more than the $675,000 that was paid for the house. 
After paying the liens and sales costs, the sale netted $505,000, which went to the 
United States. Under the terms of the agreement described by Applicant, if the sale 
went through without having to pay the United States, even with the house appreciating 
by $200,000, the proceeds of $505,000 would have been $235,000 short of being able 
to pay Mr. A back the remaining $740,000 owed on the loan. In other words, Applicant 
would have profited about $200,000 (which is the same amount he actually profited), 
while Mr. B would have lost $235,000 (which is still less than the $740,000 he actually 
 
10 
 
lost). Applicant could not supply a good reason why a successful business person 
would agree to such a one-sided deal. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Personal conduct security concerns are not 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s character 
evidence and his otherwise honorable military service. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
