 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03446 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Michael J. Harris, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 17, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 (AG). 
 
 On November 6, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 11, 2018, and the hearing was 
 
2 
 
 
convened as scheduled on August 8, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3. Applicant objected to all the Government exhibits. I sustained the objection to 
GE 3 (Applicant’s personal subject interview dated August 28, 2017) and it was not 
considered, but overruled the objections to GE 1 and 2. The Government’s exhibit list 
was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE I).1 Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A 
through G, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s exhibit list was marked as 
a HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 16, 2018. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the allegation to substitute the word 
“record” for the word “card.” Without objection, the motion was granted.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he denied the sole SOR allegation. After a thorough and 
careful review of all the pleadings and evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He has worked for his current government contractor 
employer since September 2016. Previously, he worked for a different government 
contractor from January 2000 to April 2016. He is single, never married, with no 
children. He has a bachelor’s degree.3   
 
 The allegation raised in the SOR stated that in April 2016, Applicant resigned 
from his employment in lieu of termination for falsifying his time record.   
  
 In October 2015, while working for his previous employer as a project manager, 
Applicant was informed that he would be laid off. He was extended twice and his lay off 
date was pushed to May 2016. During the extension periods, he “hustled” to find work 
on different IT projects. He found IT work with a software development group, within the 
company, from approximately October 2015 until his resignation at the end of March 
2016. He believed the group was happy with the work he performed.4   
 
 On either March 30 or 31, 2016 (Applicant initially testified it was April 1, but 
documentation supports the March dates), Applicant was called into a meeting with the 
local human resources representative (HR) and an unspecified person from the 
company’s corporate office (Corporate) who participated in the meeting telephonically. 
Applicant testified that at this meeting he was questioned by Corporate about the 
                                                          
1 HE I was misplaced and is not included in the record. It was not a substantive document, but merely 
listed the three Government exhibits, which are included in the record. 
 
2 Tr. 60. 
 
3 Tr. 20, 56; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 21-25; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
allocation of his work hours to the project on which he was working. Specifically, 
significant hours (496) were allegedly worked at night on the IT project he was working. 
Applicant stated that while he had core hours where he was required to work from his 
office, he claims he was also given the flexibility by his supervisor to work out of the 
office and outside core hours. He did not provide any written documentation to support 
this claim. Applicant claims he resigned after hearing about the time mischarging 
accusations, although he said he was not threatened with termination at the meeting. 
He felt he had no future with the company and that he had been betrayed. He 
documented his resignation with an email dated March 31, 2016, to HR.5    
 
 A letter from the company’s security manager, dated February 21, 2017, reflects 
the Applicant resigned in lieu of termination as a result of an internal investigation that 
found Applicant mischarged his time during 2015 and 2016 for a total of 496 hours. 
These findings were based upon a review of Applicant’s badge access records, witness 
interviews, and his 2015 performance review. The details of the investigation are not in 
the record.6  
 
 Applicant presented letters from a former supervisor and a current supervisor. 
His former supervisor stated that Applicant took his work seriously and never attempted 
to manipulate the system for his personal gain. His current supervisor characterized 
Applicant as a stellar performer and his reliability has never been called into question. 
Applicant also provided his 2013 and 2014 performance appraisals which had overall 
ratings of “achieves expectations.”7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
                                                          
5 Tr. 26, 28-29, 31-35; GE 1; AE F. 
 
6 GE 2. 
 
7 AE A-B, D-E. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
 
5 
 
 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
Applicant’s mischarging of time, as determined by his company’s investigation, 
supports the application of the above disqualifying condition.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and   
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
Applicant did not acknowledge his time mischarging. Instead he claimed, without 
corroboration, he had the authority to do so. His action of resigning from a position he 
held for 16 years immediately after being confronted by HR about his time mischarging 
creates a reasonable inference that he did so to avoid termination for cause. His denial 
of wrongdoing is not credible. His action casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c)  and 17(f) do not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.               
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s years of 
contractor service, his supervisors’ statements, and his performance appraisals. 
However, I also considered that he engaged in fraudulent time charging. Applicant failed 
to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude he failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Guideline E, 
personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph     1.a:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
