 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 17-024951 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct and the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 23, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Statements of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines E, personal conduct, and F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 
2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 23, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 28, 2018. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 5, 2018, 
                                                          
1 This case was incorrectly labeled as an ISCR case. 
 
2 
scheduling the hearing for August 16, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified, called one witness, 
and offered exhibit (AE) A.2 There were no objections to any exhibits and all were 
admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on August 23, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. She earned an associate’s degree in 2014. She has a 
seven-year-old child. She married the father of her child in 2015. She has been 
employed by a federal contractor since June 2014. From February 2014 to June 2014, 
she chose to stay home to care for her child. She attended school full-time from August 
2011 until February 2014, and did not work. From August 2010 to August 2011, 
Applicant stayed home with her infant child and the child’s father supported them.3 
 
 Applicant testified that she is aware of her financial problems and delinquent 
debts. She stated that none of the debts are paid. When she started her job, she was 
unable to pay them because she was living paycheck to paycheck and her income was 
insufficient. She contacted some creditors, but it was a long time ago. She wanted to 
hire a company to consolidate the delinquent debts, but has not done so. She has 
looked into filing bankruptcy.4  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that she obtained student loans in 2011 and 2012, and 
has never made payments on them (SOR ¶ 1.a-$8,514 and ¶ 1.b-$8,175). She testified 
that she contacted the lender in the past, but was not able to pay the loans. When she 
got a job, she did not address her debts. She stated that in 2014 her father was 
diagnosed with cancer and she helped him financially. She gave him about $1,000.5  
 
 Applicant testified that she always intended to pay her debts. She stated until she 
went through the clearance process, she was unaware of the extent of her 
indebtedness. She does not have money to pay her delinquent debts. She does not 
have medical insurance. Her son has medical needs.6  
 
 In Applicant’s application for a public trust position, she responded “No” to 
questions that asked if in the past seven years a judgment had been entered against 
                                                          
2 The Government’s exhibit list is Hearing Exhibit HE) I and the discovery letter is HE II. Applicant 
provided as part of her answer to the SOR numerous character letters. 
 
3 Tr. 19-23; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. 23-31. 
 
5 Tr. 30-34. 
 
6 Tr. 36-37. 
 
3 
her; are you currently delinquent on any federal debt; have you defaulted on any type of 
loan; have your bills or debts been turned over to a collection agency; have you had any 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed.7  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in January 2016. She 
acknowledged numerous delinquent medical debts that were incurred for her son. She 
told the investigator that the medical accounts were in collection status. She did not 
have medical insurance, and she was trying to pay the bills with cash. She told the 
investigator that she had not been contacted by the creditors. She said she attempted to 
make small monthly payments to the original creditors. She could not verify the amounts 
or dates of the payments. She was unaware of other debts that were delinquent, 
including two judgments (SOR ¶ 1.hh-$862 entered 2010 and ¶ 1.ii-$4,291 entered 
2014).8 
 
 Regarding Applicant’s delinquent student loans, she explained to the investigator 
that she was aware the loans became due six months after she completed school. She 
was unable to pay them. She did not contact the lender at that time they became due. 
She moved frequently. Her mother was contacted in the summer of 2015 by the lender. 
Applicant’s mother notified Applicant. Then Applicant contacted the lender and advised 
it that she was not financially able to pay the loans at that time. She told the investigator 
that she was advised by the lender that they only wanted to make sure they had reliable 
contact information for her. Applicant told the lender that she intended to repay the loan, 
but did not know when. She said the lender advised her that they expected her to repay 
the debts in a timely manner. Since this contact, Applicant has not made any payments 
or had contact with the lender. She told the investigator she did not realize the lender 
was characterizing the debts as late since she had spoken to them.9  
 
 Applicant’s explanation to the investigator for her failure to disclose her 
delinquent medical debts in her application for a public trust position was because she 
overlooked the question when competing the application. She did not disclose other 
delinquent debts because she was unaware of them. She did not disclose delinquent 
student loans because she believed after she contacted the lender in the summer of 
2015, it had allowed her more time to begin making payments.10 
 
 Applicant told the investigator that her future intentions were to hire a credit 
counselor to help her manage and resolve the delinquent accounts within the year 
(2016), but she needed time to save money so she could afford its services. She also 
intended to obtain a copy of her credit report, so she could contact her creditors in an 
attempt to clarify and resolve any outstanding debts. She was going to do this no later 
                                                          
7 GE 1. 
 
8 GE 2. 
 
9 GE 2. 
 
10 Tr.38-43; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
than March 2016. She also intended to contact her student loan lender in January 2016, 
to resolve issues with her accounts. She was not in a financial position at that time to 
make payments, but was hoping the lender would defer payments without additional 
penalties.11 
 
 Applicant testified that she was aware at the time she completed her public trust 
application that she had delinquent debts, but was not aware of the amounts. Applicant 
testified that the reason she did not disclose her delinquent debts on the application was 
because she did not understand the questions. She said she did not disclose the 
medical debts because she felt there was a difference between the doctor’s office 
medical debts and collection accounts. She did not have an explanation for why she told 
the investigator that she “overlooked” the questions and then testified that she did not 
understand the question.12 I did not find Applicant’s testimony regarding her failure to 
disclose financial delinquencies credible.  
 
 Applicant stated in her October 2017 answer to the SOR that in the past her 
wages were garnished by the IRS. They are no longer being garnished. Applicant’s 
husband testified on her behalf. He acknowledged that his wages were garnished for 
unpaid taxes for years 2011 and 2013. He failed to have sufficient money withheld from 
his pay and then was unable to pay his taxes when due. He did this intentionally 
because he needed the money while his wife was not working. He confirmed that his 
wife’s wages were previously garnished for state taxes because her employer did not 
withhold taxes. 
 
 Applicant testified that her federal and state income tax refunds are involuntarily 
withheld. She believes the IRS is applying her refunds to her delinquent student loans. 
She testified that she likely has received letters from the IRS and state tax authority, but 
her husband takes care of them. They file their taxes jointly.13  
 
 Applicant testified that she and her husband pay what they are able to at the 
moment. They do not have a written budget. She does not know how much her 
husband earns. They have $50 in savings and the amount in their checking account 
varies. They have little money remaining at the end of each month after paying monthly 
expenses. She stated she wanted to consolidate her debts, but could not afford the 
services of a credit agency. She stated she contacted a credit agency, but it was a long 
time ago.14  
 
                                                          
11 GE 2.  
 
12 Tr. 30-37. 
 
13 Tr. 44-55, 66-73; Answer to the SOR. I have not considered any derogatory information for 
disqualifying purpose that was not alleged in the SOR. I may consider information when making a 
credibility determination, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in my whole person analysis.  
 
14 Tr. 55-64. 
 
 
5 
 The debts are corroborated by Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and credit 
reports from July 2015 and July 2017.15 
 
 Applicant provided character letters. In them she is described as professional, 
outstanding, helpful, task-oriented, respectful, compassionate, knowledgeable, 
experienced, excellent, positive, kind, invaluable, honest, trustworthy, conscientious, 
and a phenomenal worker.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, states that the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” 
The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
15 GE 1, 2, 3, 4. 
 
16 Answer to the SOR, AE A. 
 
6 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has unpaid judgments, delinquent student loans, and other delinquent 
debts that began accumulating in 2014, which she is unable to pay or resolve. There is 
sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
 
7 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to underemployment and lack of 
medical insurance. She did not provide sufficient evidence that she is paying or 
attempting to resolve any of her delinquent debts at this time. Her debts are recent and 
ongoing. She has not established a reliable financial track record. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude future financial problem are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant was underemployed for periods of time and did not have medical 
insurance, which contributed to her financial problems and were circumstances beyond 
her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant has been steadily employed since 2014. Her 
husband is also employed. During her 2016 background interview, she said she would 
obtain a credit report; begin to address her delinquent debts; work with a credit 
counselor to resolve her debts; and contact her student loan lender. She has not done 
this and is unable to pay her delinquent debts. Insufficient evidence was provided to 
show she has acted responsibly regarding any of her delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence Applicant sought financial counseling or that there 
are clear indications her financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Applicant told the government investigator in 2016 that she intended to resolve her 
delinquent debts in the future. She testified she intended to pay her delinquent debts. 
She provided no evidence that she has taken any action to begin this process, including 
paying some of the small debts. None of the debts in the SOR are resolved. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
8 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant did not disclose any financial problems under Section 26 of the public 
trust application. She told the government investigator that she overlooked these 
questions. She testified that she did not understand the financial section questions. She 
stated that she believed she was not required to disclose her delinquent student loans 
because she did not think the creditor considered the debts late after she had contacted 
them. Her testimony and explanations were not credible. The above disqualifying 
condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
There is insufficient evidence that Applicant made a prompt good-faith effort to 
correct the omissions and disclose her financial problems before being confronted by 
the government investigator. Applicant testified that she did not have medical insurance 
in 2013 and 2014 and was unable to pay her medical bills. She was aware of the 
expenses associated with her son’s medical issues and that she had bills owed. She 
was also aware that she had not made any payments on her student loans that were 
due six months after she completed her education in 2014. It is not reasonable to 
believe she merely overlooked the questions or misunderstood them. Applicant 
responded “no” to each specific question and did not provide any comments. She 
admitted she lives paycheck to paycheck. Applicant’s failure to truthfully provide 
answers on her application is not minor. The Government relies on those seeking 
positions of trust to honestly disclose information, which may be derogatory. Failure to 
do so raises questions about a person’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
I find AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) do not apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. She accumulated delinquent debts due to 
underemployment. She was aware that she had delinquent debts when she completed 
her public trust application. She did not disclose any financial issues on her application. 
Applicant provided insufficient evidence of action she has taken to resolve or pay her 
delinquent accounts. Her testimony supported that she is unable to do so. She intends 
to resolve her delinquent debts in the future. Applicant has not established a sufficient 
reliable financial track record. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust positon. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.jj:   Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 
10 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
