 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     --------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02211 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He was involved in six security incidents from April 
2014 to February 2016. Four of the six incidents resulted in a determination that he was 
culpable or a responsible party. Two of the incidents were still pending a determination 
at the time of the April 2018 hearing. He has had no further security incidents since 
February 2016. The evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the serious security concern 
stemming from his involvement in the six security incidents. Accordingly, this case is 
decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Standard Form (SF) 86, Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions, on October 8, 2015.1 It is the official form that military 
personnel, federal contractors, and federal employees complete in order for the 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1. 
 
 
2 
 
Government to collect information for conducting background investigations, 
reinvestigations, and continuous evaluations of people under consideration for, or 
retention of, national security positions. It is commonly known as a security clearance 
application.  
 
On September 12, 2017, after reviewing the application and the information 
gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent Applicant a statement of reasons 
(SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. The SOR is similar to 
a complaint. It alleged the factual reasons—Applicant’s involvement in six security 
incidents—under the security guideline known as Guideline K for handling protected 
information. In addition, the SOR cross-alleged the six security incidents under 
Guideline E for personal conduct. And the SOR cross-alleged two of the security 
incidents, which involved a process called assured file transfer, under Guideline M for 
use of information technology.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 20, 2017. He admitted his 
involvement in the six security incidents and provided an explanation for each. He also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on November 7, 2017. The hearing took place as 
scheduled on April 12, 2018. Applicant appeared without counsel. Department Counsel 
offered documentary exhibits, which were admitted as Exhibits 1 and 3; Exhibit 2 was 
not admitted based on Applicant’s objection. Applicant’s documentary exhibits were 
admitted as Exhibits A-E. Other than Applicant, no witnesses were called by either 
party. The record was kept open until April 30, 2018, to allow Applicant to present letters 
of reference or recommendation. He timely submitted three such letters, and they are 
admitted without objections as Exhibits F, G, and H.   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old engineer logistics specialist who is seeking to retain a 
top-secret security clearance. His first marriage ended in a divorce. He has two minor 
children from that marriage. He married for the second time in 2011. His formal 
education includes a bachelor’s degree in criminal justice. He has worked for his current 
employer since April 2001. He was initially granted a security clearance at the secret 
level in 2002, and was granted a top-secret security clearance in 2011. He has a very 
good employment record according to three co-workers who submitted letters of 
recommendation on his behalf.2 Those people regard Applicant as an honest and 
ethical person of integrity who is a valued employee.  
 
As alleged in the SOR, the evidence establishes that Applicant was involved in 
six security incidents from April 2014 to February 2016.3 Four of the six incidents 
                                                          
2 Exhibits F, G, and H.  
 
3 Exhibit 3.  
 
3 
 
resulted in a determination that he was culpable or the responsible party. Two of the 
incidents were pending a final determination at the time of the April 2018 hearing. He 
has had no further security incidents since February 2016. The six security incidents are 
discussed below.  
 
The first incident occurred in April 2014, when Applicant was faulted for failure to 
properly respond to an alarm leaving a classified area unattended overnight after being 
notified that the alarm was not operational.4 He received a security infraction as a result. 
Applicant explained that he received a telephone call from his employer’s dispatcher 
that an employee was intending to depart with an alarm unarmed due to technical 
problems; he advised the employee to double-check all doors, which they had done; he 
then advised the employee to have the dispatcher contact the security company 
responsible for the alarm system, but that was unsuccessful; and he then called the on-
call technician for the alarm company who informed Applicant he would be unable to 
respond until the following morning at 8:00 AM. Faced with these circumstances, 
Applicant decided not to respond in-person because he had alcohol with dinner and did 
not want to drive. Instead, after assuring himself that the area was locked and secured, 
he requested that the room be checked by the security detail every hour instead of the 
normal two-hour check. His employer faulted him because this particular secured area 
was not available for a one-hour check. Although the alarm was not operational, the 
area was secured at all times and there was no compromise of classified or sensitive 
information.  
 
The second incident occurred in February 2015, when Applicant was faulted for 
failing to properly secure a container.5 He received an administrative action known as a 
practice detrimental to security (PDS), which is not a security infraction or violation, but 
an event, action, or behavior that could lead to a possible compromise of classified or 
sensitive information; a PDS can be delivered as an oral or written warning and is an 
opportunity for reeducation. The incident occurred when the middle drawer of a five-
drawer container was left slightly cracked open in a secured area that was secured 
throughout. The incident occurred due to oversight. There was no compromise of 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
The third incident occurred in April 2015, when Applicant was faulted for failing to 
properly secure an unclassified accreditation letter or document in the work area 
overnight.6 He received a second PDS as a result. The incident occurred when he left 
the document in a courier bag outside of his desk area as opposed to placing the 
document in the secured container. Although he removed other documents from the 
bag and placed them in the secured container, the document in question was 
inadvertently left behind. There was no compromise of classified or sensitive 
information. As a result of this incident, Applicant’s practice now is to place the courier 
                                                          
4 Tr. 32-37.  
 
5 Tr. 37-43.  
 
6 Tr. 43-48.  
 
 
4 
 
bag in the secured container at the end of the day, thereby eliminating the risk of 
recurrence of a similar mistake. 
 
The fourth and fifth incidents in October 2015 and February 2016, respectively, 
are similar in that Applicant was involved via his role in a process known as an assured 
file transfer (AFT).7 As I understand it, this process is a risk-managed data transfer 
within the employer’s special programs.8 Applicant’s role was that of the contract 
program security officer (CPSO), which required him to oversee the entire process; the 
CPSO is ultimately responsible to approve releasing all media containing “screened and 
cleaned” information; and the CPSO is responsible for obtaining and maintaining key 
(dirty word) lists. Applicant worked with subject-matter experts (SME) in this process; 
the SME are thoroughly knowledgeable of all aspects of a program, to include the 
involved technologies; and each SME is ultimately responsible to review all data 
intended for transfer and purge it of any non-releasable information. Further, each SME 
may be held liable for any security incidents or data spills that occur as the result of a 
properly executed transfer process but still results in a data spill due to improper data 
review. 
 
According to the initial reports, for the October 2015 AFT, Applicant was faulted 
for using the wrong policy setting in a tool during the execution of an AFT, which 
resulted in the release and potential compromise of non-technical but classified program 
material.9 For the February 2016 AFT, he was faulted for not following the approved 
AFT process using a particular tool, which resulted in the release and potential 
compromise of controlled program material.10 The initial reports also state that a 
determination of security infraction versus security violation was pending. At the 
hearing, Applicant stated that he has not been disciplined for either incident.11 Further, 
he understands the second incident was considered closed in March 2018, and that the 
parties involved were issued a PDS warning, although he did not received a PDS 
warning or any other type of warning or counseling.12 
 
The sixth incident occurred in February 2016, when Applicant was faulted for 
briefing two employees for a program for which they were not vetted, resulting in the 
unauthorized disclosure of classified or sensitive information.13 He received a security 
violation as a result, and he was suspended without pay for one week. The incident 
                                                          
7 Tr. 54-68. 
 
8 Exhibit A.  
 
9 Exhibit 3.  
 
10 Tr. 43-48.  
 
11 Tr. 60.  
 
12 Tr. 65-66.  
 
13 Tr. 48-54.  
 
 
5 
 
occurred when he misread an approval letter, which led to the inadvertent disclosure to 
the two employees, which then had to be remediated.  
 
On the day of the last incident, Applicant was removed from the program to 
which he was assigned and reassigned to another program.14 He no longer performs 
AFT duties. He has had no further security incidents since the last incident in February 
2016. He attributes his involvement in six security incidents during a two-year period 
(April 2014-February 2016) to a heavy workload, the press of business, and lack of 
sufficient attention to his duties.15 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.16 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.17 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”18 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.19 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.20 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.21 An 
                                                          
14 Tr. 68-69. 
 
15 Tr. 69-70. 
 
16 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
17 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
18 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
20 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
21 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
 
6 
 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.22 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.23 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.24 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.25 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.26 
 
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline K, both willingness and ability to comply with rules and 
regulations for handling protected information are of central importance to an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. The overall concern is: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information—which includes classified information and 
other sensitive government information, and propriety information—raises 
doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or 
willingness and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious 
security concern.27 
 
In addition to the concern under Guideline K, the Appeal Board has established a 
long line of caselaw concerning applicants who commit security infractions or violations. 
The central points of that caselaw are: (1) once it is established that an applicant has 
committed security violations or infractions, they have a “very heavy burden” of 
persuasion as to mitigation; (2) such violations or infractions “strike at the heart of the 
industrial security program;” and (3) any claims of reform or rehabilitation are viewed 
with “strict scrutiny.”28 Put differently, security infractions and violations are serious 
business, and they are not to be taken lightly.   
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
                                                          
22 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
23 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
24 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
25 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
26 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
27 AG ¶ 33.  
 
28 E.g., ISCR Case No. 15-04340 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 30, 2017) (citation omitted).  
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 34(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of protected information to 
unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, personal or business 
contacts, the media, or persons present at seminars, meetings, or 
conferences; 
 
AG ¶ 34(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified 
or sensitive information;   
 
AG ¶ 34(h) negligence or lax security practices that persist despite 
counseling by management; 
 
AG ¶ 35(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has 
happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that is it 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
AG ¶ 35(d) the violation was inadvertent, it was promptly reported, there is 
no evidence of compromise, and it does not suggest a pattern.  
   
 Applicant’s involvement in six security incidents within a two-year period during 
2014-2016 establish a pattern of negligence or laxness or both. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply. With that said, I have given less weight to the two incidents involving 
the AFT process because there has not been a final determination concerning 
Applicant’s liability as well as the fact that others may have been held ultimately liable 
for the two incidents.  
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions noted above, but the evidence is not 
sufficient to mitigate the concern. I reach that conclusion because the numerous 
incidents over a two-year period are evidence of a well-established pattern of 
negligence or lax security practices. The incidents are not so infrequent, few in number, 
or remote in time to assure me that similar incidents will not recur.   
 
 In addition to the formal mitigating conditions, I have considered the totality of the 
evidence, to include an examination of each security incident as developed during the 
hearing as well as an examination of the six incidents cumulatively. Consistent with 
Appeal Board caselaw, I have examined the six incidents in light of the very heavy 
burden of persuasion assigned to Applicant, and I have viewed his case in mitigation 
with strict scrutiny. I have considered the six security incidents in the context that 
Applicant has worked in the defense industry for about 18 years and has had a security 
clearance for most of that time. And I have considered that the six security incidents 
were inadvertent, resulting from simple oversight or an honest mistake. Applicant was 
well intentioned at all times.  
 
 In addition to the Guideline K matters, the SOR alleges the same six security 
incidents under Guideline E for personal conduct. The concern under Guideline E is 
decided against Applicant under the same rationale discussed above under Guideline 
K. The same judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability concerns present in Guideline E 
 
8 
 
are present in Guideline K. It is unnecessary to tread there further. The SOR also 
alleges the two incidents involving the AFT process under Guideline M for use of 
information technology. The concern under Guideline M is decided for Applicant 
because there has not been a final determination concerning Applicant’s liability as well 
as the fact that others may have been held ultimately liable for the two incidents. 
Although these two incidents when taken together with the other four incidents are 
sufficient for adverse findings under Guidelines K and E, they are not sufficient for 
adverse findings under Guideline M when standing alone.  
 
 Following Egan and the clearly consistent standard, I have doubts or concerns 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence 
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable 
evidence or vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. I conclude that he 
has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility denied.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
