 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 17-01008  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
November 19, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
  
Statement of Case 
 
 On January 7, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On May 22, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on June 9, 2017. He neither formally 
admitted nor denied the SOR allegations; and as such, they will considered denied. 
Applicant requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written 
record without a hearing. On July 20, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant on July 21, 2017, and received by him on 
September 10, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM. Applicant submitted nothing in response to the FORM.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. (Item 1 at page 5.) He is divorced and provides child 
support for two children. (Answer, and Item 1 at pages 27~28.) 
 
 1.a. It is alleged, and supported by the Government’s most recent credit report, 
that Applicant has a past-due mortgage in the amount of about $277,990. (Item 5 at 
page 1.) Applicant admits that “we [Applicant and his former spouse] allowed it to go to 
foreclosure,” but has submitted nothing further in this regard. (Answer.) This allegation 
is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.b. It is alleged, and supported by the Government’s most recent credit report, 
that Applicant has a past-due second mortgage in the amount of about $20,125. (Item 5 
at page 2.) Applicant avers that “I have since made a payment arrangement for this loan 
and am paying (roughly [$]300) a month to catch this bill up,” but has submitted nothing 
further in this regard. (Answer.) This allegation is also found against Applicant. 
 
 1.c. It is alleged, and supported by the Government’s most recent credit report, 
that Applicant has a past-due car loan in the amount of about $902. (Item 5 at page 2.) 
Applicant avers that “this bill . . . has since been caught up,” but has submitted nothing 
further in this regard.  (Answer.) This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.d. It is alleged, and supported by the Government’s most recent credit report, 
that Applicant had a car repossessed, with about $11,902 remaining on the auto loan. 
(Item 5 at page 2.) Applicant avers that his former spouse “is working [out] a payment 
 
 
3 
 
 
plan with them,” but has submitted nothing further in this regard.  (Answer.) This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.e. . It is alleged, and supported by the Government’s most recent credit report, 
that Applicant has a past-due debt to Creditor E in the amount of about $385. (Item 5 at 
page 2.) Applicant avers nothing in this regard. This allegation is found against 
Applicant. 
 
 1.f. It is alleged, and supported by the Government’s most recent credit report, 
that Applicant has a past-due “cell phone bill” in the amount of about $2,487. (Item 5 at 
page 2.) Applicant avers that he is “disputing” this bill, but has submitted nothing further 
in this regard.  (Answer.) This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.g. It is alleged, and supported by the Government’s most recent credit report, 
that Applicant has a “cell phone bill” placed for collection in the amount of about $2,119. 
(Item 5 at page 2.) Applicant avers that his former spouse “has a payment arrangement” 
with this creditor, but has submitted nothing further in this regard.  (Answer.) This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.h. It is alleged, and supported by the Government’s most recent credit report, 
that Applicant has a past-due debt to Creditor H in the amount of about $451. (Item 5 at 
page 2.) Applicant avers that it is his “plan to pay off my debt to them in the next 60 
days,” but has submitted nothing further in this regard.  (Answer.) This allegation is 
found against Applicant. 
 
 1.i. It is alleged, and supported by the Government’s credit report from February 
of 2016, that Applicant has a past-due debt to Creditor I in the amount of about $5,655. 
(Item 6 at page 3.) Applicant avers that it is his plan “to pay off my debt to them in the 
next 60 days,” but has submitted nothing further in this regard.  (Answer.) This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
 
 
4 
 
 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
 
 
5 
 
 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .   
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has significant past-due debt that he has yet to address. These facts 
establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the 
burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of these apply. Although Applicant may attribute his financial difficulties to 
his divorce, it is that his financial issues are not under control.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance. He has failed to meet his burden to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
