 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04052 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline I, psychological 
conditions. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 23, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline I, psychological conditions. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 28, 2018. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 5, 2018. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 15, 2018. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4.1 Applicant and three witnesses testified. He offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A and B. There were no objections to any exhibits offered, and all were 
admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on August 23, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the sole allegation in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He is a high school graduate. He served in the Army 
National Guard from 2003 to 2009 and was honorably discharged. He is not married and 
has no children. He has worked for his present employer, a federal contractor, since May 
2015.2  
 
 Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) in August 2015. In it 
he answered “yes” about whether he had consulted a health care professional regarding 
an emotional or mental health conditions or was hospitalized for such a condition. He 
provided the dates of treatment or counseling as March 2014 to April 2014.3 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in August 2016. He 
disclosed to the investigator that in approximately early 2013 he began having memory 
issues that worsened progressively over time. It caused him to have difficulty functioning 
at work because he was unable to remember simple tasks, and he would become 
confused in the middle of a conversation. He sought medical assistance to determine the 
cause of his memory issues.4  
 
 Applicant disclosed to the investigator that in approximately March or April 2014, 
his medical doctor advised him to see another doctor to rule out psychological causes of 
Applicant’s memory issues. Applicant said that he attended three to five evaluation 
sessions with doctor. Her credentials were not provided, but the purpose of the sessions 
were to evaluate his memory. He told the investigator that the doctor determined that his 
memory problems were not due to a psychological condition. Applicant told the 
investigator that he did not have any additional mental health counseling or treatment.5 
 
 Applicant further disclosed during his August 2016 interview that he was being 
treated by a neurologist for his memory issues. He believed he had visited this doctor 
about five or six times since January 2015. Applicant said he was not participating in any 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the exhibit list and II is the discovery letter.  
 
2 Tr. 17-19. 
 
3 GE 1. 
 
4 GE 2. 
 
5 GE 2.  
 
3 
 
 
mental health counseling, but only neurological evaluation and treatment. He was 
prescribed a drug for his memory issues, which he took daily. Applicant researched the 
drug on the Internet and learned it was used to treat dementia associated with Alzheimer’s 
disease.6  
 
 The investigator noted that Applicant had difficulty providing specific information 
during the interview. In particular, when discussing Applicant’s financial history and 
issues. Applicant repeatedly told the investigator that because of his memory issues he 
was unable to recall details and specifics about his accounts.7  
 
 Subsequently, the Government requested and Applicant agreed to an independent 
psychological evaluation.8 An evaluation was conducted in October 2017 by a licensed 
psychologist. In the report, the psychologist noted that for over three years Applicant has 
had significant cognitive problems. The neurologist who treated Applicant from November 
2015 to May 2016, previously reported Applicant was quite symptomatic and required 
further treatment. Applicant underwent a neuropsychological evaluation in September 
2016, which strongly recommended a psychiatric evaluation to rule out any contributory 
psychopathology. Applicant had reported a history of depression to multiple physicians in 
the past, and it was unclear if he had received sufficient and consistent treatment to 
address his depression. The Government psychologist noted that Applicant’s recent 
history of cognitive and psychological symptoms had caused significant impairment. 
Pursuant to medical documentation, the psychologist noted that Applicant complained of 
memory loss, confusion, disorientation, mood swings, sleep disturbances, tremors, and 
occasional falls. Applicant disclosed to the government psychologist that in 2014, his 
employer recommended he undergo medical evaluation due to observable performance 
issues including losing track of tasks, forgetting conversations that occurred less than 20 
minutes prior, losing tools, and getting lost in the building in which he worked.9  
 
 As part of the Government psychologist’s evaluation in October 2017, Applicant’s 
psychiatric history was disclosed. It was learned that the doctor who evaluated him 2014, 
diagnosed him with a cognitive disorder and circadian rhythm sleep disorder. He was 
prescribed an antidepressant and sleep aid to help his issues. Despite this treatment, 
Applicant reported to the Government psychologist that he continued to have memory 
difficulties.10  
 
 In November 2015, Applicant had a neurological evaluation by a medical doctor 
and was diagnosed with moderate severity memory loss and was prescribed a cognition-
enhancing medication commonly prescribed for Alzheimer’s patients. Applicant reported 
                                                          
6 GE 2. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 GE 3. 
 
9 GE 4. 
 
10 GE 4. 
 
4 
 
 
initial improvements, but then later reported worsening memory and work performance 
issues.11 The Government psychologist stated in her report:  
 
When interviewed, the consulting neurologist did NOT recommend 
[Applicant] for a position involving national security because his condition 
was not under control and could impact his judgment and reliability. 
Applicant has been followed by [neurologist] at [health clinic].12 
 
Applicant’s neurologist recommended a full psychiatric evaluation. Applicant 
continued to receive medication management. However, it was noted that Applicant’s 
neurologist had left his practice, and Applicant needed to find another doctor.13  
 
 In September 2016, Applicant had a comprehensive neuropsychological 
evaluation by a Ph.D. at a memory health network. This doctor indicated an 
auditory/verbal learning disorder, and indicated that a cognitive disorder could not be 
ruled out. Findings were inconsistent with neurodegenerative disease. Based on 
Applicant’s past history of issues, the doctor strongly recommended he seek individual 
counseling.14 
 
 During his October 2017 evaluation with the Government psychologist, Applicant 
reported his understanding for participating in the evaluation was related to his “neuro 
issues” and noted although “my logic centers are fully intact with no signs of degeneration, 
it’s harder for me to recall memory” and “it takes a lot for me to pull it up.”15 As a means 
of explanation, he told the psychologist “my secretary isn’t filing things correctly.”16 He 
reported that without medication, “I can’t verbally talk or write and have trouble with words 
and even understanding what you’re saying even if you were speaking slowly.”17 He 
further told the psychologist, that without medication, “We wouldn’t be having a 
conversation at all. I’d pause after 2-3 words, and there would no logical flow.” Applicant 
confirmed during his testimony that if he does not take medication, it is extremely difficult 
for him to understand and choose the right words and form sentences.18 
 
Applicant further reported during the October 2017 evaluation that he experienced 
moderate to significant functional impairment in occupation, social, community and daily 
                                                          
11 GE 4. 
 
12 GE 4. 
 
13 GE 4. 
 
14 GE 4. 
 
15 GE 4. 
 
16 GE 4. 
 
17 GE 4. 
 
18 Tr. 28; GE 4. 
 
5 
 
 
living domains as a result of his memory impairment. He uses compensatory strategies 
daily to manage his responsibilities, to include his schedule, paying bills, and keeping 
track of essential items. There are mutual benefits for living with his mother with respect 
to reminders for financial management as well as cooking. He no longer cooks on the 
stove because he forgot he was cooking, walked away from the stove, and caused a 
grease fire. Applicant has restricted his community activities and primarily drives as 
necessary to work and appointments. He rarely drives at night and never while raining as 
he perceives stimulus overload and too much information for his brain to process. 
Applicant testified that since taking medication he no longer has these issues and the 
information provided was a historical statement. He stated that he still has problems 
driving at night because it is difficult to process what he is seeing to know whether he 
should take action. So for safety purposes he does not drive at night.19  
 
 Applicant told the psychologist that at work he has difficulty with cognitive flexibility 
should a task demand change as well as multitasking, and completing tasks quickly. He 
had difficulty grasping the big picture, even with medication. He reported difficulty with 
verbal and written communication and substitutes wrong words. He rarely catches an 
error unless brought to his attention. Applicant reported numerous other memory and 
cognitive issues to the psychologist. He stated that his current medication “boosts 
connectivity within the brain and gives me 85-90% of me.” Applicant testified that when 
his drug dose was increased from 5 milligrams to 10 milligrams, many of these issues 
went away. He further stated that after he had his evaluation with the Government 
investigator in October 2017, his dosage was increased.20 
 
The psychologist noted that Applicant reported his perceptions of the problem are:  
 
[T]hat his symptoms are of a neurological basis and discounts the possibility 
any underlying psychological issue which lends credence to the potential 
for denial or minimization as [Applicant] reported no real interest in therapy 
or psychological evaluations as they have nor revealed anything substantial 
historically.21 
 
 Applicant testified and explained that every time when he was sent to a 
psychologist, each would conclude that his psychological conditions were due to his 
neurological issues and they all treated him for depression. Since he started medication, 
it has not been recommended he see a psychologist.22  
 
The Government psychologist reviewed the historical data, coupled with 
Applicant’s description of persistent and significant neurocognitive symptoms and 
                                                          
19 Tr. 28-30; GE 4. 
 
20 Tr. 30-31; GE 4. 
 
21 GE 4. 
 
22 Tr. 32-33. 
 
 
6 
 
 
diagnosed Applicant with “Unspecified Neurocognitive Disorder.”23 She opined: in her 
October 2017 evaluation that: 
 
Despite treatment with [drug name] a cognitive enhancing medication, 
[Applicant] continues to describe very significant neurocognitive symptoms 
and limitations although he reported his perception that his speech and 
functional abilities would be more severely impaired without the 
medication.24 
 
She noted that there is plausibility of a psychiatric overlay associated with his history and 
symptoms. Applicant reported to the psychologist that he was scheduled to have a new 
evaluation in December 2017. She noted that that evaluation may provide additional 
relevant diagnostic information as well as prognostic indicators.25  
 
 The psychologist’s found that given Applicant’s medical history and self-reported 
cognitive and memory limitations that significantly impact his daily functioning, including 
occupational functioning, she stated that Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and decision-
making are somewhat compromised. Applicant’s memory deficiencies affect his ability to 
process new and complex information. She further opined that these deficiencies are risk 
factors that could impact his ability to safeguard sensitive material. Based on the 
information, it is her opinion that Applicant’s “prognosis is guarded due to the intensity 
and duration of symptoms and functional limitations despite medication interventions.”26 
 
 Applicant testified that in mid-2017 he began treatment with a new neurologist and 
the dose of his medication was recently increased. The medication is for cognitive 
memory disorders. He also take a sleep medication. He sees this doctor every six months. 
His last appointment was a month ago. Applicant stated that the doctor believes Applicant 
can take care of himself. Applicant admitted that without medication, he has extreme 
difficulty communicating. He said he has been on medication since 2015. He stated that 
many symptoms that he disclosed to the Government psychologist were historical and 
before he started taking his current medication. This is inconsistent with the evidence 
provided.27  
 
 Applicant believes the medication he takes is working. He testified that he is 
compliant with his prescribed medication requirements and intends to remain so. He 
testified that in December 2017 he had a memory assessment evaluation, which was not 
done by his neurologist, but a psychologist to evaluate his cognitive function. He said the 
                                                          
23 GE 4. 
 
24 GE 4. 
 
25 GE 4.  
 
26 GE 4.  
 
27 Tr. 21-27. 
 
 
7 
 
 
results of that evaluation indicated he has a steady cognitive function that is not 
degenerative. His verbal center is impaired, and he has some difficulty speaking, but it is 
non-degenerative. He said that under his current treatment, he has no current problems. 
He said he performs his job and there are no security issues. Applicant did not provide 
any independent evidence to corroborate his statements, to include a copy of the memory 
evaluation, his doctor’s medical evaluation, a more recent diagnosis, or an updated 
prognosis from a medical or other health care professional since his October 2017 
evaluation.28   
 
 A coworker with whom Applicant has worked with for three years testified. She said 
he was an exceptional worker and can work through any problem. He has shown attention 
to detail. He has occasional gaps in memory, but nothing unusual or that a normal person 
would not experience. He is reliable, and she believes he will safeguard sensitive 
material.29  
 
 Applicant’s sister testified. She stated that Applicant’s memory issues have 
improved over the past three years. Applicant is focused and motived to do whatever he 
needs to do. Before his treatment, he had mood swings and was depressed. Since he 
has been on medication these have not occurred. She said his condition has vastly 
improved. She lived with Applicant from 2012 until 2014. She now visits him for several 
days about every two months.30  
 
 Applicant’s mother testified. She stated that Applicant was very different before he 
started medication. She said he takes his medication daily. She said although Applicant 
lives with her, he could live independently. They live together due to financial necessity. 
She has no safety concerns about Applicant.31 
 
 Applicant is described in a character letter from someone, who has known him for 
14 years, as trustworthy and dependable. She stated that Applicant has been recognized 
for his outstanding work. Applicant received a certificate of appreciation from a 
commanding officer for his support and exemplary performance from March 17 through 
24, 2018.32 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
28 Tr. 33-38. 
 
29 Tr. 40-43. 
 
30 Tr. 44-48. 
 
31 Tr. 49-52. 
 
32 AE A, B. 
 
8 
 
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I: Psychological Conditions 
 
The security concern for psychological conditions is set out in AG & 27:  
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is not required 
for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified mental health 
professional (e.g., clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) employed by, or 
acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, should be consulted 
when evaluating potentially disqualifying and mitigating information under 
this guideline and an opinion, including prognosis, should be sought. No 
negative interference concerning the standards in this guideline may be 
raised solely on the basis of mental health counseling. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 28, and the following is 
potentially applicable: 
  
 (b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition that may impair judgment, stability, reliability, or 
trustworthiness. 
  
 Applicant was evaluated by a licensed psychologist in October 2017 and 
diagnosed with an “Unspecified Neurocognitive Disorder,” and the psychologist found that 
his judgment, reliability, and decision-making are somewhat compromised. The 
psychologist determined that Applicant’s memory deficiencies affect his ability to process 
new and complex information. These deficiencies are risk factors that could impact his 
ability to safeguard sensitive material. Further, the psychologist found that based on the 
information provided, it is her opinion that Applicant’s prognosis is guarded due to the 
intensity and duration of symptoms and functional limitations despite medication 
interventions. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from psychological conditions. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 29 were 
considered: 
 
 (a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan;  
 
 (b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment program 
for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is currently 
receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified mental health professional;  
 
10 
 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by, the U.S. Government that an 
individual’s previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation;  
 
(d) the past psychological/psychiatric condition was temporary, the situation 
has been resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of 
emotional instability; and 
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem.  
  
 The evidence is insufficient to conclude any of the above mitigating conditions 
apply. I do not have a favorable prognosis from a duly qualified medical professional, or 
a recent medical opinion that Applicant’s condition is under control, in remission, or has 
a low probability of recurrence or exacerbation. I do not have evidence, other than 
Applicant’s testimony, that his condition is readily controllable with treatment. Applicant  
testified that he is compliant with taking medication for his condition, but I do not have 
evidence from a professional indicating there is a treatment plan in place, the specifics of 
the plan, how long he has been on it, and if he is compliant with the plan. I do not doubt 
Applicant is taking medication, and it has helped him, which shows he is amenable to 
treatment, but without independent corroborating evidence and a more recent than 
October 2017 opinion by a qualified medical professional acceptable to the Government, 
the evidence is insufficient to conclude the issues raised have been mitigated and are no 
longer a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
11 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline I in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 33 years old man. Several years ago he began having cognitive and 
memory issues. He sought treatment and is on medication. However, there is insufficient 
evidence that the alleged security concerns regarding Applicant’s judgment and reliability 
have been mitigated. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline I, 
psychological conditions.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
