 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03148 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sean Bigley, Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
November 27, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on February 6, 
2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 6, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 1, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection, and GX 4 for Administrative Notice. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf. Applicant presented one packet of documents, which I marked 
 
2 
 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AppX) A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (TR) on March 8, 2018. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan). Department Counsel 
provided a five-page summary of the facts, supported by four Government documents 
pertaining to Afghanistan. The documents provide elaboration and context for the 
summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government 
reports. They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable 
dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations of the SOR, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 
and 1.n., as these distant cousins no longer live in Afghanistan. (TR at page 30 lines 
18~25, and at page 31 line 1 to page 33 line 3.) After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since June of 2017 as an 
interpreter. (TR at page 34 line 23 to page 35 line 1.) He was married to a U.S. citizen, 
but is now divorced and has no children. (GX 1 at pages 24~25.) 
  
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
 Applicant’s father and brother, who were farmers, were killed in 2010 by the 
Taliban when he “was working for with the UN (United Nations).” (TR at page 14 line 16 
to page 15.) Applicant believes they were killed because “he refused to provide them 
[the Taliban] with information.”  (TR at page 14 line 16 to page 17 line 19.) Applicant fled 
Afghanistan, soon thereafter, to Switzerland, where he was granted asylum. (TR at 
page 18 line 4 to page 22 line 11.)  Applicant married a U.S. national in 2012; and as a 
result, immigrated to the United States. (Id, and GX 1 at page 24.) He became a U.S. 
citizen in 2016. (GX 1 at page 8.) 
 
 1.a and 1.b. Applicant’s elderly mother and remaining brother are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. (GX 1 at pages 26~29.) They are farmers. (TR at page 17 line 
20 to page 18 line 3, and at page 26 line 4 to page 27 line 4.) His mother and brother 
would also willingly sacrifice their lives, as did his father and deceased brother, before 
giving in to the demands of the Taliban. (Id.) Applicant would honor their wishes. (TR at 
page 17 line 20 to page 18 line 3, and at page 26 line 4 to page 27 line 4.) 
 
 1.c.~1.n. (1.c. and 1.f., and 1.k and 1.m. are duplicate entries involving distant 
cousins) Except for the cousin listed in 1.k., Applicant has very little contact with his 
distant cousins. He listed them on his Counterintelligence-Focused Screening 
Questionnaire (GX 3.) in an abundance of caution. (TR at page 29 line 2 to page 30 line 
 
3 
 
11.) As to his cousin listed in allegation 1.k., his “off and on contact . . . is limited to the 
phone.” Applicant “sent him money a couple of times . . . probably $150 or $200 max.” 
(Id.) Suffice it to say, that Applicant would not be subject to coercion vis-à-vis one of his 
distant cousins, as he proved with the deaths of both his father and brother 
 
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice as to the following facts regarding Afghanistan: The 
U.S. Department of State advises against all travel to Afghanistan due to crime, 
terrorism, civil unrest, and armed conflict. In 2016, insurgents across Afghanistan used 
a variety of tactics to expand their territorial influence, disrupt governance, and create a 
public perception of instability. No province in Afghanistan should be considered 
immune from violence. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s mother and brother are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant has proven that he is not subject to possible coercion as evidenced by 
the deaths of his father and brother. He, and his mother and brother, are willing to 
continue that sacrifice. As to his distant cousins, his contact is minimal, at best. 
Guideline B is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
6 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is a 
highly regarded and respected interpreter, working for U.S. interests in Afghanistan, as 
evidenced by six letters of support. (AppX A.) One very laudatory letter of support is 
from a U.S. Army Colonel who serves with Applicant in Afghanistan. (AppX A at page 
1.)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a~n:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
