 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03183 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 19, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on February 2, 2018. The case was 
assigned to me on August 3, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on September 4, 2018, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on September 20, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 
1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department 
Counsel’s discovery letter was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
 
2 
 
offered exhibits (AE) A-G, which I admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 28, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He has worked for defense contractors for 40 years. He 
has held a security clearance for 38 years. He works as a machinist-manufacturing 
engineer. He has a high school diploma and has earned college credits. He is married 
and has five stepchildren.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to timely file federal and state income tax 
returns from 2012 to 2016. He admitted in his security clearance application, his 
security clearance interview, his response to interrogatories, his SOR answer, and his 
hearing testimony not timely filing his federal and state tax returns for those years.2  
 
 Applicant attributed his tax problems to three main factors. First, in 2012, he 
received proceeds from a state abandoned-asset fund, to which he contributed early in 
his working career, of approximately $20,000. He did not know how to deal with the tax 
gain associated with the transaction, so he did not file his 2012 federal or state returns. 
He failed to file his 2013 to 2016 federal and state returns for the same reason. Second, 
he admitted that he was a procrastinator. Third, because of his wife’s medical issues 
starting in 2013 and 2014, where he became her primary caregiver, he could not find 
the time to take care of his tax issues. He admitted that it took putting his security 
clearance in jeopardy before he realized he needed to address his tax issues. He did 
not use an accountant or tax preparation firm to file his returns. He used a commercial 
computer tax program and filed the returns himself. He was interviewed by a defense 
investigator in June 2017 and subsequently filed his federal and state returns for 2012 
to 2015 in either June or July of 2017. He filed his 2016 returns in November 2017. He 
had not requested an extension for 2016. For tax year 2016, he was assessed penalties 
and interest on his federal tax return in the amount of $1,802, which he paid in 
December 2017. He timely filed his 2017 returns.3 
 
 Applicant documented that his current financial picture includes a retirement 
account in excess of $750,000, bank accounts with total balances of approximately 
$85,000, and he testified that his home and cars are debt free. He also presented his 
credit report, which showed no delinquent debts.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 7, 20-21; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21; GE 1-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 22-31, 33-34, 36-37; GE 3; AE F-G. 
 
4 Tr. at 29; AE A-D. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant had unfiled federal and state tax returns from 2012 to 2016. I find both 
the above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant failed to show significant efforts toward resolving his federal and state 
tax issues until after he was interviewed for his background check in June 2016. This 
pattern shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment for someone who 
served in has worked for a federal contractor for over 40 years. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
Applicant’s wife had serious medical issues beginning in 2013, which required 
Applicant to become her caregiver while still performing his regular job. That 
circumstance beyond his control is overcome by his admitted procrastination in failing to 
timely file both his federal and state tax returns from 2012 to 2016. He had the means to 
hire a professional to assist him with his taxes, but he failed to do so. AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant provided evidence that his tax problems are under control. He receives 
some credit for eventually filing all his delinquent federal and state tax returns. However, 
since it took him over five years to do so, despite having the means to address his tax 
issues, good-faith efforts to pay or resolve his tax issues are lacking. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 
20(d), and AG ¶ 20(g) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s lengthy contractor service and his family circumstances. 
However, I also considered that his federal and state returns went unfiled from 2012 to 
2016. He has not shown responsibility in exercising his lawful duty to file his federal and 
state tax returns in a timely manner.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
