 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 17-03932 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s information is not sufficient to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
raised by his unpaid debts, his failure to file his income tax returns as required, and by 
his deliberate false statements about adverse information in his background. Applicant’s 
request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On March 24, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position for his job 
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators were unable to determine that 
 
 
2 
 
 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request 
for a position of trust.1 
 
 On March 23, 2018, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
facts raising trustworthiness concerns addressed through the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG)2 for financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). 
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on August 9, 2018, and scheduled the hearing for October 19, 
2018. The parties appeared as scheduled, and I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GX) 1 
– 6 without objection by the Applicant. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AX) A, which I admitted without objection from the Government. I received a 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 25, 2017. I left the record open after the hearing 
to allow Applicant time to submit additional relevant information. (Tr. 44 – 46, 122) The 
record closed on October 26, 2018, when I received Department Counsel’s waiver of 
objection to the admissibility of Applicant’s timely post-hearing submissions. Those 
documents are admitted as AX B – E.3 
 
 Also included in the record are a letter from Department Counsel, dated May 30, 
2018, and a List of Government’s Exhibits. They are identified as Hearing Exhibits (HX) 
1 and 2, respectively. In accordance with Directive E3.1.13, HX 1 provided Applicant 
advance copies of GX 1 – 6. Additionally, it presented Applicant with an Amendment of 
the SOR.4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant had not yet filed his 
federal (SOR 1.a) and state (SOR 1.b) income tax returns for the 2014 – 2016 tax years, 
and that he owed $1,448 to the federal government for unpaid taxes in 2013, that debt 
being enforced through a tax lien. (SOR 1.c). The SOR further alleged that Applicant 
owed another $3,184 for four delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 2.d – 2.g). In response 
to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the allegations under Guideline 
F. He also claimed that the tax lien alleged in SOR 1.c was actually a state tax lien for the 
same amount.  
                                                 
1 Required by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive). 
 
2 Adjudicators applied the adjudicative guidelines issued by the Director of National Intelligence on 
December 10, 2016, and effective for all adjudications on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
3 AX B (four pages) is an email from one of Applicant’s creditors confirming that, on the same day as his 
hearing, Applicant finalized a repayment plan to resolve one of his debts through 26 payments of $150 
between October 26, 2018 and February 28, 2020. AX C (30 pages) consists of copies of federal and state 
income tax returns for the tax years 2014 – 2017. AX D (one page) is a brief note from Applicant’s supervisor 
expressing support for Applicant. AX E (three pages) is an excerpt from Applicant’s credit report, dated 
October 16, 2018. 
 
4 See Directive E3.1.17. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 In consideration of Applicant’s response, Department Counsel amended SOR 1.c 
to reflect that the lien is for a state tax debt. Additionally, Department Counsel amended 
the SOR to add allegations (SOR 1.h – 1.j) that Applicant owed three debts totaling 
$11,129, bringing the total non-tax delinquent debt at issue to $14,313. Before the 
hearing, Applicant did not respond as requested to the amendments. At hearing, he did 
not object to any of the amendments, and he admitted the SOR 1.h – 1.j allegations. 
(Answer; HX 1; Tr. 13 – 24) 
 
 Under Guideline E, the Government alleged that Applicant deliberately made false 
statements by omitting from his e-QIP the fact that he had been charged with or arrested 
for alcohol or drug-related crimes between 1983 and 2000 (SOR 2.a); by failing to disclose 
in his e-QIP that he failed to file his tax returns, as alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.b (SOR 
2.b(1)); and by failing to disclose the tax lien addressed in SOR 1.c (SOR 2.b(2)). Finally, 
it was alleged that Applicant intentionally provided false information to a government 
investigator during a personal subject interview by failing to disclose that he had not filed 
his income tax returns, as alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.b, and by misrepresenting facts about 
one of his income tax returns (SOR 2.c). In response to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR 
2.a, but admitted 2.b and 2.c. (Answer)  
 
 In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following 
findings of fact. Applicant is 54 years old and is employed by a federal contractor, for 
whom he has worked since early 2016. He previously worked for a different contractor at 
the same military installation between 2011 and 2016. Applicant has never been married, 
and he has one adult child. (GX 1; Tr. 101) 
 
 As of the date of the SOR, Applicant had not filed his federal or state income tax 
returns for the 2014, 2015, and 2016 tax years. Applicant claimed that he only filed his 
returns every three years, but he did not explain why. At the hearing, he testified that in 
2017, he had given his information for 2014 – 2016 to someone else to prepare his 
returns; however, that person had become involved in some sort of fraud (again, 
unexplained) and did not file Applicant’s returns. As of the hearing, Applicant had not yet 
filed his returns for 2014 – 2016. Additionally, he has not yet filed his 2017 returns 
because he first must file the 2014 – 2016 returns. Applicant’s post-hearing submissions 
included copies of prepared, unsigned, undated federal and state income tax returns for 
those tax years. If those returns have, in fact, been filed, it appears from the information 
he provided that they were filed after this hearing. (Answer; GX 2; AX B; Tr. 49 – 50, 56 
– 65) 
 
 In his e-QIP, Applicant listed the debt at SOR 1.d, as well as three other unalleged 
past-due debts in Section 26 (Financial Record). He stated therein that they were caused 
by “family problems” and that he was “in the process” of resolving them. During his 
ensuing background investigation, investigators obtained credit reports that document all 
of the delinquent debts in the SOR (as amended), including a state tax lien from the 2013 
tax year. Applicant claimed that debt was not for income tax; rather, it was likely for an 
unpaid property tax bill. Applicant further attributed his financial problems to his mother’s 
 
 
4 
 
 
medical issues. She had a stroke in 2005, then contracted cancer, and had only Medicaid 
and Medicare for her medical expenses. Applicant supported his mother by buying food, 
medically-necessary furniture, and medications not otherwise covered by her medical 
insurance. To that end, he relied on credit cards that he was eventually unable to pay. 
Applicant’s mother died in May 2018 and he also had to pay another $500 for his share 
of the funeral expenses. All of the debts listed in the SOR remain unresolved. To pay off 
his debts, Applicant intends to rely on income tax refunds he expects to receive after he 
files his returns. The state tax lien will likely be resolved first through diversion of his state 
tax refunds. He feels he could resolve all of his debts over the next year or so. (Answer; 
GX 1 – 5; Tr. 47, 50, 54 – 55, 67 – 68, 73 – 78, 95 – 98, 110 – 112) 
 
 Applicant has a long record of criminal activity that ended in 2009, when he was 
charged with theft. Between 1983 and 2000, Applicant’s criminal conduct was drug-
related. Available information shows he was charged 13 times with drug-related offenses, 
such as possession of a controlled dangerous substance (CDS) and possession of a CDS 
with intent to distribute. When Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he answered “no” to the 
question in e-QIP Section 22 (Police Record (EVER)) that asked, “Have you EVER been 
charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?” (Bold and upper case in the original). 
(GX 1; GX 6) 
 
 Applicant also answered “no” to the question in e-QIP Section 26 (Financial Record 
– Taxes) question that asked, “In the last seven (7) years have you failed to file or pay 
your Federal, state, or other taxes when required by law or ordinance?” He knew at that 
time he had not filed his tax returns for 2014, and that he owed the state tax lien alleged 
at SOR 1.c. When Applicant was asked about this answer in a subject interview with a 
government investigator on September 8, 2017, Applicant confirmed his e-QIP answers 
and indicated that he only had a minor problem with interest reporting on his 2015 returns. 
His statements during the interview were false in that they implied he had filed his returns, 
when he knew he had not done so. (Answer; GX 1; Tr. 49 – 50, 68 – 69) 
 
 Applicant denied any intent to falsify or mislead by his answer, claiming he likely 
misread the question because he was tired, stressed from the need to care for his ailing 
mother, and trying to complete the questionnaire in a hurry. Applicant testified that he 
disclosed some of his debts because he read that information from a credit report. 
Applicant did not explain why he could not simply have answered “yes” to these Section 
22 and 26 questions based on his own memory of having been charged with so many 
drug offenses, and on his own knowledge that he had not filed his income tax returns and 
owed a state tax lien. (Answer; GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 49 – 50, 68 – 73, 83 – 92, 105 – 109) 
 
 Applicant did not provide much information about his current finances. In addition 
to his work as a federal contractor, he has a second, part-time job that pays him about 
$600 each month. The prepared tax returns he submitted post-hearing reflect an adjusted 
gross income of $44,841 for 2017. In a subject interview with an investigator in October 
2017, he presented information showing he earned about $1,000 after deductions, but 
there is no information about his regular monthly expenses or other financial obligations. 
Applicant submitted information showing that he has established a monthly repayment 
 
 
5 
 
 
plan with a collection agency effective a week after his hearing. He is required to make 
36 monthly payments, but there is no information in this record about which debt the 
agency is collecting for and that would show he can actually make the required payments. 
Applicant has not sought or received any financial counseling or other professional 
assistance. (Answer; AX B; AX C; AX E; Tr. 78 – 82, 99 – 101) 
 
 Applicant has a good reputation at work. His supervisors regard him as reliable, 
hardworking, and trustworthy. He also has been recognized for his good performance by 
the military commander of the installation where Applicant works. (AX A; AX D)  
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a position of public trust must be based on a determination that it is 
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.5 All such adjudications 
must adhere to the procedural protections in the Directive before any adverse 
determination may be made. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors, commonly referred to 
as the “whole-person” concept, listed in the guidelines at AG ¶ 2(d).7 The presence or 
absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, 
specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of eligibility 
for a position of trust. 
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a position of 
trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has access to 
sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on 
trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the Government. 
                                                 
5 Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix A, Paragraph 1(d).  
 
6 Directive, 6.3. 
 
7  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, 
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's 
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the 
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support the allegations that 
Applicant has not filed his federal and state income tax returns as required for several 
years. He also owes unpaid state taxes, a debt that has been enforced by a lien against 
Applicant for more than five years. Finally, Applicant owes more than $14,000 for seven 
other delinquent debts. This information raises a trustworthiness concern about 
Applicant’s finances that is addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18, as follows: 
 
  Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations); and 19(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required). 
 
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
 
7 
 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s debts have been delinquent for 
several years and they remain unresolved. Only AG ¶ 20(b) applies, in part, based on 
Applicant’s representations that his financial problems resulted from expenditures related 
to the care and support of his late mother. For proper application of AG ¶ 20(b), it was 
incumbent on Applicant to show that he acted responsibly in the face of circumstances 
beyond his control. He did not do that. Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. He did not 
establish any good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his debts. The repayment 
plan documented by AX B was scheduled to begin well after his hearing, and Applicant 
did not establish he is able to make the payments required. Nor has he shown that any 
of the debts alleged are invalid and subject to dispute. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and AG 20(e) do not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant did not present any information that would suggest his current finances 
are sound and no longer pose a trustworthiness concern. He has not engaged in any 
financial counseling or other professional assistance to improve his finances. AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. 
 
 As to Applicant’s taxes, available information shows that, as of the hearing, he had 
not filed his annual income tax returns since 2014. The information he provided post-
hearing shows his returns may have been filed after the hearing. Additionally, Applicant 
still has not resolved a state tax lien that has been in place for five years. AG ¶¶ 20(g) 
does not apply. On balance, Applicant did not mitigate any of the trustworthiness 
concerns raised by the adverse information about his finances. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is articulated at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
 
8 
 
 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 Available information shows that Applicant omitted from his e-QIP any mention of 
his drug-related criminal charges between 1983 and 2000. He also did not disclose his 
failure to file his federal and state income tax returns for the 2014 tax year, and the fact 
that he had a delinquent state tax debt enforced by a 2013 lien against him. Questions in 
e-QIP Sections 22 and 26 plainly required him to make those disclosures. Available 
information also shows that Applicant provided inaccurate information regarding his taxes 
when he was interviewed by a government investigator during his background 
investigation. 
 
 Applicant denied that he intentionally omitted information from his e-QIP, or that 
he gave false official statements about his taxes during his interview. Nonetheless, having 
weighed all of the information probative of the allegations at SOR 2.a – 2.c, I conclude 
Applicant intended to deceive the government by withholding relevant information from 
his e-QIP and by making false statements to a government investigator. 
 
 The following AG ¶ 16 disqualifying conditions apply:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 In response to the Government’s information, Applicant claimed that he misread 
the questions in the e-QIP because he was tired and trying to complete the e-QIP in a 
hurry. I did not find his testimony in this regard credible. Against Applicant’s response is 
the absence of an explanation why he could list debts from a credit report he was reading, 
but could not properly answer “yes” or “no” to questions about information of which he 
plainly was aware without any external reference. It is unreasonable to conclude that 
Applicant needed to look at his credit report to be candid about his debts, but simply 
overlooked the fact he had been arrested or charged 13 times from the time he was 19 
until he was 38; or that he had not filed his taxes because, as he himself stated, he only 
files every three years. Finally, a summary of interview, the accuracy of which Applicant 
acknowledged, shows he made statements to an investigator that clearly implied that 
Applicant had filed his taxes when he knew he had not. 
 
 I also have considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 None of these apply. Rather than try to correct his e-QIP omissions about his taxes, 
Applicant made additional false statements about his taxes when he was interviewed by 
a government investigator. It does not appear that he ever addressed his arrest record 
until after the SOR was issued. Applicant’s false statements were not the result of counsel 
or advice from any qualified person, and the circumstances under which he completed 
his e-QIP were not unusual. On balance, Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns under this guideline.  
 
 I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors 
under Guidelines E and F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the 
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant provided positive information about 
his performance and reputation in the workplace. He also seemed contrite at his hearing 
about the mistakes he has made. Nonetheless, the record evidence as a whole leaves 
me with significant doubts about Appellant’s suitability for a position of public trust. 
Because protection of the national interest is the central focus of these adjudications, any 
remaining doubts must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for public trust 
eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
