 
  
  
1  
                                        
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )               ISCR Case No. 17-01647                                                                      
  )   
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On May 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
 
  
  
2  
                                        
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 17, 2017. In a notarized statement, dated 
June 26, 2017,2 Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on September 6, 2017. The case was assigned to me on March 20, 2018.  A 
Notice of Hearing was issued on August 28, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on September 24, 2018. 
 
 During the hearing, Government exhibits (GE) 4 through GE 7, Applicant exhibit 
(AE) A, and Administrative exhibit I, were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 2, 2018. I kept the record 
open to enable Applicant to supplement it. He took advantage of that opportunity and 
timely submitted additional documents, which were marked and admitted as AE B through 
AE H, without objection. The record closed on October 29, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations of the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.). 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving, 
initially as a laborer, then as a shipping and receiving clerk, but now as a service order 
dispatcher, with his employer since 2014. A 1989 high school graduate, Applicant 
received a bachelor’s degree in 1998, plus a substantial number of credits towards a 
master’s degree. He has never served with the U.S. military. He has never held a security 
clearance, but was granted a position of public trust on an unspecified date. Applicant 
was married in 2008, and informally separated in 2014. He has one child from that 
marriage, born in 2009, and two children from a prior relationship, born in 1998 and 2003. 
 
                                                          
1 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 
10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were 
established to supersede all previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. 
Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on September 1, 2006, under which this security 
clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the two versions, there is no substantial 
difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
2 The pre-printed form supplied to Applicant said the date was “2016,” but that date was obviously 
in error. 
  
  
3  
                                        
 Financial Considerations3 
  
In 2003, Applicant’s annual income was $25,000. In 2004, it increased to $31,000. 
In 2005, it plummeted to $14,000. On September 1, 2005, after consulting with a credit 
counselor, Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, 
listing $7,556 in creditors holding secured claims; and $105,437 in creditors holding 
unsecured nonpriority claims. At the time, his total monthly income was $2,350, with 
$3,183 in expected monthly expenses. Applicant’s bankruptcy was discharged as a no-
asset case on December 30, 2005.4 Applicant attributed those financial difficulties to 
several issues that initially arose in or about 2005: his fiancée moved out of state; to keep 
his family, by then, including a small child, together, after several months apart, in August 
2000, he too decided to relocate; and it took several months for him to find employment. 
In 2004, after their second child was born, Applicant’s fiancée had a change of heart, 
claiming she no longer liked the area where they were, and she decided to return to where 
her family resided. She took the two children, abandoned Applicant, and left town. 
Applicant remained there until 2006 when he relocated to another area within the state 
and was joined by the two children. The costs incurred by establishing both the initial and 
the next residence, the utility bills, babysitters, and the other normal monthly expenses 
were his responsibility because his fiancée’s credit was “shot,” and she was unemployed. 
Because of all the expenses that he had incurred, his only way out was to file for 
bankruptcy in 2005.5 
In August 2006, Applicant obtained a position as an assistant office manager and 
billing specialist with a medical rehabilitation and medical specialist. He reconnected with 
a college friend whom he had known ten years earlier, and in 2008, they were married. 
Their child was born in 2009. There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances at 
that point. He opened individual accounts with several entities, and financed the purchase 
of an automobile. In November 2013, Applicant’s job was outsourced and he was 
terminated with a compensation package. His wife was already unemployed. Applicant’s 
period of unemployment lasted until June 2014. Because of the stresses from the 
unemployment, as well as marital friction, Applicant’s wife decided to leave, taking their 
child. Eventually, Applicant obtained a position as a laborer cutting grass. However, his 
financial situation suffered because he did not have sufficient funds to maintain his 
accounts in a current status. In an effort to rectify his financial situation, Applicant hired a 
financial counseling service, and he paid them approximately $350 per month to assist 
him in resolving his delinquent debts. Unfortunately, over a period of two years, he noticed 
                                                          
3 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in 
the following exhibits: GE 1 (e-QIP, dated March 7, 2016); GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 
8, 2017); GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated March 31, 2016); GE 
4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated April 24, 2017); GE 5 (Chapter 7 Bankruptcy Petition, dated September 1, 
2005); GE 6 (Chapter 13 Bankruptcy Petition, dated October 28, 2016); GE 7 (Chapter 13 Bankruptcy 
Petition, dated April 7, 2017); and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated June 26, 2017.   
  
4 GE 5, supra note 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 13-19. 
 
  
  
4  
                                        
that the bulk of his payments remained with the counseling service, and a small portion 
actually went to his creditors.6 
Applicant completed credit counseling on October 28, 2016.7 That same day, 
without the benefit of an attorney, he filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 of the U.S. 
Bankruptcy Code, erroneously listing zero creditors holding secured claims; and zero 
creditors holding unsecured nonpriority claims, although he did list $130,000 in student 
loans. At the time, his total monthly income was $2,974, including salary as a night auditor 
at a motel, with $2,460 in expected monthly expenses, leaving a monthly remainder of 
$514.8 He failed to list the informal monthly child support of $300 that he pays his wife.9 
Because of Applicant’s misunderstanding of the bankruptcy filing requirements, his 
failures to request a hearing, and his failure to pay the balance of the filing fee, on March 
27, 2017, the case was dismissed.10  
Confused by the bankruptcy process, Applicant engaged the services of an 
attorney to guide him thorough the process. On April 7, 2017, now legally represented, 
Applicant refiled for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, listing 
$133,920 in creditors holding secured claims; and $186,437 in creditors holding 
unsecured nonpriority claims. At the time, his total monthly income was $3,391, with 
$1,766 in expected monthly expenses, leaving a monthly remainder of $1,625.11 
 Under the bankruptcy payment plan, Applicant pays the trustee approximately 
$1,644 per month for a period of five years. Applicant’s statement of earnings and 
deductions issued by his employer reflects deductions to the bankruptcy trustee of 
$413.75 per pay period, and as of October 19, 2018, he has paid the trustee $17,377.50, 
year to date.12 The trustee, in turn, is scheduled to make payments to various “long-term 
debts,” and Applicant is to continue making payments for child support and deferred 
student loans.13 He has not missed any payments.14 
Applicant acknowledges that he made several mistakes during his lifetime, and 
that it took him several tries to become responsible with his finances. He plans to do his 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 47-49. 
 
7 AE G (Certificate of Counseling, dated October 28, 2016). 
 
8 GE 6, supra note 3. 
 
9 Tr. at 22. 
 
10 GE 6, supra note 3; Tr. at 23-26. 
 
11 GE 7, supra note 3; AE F (Notice of Bankruptcy Case Filing, dated April 7, 2017). 
 
12 AE H (Statement of Earnings and Deductions, dated October 19, 2018); AE A (Statement of 
Earnings and Deductions, dated September 21, 2018). 
 
13 AE E (Chapter 13 Plan, dated April 7, 2017). 
 
14 Tr. at 35. 
  
  
5  
                                        
very best this time around to avoid making those mistakes again. During the entire 
bankruptcy and security clearance review processes, he has taken several steps to stay 
debt free by controlling his spending habits; obtaining financial counseling from a 
legitimate and credible source; following a budget plan created by a financial adviser; 
read a book entitled Rich Dad/Poor Dad; and by following tips on staying out of debt, how 
to spend money wisely, tracking your money better, and learning solutions to become 
debt free, by Dave Ramsey.15  
Other than the debts listed in his bankruptcy, Applicant is not aware of any other 
delinquent accounts. He timely files and pays his federal and state income taxes. 
Applicant has made significant progress in stabilizing his finances and avoiding other 
more recent financial delinquencies. With the financial guidance received from a variety 
of sources, his embracing of fiscal responsibility, and the structured bankruptcy payment 
plan, Applicant’s financial situation is now under control.  
Character References 
 
 The office manager at Applicant’s former medical-practice employer has known 
Applicant for more than ten years as a friend, employee, and colleague. Applicant is 
trustworthy, hard-working, respectful, punctual, caring and motivated. He would often stay 
late and work on weekends to ensure the practice was prepared for the upcoming week. 
He is also a loving father. Applicant is “a mature, imperfect man who strives to always do 
and be a better person than the previous day.”16  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”17 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”18   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
                                                          
 
15 AE B (Statement, dated October 22, 2018); Tr. at 39-41. 
 
16 AE D (Character Reference, dated October 1, 2018). 
 
17 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
18 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”19 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.20  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”21  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”22 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
                                                          
19 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
21 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
22 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, including Applicant’s testimony, as 
well as an assessment of Applicant’s demeanor and credibility, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts and factors, I conclude the following with respect to the 
allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Analysis 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
  
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:        
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19:   
  
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
  
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
  
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
  
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators.  
  
 
8 
                                      
 
A number of Applicant’s accounts became delinquent, and they were placed for 
collection. Unable to resolve them, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005, and 
his liabilities were discharged. Eventually, financial difficulties again arose when he was 
unable to resolve them without assistance. Without proper guidance, in 2016, Applicant 
filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but that petition was dismissed. With legal guidance, he 
refiled for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2017. There is no evidence that he was unwilling to 
satisfy his debts or that he had the ability to do so, and there is no evidence of frivolous 
or irresponsible spending, or consistent spending beyond his means. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) have been established, and AG ¶ 19(e) has been partially established. AG ¶ 19(b) 
has not been established.  
     
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;23 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;24 and 
                                                          
23 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
24 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
 
9 
                                      
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
I have concluded that ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) all partially or fully apply, 
and ¶ 20(e) does not apply. Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose because of his 
fiancée’s – the mother of two of his children - actions. First she moved out of state; to 
keep his family together, after several months apart, in August 2000, he too decided to 
relocate; and it took several months for him to find employment. In 2004, after their 
second child was born, Applicant’s fiancée had a change of heart, claiming she no longer 
liked the area where they were, and, taking the two children, she returned to where her 
family resided. Applicant remained there until 2006 when he relocated to another area 
within the state and was joined by the two children. The costs incurred by establishing 
both the initial and the next residence, the utility bills, babysitters, and the other normal 
monthly expenses were his responsibility because his fiancée’s credit was “shot,” and 
she was unemployed. Because of all the expenses that he had incurred, his only way out 
was to file for bankruptcy in 2005. 
 
In August 2006, Applicant obtained a position with a medical rehabilitation and 
medical specialist. In 2008, he reconnected with an old friend, and they were married. He 
lost that job in November 2013. His wife was already unemployed. Applicant’s period of 
unemployment lasted until June 2014. Because of the stresses from the unemployment, 
as well as marital friction, Applicant’s wife decided to leave, taking their child. Eventually, 
Applicant obtained a position as a laborer cutting grass. However, he did not have 
sufficient funds to maintain his accounts in a current status. In an effort to rectify his 
financial situation, Applicant hired a financial counseling service, and he paid them to 
assist him in resolving his delinquent debts. Unfortunately, over a period of two years, he 
noticed that the bulk of his payments remained with the counseling service, and a small 
portion actually went to his creditors. In October 2016, without the benefit of an attorney, 
he filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. His petition was a 
mess, missing significant information. Because of Applicant’s misunderstanding of the 
bankruptcy filing requirements, his failures to request a hearing, and his failure to pay the 
balance of the filing fee, in March 2017, the case was dismissed. Applicant engaged the 
services of an attorney to guide him thorough the process, and in April 2017, he refiled 
for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Applicant pays the trustee 
approximately $1,644 per month for a period of five years. As of October 19, 2018, he 
has paid the trustee $17,377.50, year to date. He has not missed any payments.                                                      
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
                                                          
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time.   
Other than the debts listed in his bankruptcy, Applicant is not aware of any other 
delinquent accounts. He timely files and pays his federal and state income taxes. 
Applicant has made significant progress in stabilizing his finances and avoiding other 
more recent financial delinquencies. With the financial guidance received from a variety 
of sources, his embracing of fiscal responsibility, and the structured bankruptcy payment 
plan, Applicant’s financial situation is now under control. Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.25  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.26  
  
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. With a number of 
delinquent accounts, he filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code 
in 2005, and his liabilities were discharged that same year. In 2016, with new financial 
difficulties, he self-filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. 
                                                          
25 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010).  
  
26 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
That petition was dismissed in 2017 for failing to fulfill certain legal obligations.  It was 
refiled with the assistance of an attorney in 2017.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving, initially 
as a laborer, then as a shipping and receiving clerk, but now as a service order dispatcher, 
with his employer since 2014. He has never held a security clearance, but was granted a 
position of public trust on an unspecified date. The office manager at Applicant’s former 
medical-practice employer considers him to be trustworthy, hard-working, respectful, 
punctual, caring and motivated. Applicant is “a mature, imperfect man who strives to 
always do and be a better person than the previous day.”  
Because of the erratic actions of both his former unemployed fiancée, and years 
later his unemployed wife, both of whom chose to leave the family residences and 
subsequently relocate out of state, only to abandon him again, all of which caused 
unanticipated expenses for Applicant, his financial situation suffered. Unemployment only 
added to his struggles to remain current on his various accounts. Rather than avoiding his 
financial problems, he chose to confront them. It is significant that he chose to cut grass 
to earn a salary. First, there was costly and ineffective financial guidance. Then, there was 
his effort to seek Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection without the assistance of an attorney. 
Now, with the assistance of an attorney, Applicant is on a bankruptcy payment plan. In 
2018, as of October 19, 2018, he has paid the trustee $17,377.50, year to date. With the 
financial guidance received from a variety of sources, his embracing of fiscal 
responsibility, and the structured bankruptcy payment plan, Applicant’s financial situation 
is now under control. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:27 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
                                                          
27 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
Applicant has demonstrated a good track record of debt reduction and elimination 
efforts, resolving some of his debts, limited only by insufficient funds, and complying with 
the bankruptcy trustee’s decisions regarding the remaining debts for eventual resolution. 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
