 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 17-04165  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
November 27, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
  
Statement of Case 
 
 On July 11, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On January 16, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 13, 2018. She admitted all the allegations 
of the SOR, except for Subparagraphs 1.g., 1.h., 1.p., and 1.q., and requested that her 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On May 16, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 11 Items, 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
was received by the Applicant on June 5, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant that she 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. Applicant submitted nothing in 
response to the FORM. DOHA assigned the case to me on July 30, 2018. Items 1 
through 11 are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. (Item 3 at page 5.) She is married, and has seven 
children. (Item 3 at pages 20 and 22.) 
 
 1.a.~1.d. Applicant admits that she filed for the protection of a Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy in 1999 as she was “a single parent and needed a fresh start.” (Item 2 at 
page 1.) Applicant received a discharge from this Bankruptcy. 
 
 Applicant also admits that she filed for the protection of Chapter 13 Bankruptcies 
in April of 2005, in April of 2015, and in November of 2015. (Id.) They were all dismissed 
as Applicant was “unable to make monthly payment(s).” These allegations are found 
against Applicant. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admits that in about October of 2016, she suffered a mortgage 
foreclosure. (Item 2 at page 1.) This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admits that she was indebted to the Federal Government in the 
amount of about $6,356 for tax years 2013 and 2014. In her Answer, Applicant avers 
that “this amount has been satisfied and payment arrangements are in good standing,” 
but has offered nothing in support of this averment. This allegation is found against 
Applicant. 
 
 1.g. Applicant denies that she failed to file her Federal tax returns for tax year 
2015, but has submitted nothing in support of her averment. This allegation is found 
against Applicant. 
 
 1.h. Applicant also denies that she failed to file her state tax returns for tax years 
2015 and 2016. In Response to DoDCAF Interrogatories, Applicant has demonstrated 
that she prepared to file these state tax returns, but there is nothing to demonstrate that 
Applicant, in fact, filed these state tax returns. (Item 7 at page 42~45) This allegation is 
found against Applicant. 
 
 1.i.~1.m. Applicant admits that she was indebted to her state, as the result of five 
state tax liens totaling about $5,137. She avers that these debts have “been satisfied – 
Proof sent to DoD.” Applicant has submitted documentation from her state showing that 
 
 
3 
 
 
these tax liens have “been removed . . . because there is no longer a balance owing.” 
(Item 7 at pages 48~58.) These allegations are found for Applicant. 
 
 1.n.  Applicant also admits that she was indebted to her state, as the result of a 
sixth state tax lien, for about $826. As Applicant has not submitted any documentation 
regarding this state tax lien, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.o. Applicant admits that she was indebted to Creditor O as the result of a 
judgment in the amount of $306. Applicant avers that this judgment “has been satisfied,” 
alluding to her bankruptcy filings. This judgment still appears as “unsatisfied” on 
Applicant’s March 2016 credit report (CR); and as such, this allegation is found against 
Applicant.  (Item 10 at page 3.) 
 
 1.p Applicant denies that she was indebted to Creditor P as the result of a 
second judgment in the amount of $1,533. Applicant avers that “this debt was 
cancelled.” As this judgment still appears as “pending” on Applicant’s March 2016 CR, 
this allegation is found against Applicant.  (Item 10 at page 4.) 
 
 1.q. Applicant denies that she was indebted to Creditor Q as the result of a third 
judgment in the amount of $596. Applicant avers that she has “no record” of this debt. 
As this judgment appears as “satisfied” on Applicant’s March 2016 CR, this allegation is 
found for Applicant.  (Item 10 at page 4.) 
 
 1.r. Applicant admits that she was indebted to Creditor R as the result of a fourth 
judgment in the amount of $535. Applicant avers that this debt “has been satisfied. As 
this judgment appears as “satisfied” on Applicant’s March 2016 CR, this allegation is 
found for Applicant.  (Item 10 at page 5.) 
 
 1.s.~1.u. Applicant admits that she was indebted to Creditor S as the result of 
past-due medical debts totaling about $594. Applicant avers that these debts have 
“been satisfied.” As they still appear as “outstanding” on Applicant’s November 2017 
CR, these allegations are found against Applicant.  (Item 8 at pages 1~2.) 
 
 1.v. Applicant admits that she was indebted to Creditor V, as the result of a past-
due debt, in the amount of about $4,692. As Applicant has submitted nothing further in 
this regard, this allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.w. Applicant admits that she was indebted to Creditor W, as the result of a 
past-due debt, in the amount of about $562. Applicant avers that this debt has been 
“paid in full,” but has submitted nothing further in this regard. As this debt appears as 
still in “collection” on Applicant’s March 2016 CR, this allegation is found against 
Applicant. 
 
 1.x. and 1.y. Applicant admits that she was indebted to Creditor X as the result of 
past-due medical debts totaling about $248. Applicant avers that these debts have 
 
 
4 
 
 
“been satisfied.” As they still appear as “outstanding” on Applicant’s March 2016 CR, 
these allegations are found against Applicant.  (Item 10 at page 6.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
 
5 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .   
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file . . . annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns . . . . 
 
Applicant has a plethora of past-due debts and judgments. These facts establish 
prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to 
Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
None of these apply. Although Applicant has addressed most of her state tax 
liens; and a couple of debts, most of the allegations have not been responsibly 
addressed. Guideline F is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 
 
7 
 
 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. She has not met her burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.i through1.m:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.n through1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.q and1.r:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.s through1.y:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
