  1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:    ) 
      ) 
      ) ISCR Case No. 17-04058 
     ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate sexual 
behavior security concerns. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 19, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to maintain and upgrade his security clearance 
required for a position with a defense contractor. On March 16, 2017, Applicant was 
interviewed by a security agent from the Office of Personnel Management (Item 3, 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) dated March 16, 2017). He was administered a 
polygraph examination by an agent from the National Security Agency on January 4, 
2016. (Item 4, NSA Clearance Decision Statement, dated July 20, 2016). After 
reviewing the results of the background investigation and the polygraph examination, 
the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudication Facility (DOD CAF) could not 
make the affirmative findings required to continue a security clearance. On April 20, 
2018, the DOD CAF issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns for sexual behavior under Guideline D. The action was taken under Executive 
  2 
 
Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 21, 2018. He admitted the factual 
allegations of sexual behavior but denied that the facts raised security concerns. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on July 17, 2018. (Item 
5) On July 27, 2018, Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM). He 
was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not submit any 
additional material or provide a response to the FORM. I was assigned the case on 
October 11, 2018.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 3) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He was further advised 
that he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection 
was raised to the summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that he waived 
any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the PSI because he did not respond to the FORM. Since 
there is no objection by Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 50 years old. He graduated from high school in 1986, and received a 
bachelor’s degree in March 1993. Applicant has been employed by a defense contractor 
as a software engineer and project manager since 2014. Prior to that employment, he 
was employed since 1998 as a network systems analysist and programmer. He married 
in 1997 and has two children and a step child. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated December 19, 
2016; Item 3, PSI, dated March 16, 2017) Applicant was granted eligibility for access to 
classified information in 1998, and conditionally approved for access to SCI on October 
17, 2011. The SOR alleges that Applicant engaged in criminal sexual behavior from the 
1990s until the late 2014 or early 2015. (Item 1) 
 
Applicant stated in the PSI, that while in college in the 1990s, he and some 
friends went to Las Vegas where they became intoxicated. They were approached by 
some females, and Applicant went to the hotel room and engaged in sexual intercourse 
with one of the females. He paid her approximate $80 to $100 for her services. In early 
2000s, Applicant and some family members and neighbors were in Las Vegas and 
became intoxicated. They attended a bachelor party where Appellant was approached 
  3 
 
by some ladies. He accompanied one of the ladies to her room and paid to have sexual 
intercourse with her. (Item3) 
 
Applicant reported in the polygraph examination conducted on January 4 and 5, 
2016, that in the mid-1990s, he and some friends and family members went to a club 
where they lived. Applicant and a friend went to motel with one of the females they met 
at the club, and both had sexual intercourse with her both separately and together. He 
also reported that in 2007 or 2008 he went to a massage parlor and paid to receive a 
sexual message to include ejaculation from a female. He returned to the massage 
parlor six months later and paid to receive the same service. He also paid for and 
received the same service from a different massage parlor in late 2014 or early 2015. 
He reported that he had no involvement with the females after he received their 
services. None of the incidents were detected by or reported to police. He stated his 
wife is unaware that he paid prostitutes for sexual services. He also does not believe he 
had an active security clearance at the time he paid for and received sexual services 
from prostitutes. His access to SCI was denied on July 20, 2016, after evaluation of the 
polygraph examination. He continued to be eligible for access to classified information.  
(Item 4) 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant states that the characterization of his 
conduct does not define him as a person. He wrote that he values family most and 
wants to continue to work to provide a good education for his children. He has never 
been involved in an incident with law enforcement, and he has a clean record. He 
reported that the incidents with prostitutes were isolated and happened a long time ago. 
He was not aware that the conduct was considered criminal in nature. If he knew it was 
considered bad judgment to engage in the activities with prostitutes and it would affect 
his security clearance, he would not have engaged in the activities. (Response to SOR, 
dated May 19, 2018)  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
  4 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Sexual Behavior  
 
The security concern raised by sexual behavior is sexual behavior that involves a 
criminal offense, reflects a lack of judgment or discretion, or may subject the individual 
to undue influence of coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or 
individually, may raise questions about the individual’s judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Sexual behavior 
includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, electronic, or written 
transmission. (AG ¶ 12) 
The information reported by Applicant in the PSI and the polygraph examination 
shows that Applicant paid for and engaged in sexual activities with prostitutes from the 
early 1990 until as recent as early 2015. Once the Government has established an 
adverse financial issue, the Applicant has the responsibility to refute or mitigate the 
issue. 
 
This available information is sufficient to raise the following Sexual Behavior 
Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 13: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted: 
(b) pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high–risk sexual behavior 
that the individual is unable to stop;  
 
  5 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes the individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment. 
 
I considered the following Sexual Behavior Mitigating Conditions under AG 14: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, or discreet; and 
 
(e) the individual has successfully completed an appropriate program of 
treatment, or is currently enrolled in one, has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan, and/or received a favorable 
prognosis from a qualified mental health professional indicating the 
behavior is readily controllable with treatment. 
 
The mitigating conditions do not apply. The available evidence and Applicant’s 
admissions confirms that he paid for sexual conduct with prostitutes, which is criminal 
conduct, for over 25 years. Only the first incident happened when he was an adolescent 
college student, but he continued to avail himself of services from prostitute. His paying 
for sexual activity with prostitutes for over 25 years was continuous, frequent, voluntary, 
and under normal circumstances. The activities were high risk in that his friends and 
relatives were involved in the activities with him and his wife was unaware he paid for 
and engaged in sexual activities with prostitutes. His activities and the fact his wife does 
not know of his activities make him subject to coercion and exploitation.  
 
The activities were not always private because on at least once occasion a friend 
was in the same room were the sexual activities took place. Applicant did not present 
any information that he sought out or received medical guidance to help stop his illicit 
activities. Applicant’s willingness to engage in dangerous, irresponsible, and illicit 
behavior for over 25 years is a strong indication that he may not protect and safeguard 
classified or sensitive information.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
  6 
 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant was 
eligible for access to classified information and SCI for 20 years and without evidence of 
a security violation. I considered his response to the SOR where he stated that he 
values family most of all.  
 
I also considered that Applicant recently failed a polygraph examination and lost 
his eligibility for access to SCI. I considered that Applicant’s conduct with prostitutes 
was potentially dangerous, shows lack of judgment and discretion, and can subject 
Applicant to undue influence, coercion, exploitation, or duress. Overall, the record 
evidence and Applicant’s actions leaves me with questions and doubts concerning 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information and SCI. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigated the security concerns arising from his sexual behavior.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
  7 
 
classified information and SCI. Eligibility for access to classified information and SCI is 
denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
