 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 17-04264 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts and tax issues are alleged as a security concern 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. His debts remain largely unresolved. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial security concern. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 25, 2016. On 
March 22, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.1  
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) (December 10, 2016),  
effective June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 16, 2018, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on June 27, 2018. On July 27, 2018, a notice of hearing was 
issued scheduling the hearing for August 23, 2018. The hearing convened as 
scheduled. 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE D. 
All exhibits were admitted without objection. I held the record open to provide Applicant 
the opportunity to submit additional documentation. He timely submitted additional 
documents, which are marked as AE E through AE I, and admitted without objection.2 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 30, 2018. The record closed on 
September 7, 2018.  
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
 At the start of the hearing, the Government moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c, as duplicative of SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.k, respectively. The motion was granted. (Tr. 
12-13) 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.i, and 1.k - 1.p. He denied SOR ¶ 1.i. His 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. He is a high school graduate. He and his wife married 
in 2012. They have two daughters, a six-year-old and a ten-month-old. Applicant works 
as an electronics technician for a defense contractor since August 2013. Previous 
employers included an auto repair shop, a package delivery service, and a fast food 
restaurant. His wife works as a waitress. This is his first application for a security 
clearance. (Tr. 9, 28-30; GE 1) 
 
When Applicant was first hired by his employer, in 2014, he was paid $11 an 
hour. He has since been promoted and earned raises, and since January 2018, he has 
earned $20 an hour, and $30 an hour working overtime. After taxes he earns about 
$2,400 a month. (Tr. 28-30, 77-81, 91-92) 
 
 As amended, the SOR alleges that Applicant has incurred $22,256 in delinquent 
debt. The debts are listed on Applicant’s credit reports from June 2016 and November 
2017. (GE 3; GE 4) Applicant testified (and explained in his background interview) that 
he began falling behind on his debts in 2012, after his daughter was born. He was then 
                                                          
2 AE E is an e-mail from Applicant concerning his efforts to get documentation from one of his creditors. 
AE F is a recommendation letter. AE G and AE H are Applicant’s 2017 state and Federal income tax 
returns, with related payment coupons. AE I and AE J are payment coupons for his 2018 state and 
Federal income taxes.  
 
 
3 
 
 
22 years old, and working in a low-paying job. (Tr. 33; GE 2 at 12) His plan is to address 
his debts one at a time, as best he can. (Tr. 34, 44) 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.b ($6,293) is a debt in collection Applicant owes for unpaid rent. He was 
evicted from the apartment in about 2012. He disclosed the debt on his SCA. (GE 1 at 
34) Applicant began living at the apartment in 2013. He fell behind on the debt after his 
daughter was born. Applicant has taken no action to resolve this debt, and it remains 
unpaid. (Tr. 31-34, 44) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d ($787) is a past-due power bill. Applicant still has an account with the 
same power company but it is not in his name. Applicant has taken no action to resolve 
this debt, and it remains unpaid. (Tr. 34-35) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e ($29) is a debt to a collection agency. The original creditor is not 
identified, though there is a partial account number on the November 2017 credit report. 
Though Applicant admitted the debt in his Answer, he testified that he did not recognize 
it. (Tr. 34-35; GE 4)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f ($860) is a March 2015 judgment in favor of an unidentified medical 
creditor. Applicant went to the emergency room in 2014. He did not have insurance, and 
could not afford to pay the bill. Applicant has taken no action to resolve this debt, and it 
remains unpaid. (Tr. 37-38) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k ($1,352) is a similar debt, in collection to an unidentified medical 
creditor. Applicant disclosed the debt on his SCA, noting that it was an emergency room 
bill incurred in 2011. (GE 1 at 33) He testified that he thinks this debt is the same as 
medical debt ¶ 1.f. He acknowledged that he had multiple visits for medical treatment, 
for two separate issues, both when he did not have insurance. Applicant has taken no 
action to resolve this debt, and it remains unpaid. (Tr. 49-53)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g ($3,043) is a judgment issued against Applicant in January 2015, in 
favor of a local tolling authority. Applicant incurred the debt on a daily basis while driving 
across a toll bridge, to and from work to his job at a shipyard. When he did not pay what 
he owed, the creditor successfully sought a judgment against him in court, and then got 
the court to order garnishment of his wages. The amount in the SOR is the principal 
amount owed. The total, including costs and interests, is $3,812. (AE A) When Applicant 
answered the SOR, he said he had paid $1,579 of the debt. He provided a July 1, 2018 
paystub reflecting that the full payment of $3,812 has now been garnished. (AE B; Tr. 
22-23) Applicant said he no longer takes toll bridges and no longer works at that job 
site. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 38-42)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h ($7,042) is an October 2012 judgment against Applicant concerning 
the balance owed the creditor on a repossessed car. Applicant’s wife purchased the car 
in 2010 or 2011, and Applicant co-signed the loan. They tried to keep up with payments 
but were not able to do so, and the car was repossessed in 2012. Applicant believes 
this was about the same time he was evicted from his apartment (the creditor for SOR ¶ 
 
4 
 
 
1.b), though he recalls getting letters about it. This debt was brought to his attention 
during his background interview. Applicant has taken no action to resolve the debt, and 
it remains unpaid. (Tr. 42-45) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i ($452) is a debt relating to the car Applicant purchased after the 
repossession in 2012 (¶ 1.h). Applicant has made two $150 payments on the debt, and 
has one payment left. The debt is being resolved. (Tr. 46-47; AE C) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j ($98) is the only debt Applicant denied. This is a debt Applicant owes 
to a retailer. The debt was charged off in 2016. (GE 4) Applicant denied the debt 
because he said he paid it last year. (Tr. 47-49) He attempted after the hearing to get 
documentation of the payment, but was not able to “because the account was paid off 
so long ago.” (AE E) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l ($1,263) is an unpaid phone bill in collection. Applicant incurred the 
debt in about 2010. He incurred phone charges he could not pay and the company 
turned off his cell phone. Applicant has taken no action to resolve this debt, and it 
remains unpaid. (Tr. 53-54)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m ($287) is a cable TV bill in collection. Applicant has taken no action to 
resolve this debt, and it remains unpaid. (Tr. 44) 
 
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2016, 
as required. (SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o). At hearing, Applicant testified that “I was told I had 
three years to file my taxes,” at least if he was due a refund. He said he was told that by 
his friends and parents. (Tr. 56-57)  
  
Applicant said he did not file his 2016 tax returns on time, in part, because he 
and his wife were living separately for a time, and his wife had claimed their daughter as 
a dependent. (Tr. 67-72) Applicant said in his Answer that he had filed his 2016 Federal 
and State income tax returns in April 2018, with his 2017 returns. (Tr. 58, 64) 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he did not get a refund when he filed, and in fact 
owed both Federal and state taxes. (Tr. 57-61, 73, 91) He said he thought he owed 
about $6,000 in past-due Federal income taxes for tax years 2016 and 2017 combined. 
He is on a payment plan, and had paid $150 a month for the three months before the 
hearing. (Tr. 24-26, 66-67, 86-90; AE D; AE H)  
 
In SOR ¶ 1.p, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $768 in past-due 
state income taxes. The year was not specified but Applicant disclosed in his 
Interrogatory Response that he owed $768 for tax year 2014. The debt remains unpaid. 
(GE 2 at 1-3; Tr. 76-77, 90-91)  
 
After the hearing, Applicant submitted paperwork regarding his 2017 state and 
Federal income tax returns and related payments. He owed $4,521 in Federal taxes for 
tax year 2017. He provided payment vouchers for $1,131 per quarter in 2018. (AE H; 
 
5 
 
 
AE J) He owed $525 in state taxes for tax year 2017. (AE G) He provided payment 
vouchers for $132 per quarter for state taxes. (AE I) He did not provide documentation 
that his 2016 Federal and state income tax returns had been filed in April 2018, as he 
had testified.  
 
 One of Applicant’s supervisors provided a recommendation letter. He notes that 
Applicant is one of the few employees at the company who is qualified as a particular 
kind of inspector. He is motivated and shows initiative by volunteering frequently for 
extra duties. He is professional and treats co-workers and clients respectfully. He has a 
bright future with the company.  (AE F)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”3 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
3 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
6 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The financial considerations guideline sets forth several conditions that could 
raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
Notwithstanding Applicant’s admission, SOR ¶ 1.e is not established. The debt is 
to a collection agency. The original creditor is not identified, and there is only a partial 
credit number listed on GE 4. Applicant testified that he did not recognize the debt, 
which is also for a small amount, $29. Applicant’s credit reports otherwise reflect that he 
has incurred numerous unresolved delinquent debts over the last several years. AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
 
 Applicant filed his 2016 Federal and state income tax returns late. He said he 
filed them in April 2018, when he filed his 2017 tax returns, but did not provide 
supporting documentation. Applicant reported that he owes $768 in past-due state 
income taxes for tax year 2014. AG ¶ 19(g) applies.  
 
7 
 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquencies include debts for unpaid rent, power bill, cable, phone, 
auto, emergency medical expenses when he did not have insurance, and a large bill to 
a local tolling authority. To some extent, his debts are attributable to conditions beyond 
his control, as they are largely attributable to his low income. The first prong of AG ¶ 
20(b) has some application. AG ¶ 20(b) does apply to the medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f 
and 1.k), which occurred because Applicant went to the emergency room and did not 
have medical insurance.  
 
 However, for full application of this mitigating condition, Applicant must show that 
he has acted responsibly under the circumstances. These debts are largely unresolved. 
Applicant states that his plan is to pay them off one by one. That is a reasonable plan, 
but Applicant simply has not established enough of a track record of financial 
responsibility or of good-faith efforts to repay his debts, to give him full mitigation credit 
under AG ¶ 20(b), or AG 20(d).  
 
 The debt to the tolling authority (SOR ¶ 1.g) has been resolved, but it took a 
judgment against Applicant, and an order garnishing his wages, to resolve it. Applicant 
also incurred the debt on a daily basis, while driving to and from his job at a shipyard.  
Under those circumstances, I cannot credit Applicant with acting in good-faith, or that 
the debt has been mitigated, even though it has been paid.  
 
 Applicant’s $768 unpaid state income tax debt is not resolved, and he did not set 
forth a plan for resolving it. Applicant also did not provide sufficient documentation that 
he had filed his 2016 Federal and state income tax returns in April 2018, as he said. 
These allegations are unresolved. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant has set up a plan to pay his past-due Federal income tax debt, of 
between $4,300 and about $6,000 from tax years 2016 and 2017. That tax debt is not 
alleged. I cannot consider that debt as disqualifying conduct, though I can consider it in 
weighing mitigation.  
 
 While Applicant incurred many of his debts several years ago, when he had less 
income, his debts are largely ongoing and unresolved. His outstanding delinquencies 
are a “continuing course of conduct.”4 He did not provide sufficient evidence to establish 
that his financial problems happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant simply needs to establish 
more of a track record of financial stability and of good-faith steady payments towards 
his debts to meet his burden of showing that he is a suitable candidate for access to 
classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017). 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.p:   Against Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
