 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03744 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, but mitigated the Guideline B, foreign influence concerns. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 9, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F and B. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017 (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 27, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 11, 2018. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-7 (Items 1 and 2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information, and Item 8 is a request for administrative notice on Afghanistan). 
The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on June 29, 2018. Applicant was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not file objections, but submitted exhibits (AE) A-E which are 
admitted without objection. Items 3-7 are also admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on October 11, 2018. 
  
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Afghanistan. Applicant did not object and the request was 
approved. The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence 
but were included in the record as Item 8. The facts administratively noticed are set out 
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the SOR allegations except for 
¶ 1.h. The admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
The SOR alleged Applicant is indebted on charged-off and collection accounts in 
the total amount of $23,782 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.l). The SOR also alleged Applicant’s 
parents, three brothers, and one sister are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. It also 
alleged that Applicant provides approximately $1,500 annually to his mother (SOR ¶¶ 
2.a- 2.c).  
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He was born in Afghanistan in 1972. He relocated to 
the United States in 2007. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014. He attended 
high school in Afghanistan and college in the United States. He worked for a defense 
contractor as a linguist from 2002 to 2007. From 2007 to 2016, Applicant worked as a 
role player and a security guard for different federal contractors. He also experienced 
periods of unemployment (September 2012-October 2014; September 2011-June 2012; 
October 2008-February 2009; November 2007-August 2008). The record contains no 
evidence that Applicant has property or other assets in the United States.1 He is single 
with no children.2   
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 4-6 (credit reports do not show mortgage loans or a current car loan). 
 
2 Items 3-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Foreign Influence 
  
 Applicant has the following relatives who are residents and/or citizens of 
Afghanistan:  
 
 1. His parents. His father is in his mid-60s and is unable to work because of 
medical conditions. His mother is in her late 50s and is a housewife who also takes care 
of her husband. They live in Kabul. They are not affiliated with the Afghan government. 
Applicant has monthly, or once every two months, contact with his parents through 
social media.3  
 
 2. Applicant’s three brothers and one sister. His three brothers are younger and 
all are university students. His sister is in high school. None of his brothers or sisters 
knows what he does for a living or where he works. None of his siblings have any 
Afghan government connections. Applicant’s contact with his siblings ranges from 
monthly to once every two months.4 
 
 Applicant admitted supplying his mother approximately $200-$300 five to six 
times a year. He explained that it was customary to provide his aging parents financial 
assistance. His other siblings also assist with financial aid to their parents. Applicant 
sends the money using Western Union.5 
 
Afghanistan 
 
 A U.S. State Department travel warning remains in effect for Afghanistan. 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State of Iraq and 
Levant, and members of other armed opposition groups are active throughout the 
country. Afghanistan continues to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by the 
Taliban and other terrorist groups. The border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan 
remains a safe haven for terrorists. The country’s most significant human-rights concern 
during 2015 was widespread violence, armed insurgent groups’ attacks on civilians, and 
killing of persons affiliated with the government.6 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 During his November 2016 background interview with a defense investigator, 
Applicant admitted all the SOR debts (including the debt he denied in his answer, ¶ 1.h). 
He further stated that he intended to pay all the debts by May 2017. He failed to fulfil 
this commitment by May 2017. In April 2018, Applicant entered into an agreement with 
                                                          
3 Item 2; AE E. 
 
4 Item 2; AE E. 
 
5 Item 2; AE E. 
 
6 Item 8. 
 
 
4 
 
 
a debt relief company (DRC) to settle some of his SOR debts. Under the terms of the 
agreement, Applicant is to pay $288 monthly for 48 months and the DRC will negotiate 
settlements on the five entered debts (three credit card debts, one rental debt, and one 
telephone provider debt totaling approximately $16,129). As of July 2018, he paid one 
debt (insurance debt for $164), had settled one debt (telephone provider debt of $552 
settled for $221); he made two of twelve payments toward a credit card debt; and had 
made no payments on the remaining three debts. There is no evidence of payment or 
that a payment plan was established for six of seven debts that were not included in the 
DRC plan. With the exception of SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.k, Applicant’s debts are unresolved.7 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
7 GE 7; AE B, D-E. 
 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG 
¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
 
6 
 
 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The 
relationship of Afghanistan with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not 
be placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the 
United States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Afghanistan who might be 
coerced by terrorists or other governmental entities.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”8 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, or his relatives living in Afghanistan, it is not possible to rule out such a future 
possibility. As demonstrated by his regular contacts with his family and his payments to 
his mother, he continues to feel an obligation to them and affection for them. Applicant’s 
concern for his relatives is a positive character trait that increases his trustworthiness; 
however, it also increases the concern about potential foreign influence. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure 
or attempted exploitation.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his relatives 
who are living in Afghanistan. Applicant communicates with these relatives on a regular 
basis. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. Applicant has not attempted to rebut this 
presumption. Given Afghanistan’s fragile security situation, Applicant’s relationships 
with his relatives living in that country are sufficient to create “a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Applicant’s current linguist position could cause him to 
be placed in a position to choose between the interests of his relatives and those of the 
United States. However, Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He moved to the United States in 
2007, gained citizenship in 2014, and currently resides in the United States. 
Additionally, he volunteered to go into harm’s way to serve as a linguist for U.S. forces 
in Afghanistan beginning in 2002. The evidence supports that Applicant has 
longstanding loyalties toward the United States and would resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
trustworthiness concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, 
including espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
 
8 
 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid. I find all the above 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Although Applicant had periods of unemployment, which are conditions beyond 
his control, he failed to act responsibly when he did not timely address his debts. 
Applicant hired a DRC to assist him in settling five debts. This was not financial 
counseling per se, but I give Applicant some credit for taking this action. However, that 
credit is minimized by the length of time it took him to enter such an arrangement. The 
DRC only dealt with five of Applicant’s eleven debts. There is no evidence indicating 
payments or action taken on the remaining debts. Even the debts within the DRC plan 
showed limited payment. All of the mitigating conditions partially apply, but because of 
Applicant’s late and limited payments, they do not fully mitigate the financial concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
9 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support denying Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards granting his clearance. I considered the ties he established in this country and 
his service as a linguist in a hostile environment, thereby demonstrating his 
longstanding loyalty to this country. Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the foreign influence security concerns. However, Applicant failed to produce sufficient 
evidence showing that he has taken appropriate action to deal with his financial issues. I 
considered his periods of unemployment. However, he waited until four months after the 
issuance of the SOR to contract with a DRC. Even then, less than half his debts were 
incorporated into the payment plan. His financial issues remain a concern.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
although Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns, I conclude he 
failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.f:     For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.k:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.l:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
