 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03631 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Department Counsel later withdrew the 
Guideline E allegation. Applicant responded to the SOR on November 16, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on December 13, 2017, 
and reassigned to me on July 26, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 16, 2018, scheduling the hearing for August 
17, 2018. An amended notice was issued on August 6, 2018, changing the courtroom 
location, while keeping the date and time. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2015. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 2000 
until he received a general under honorable conditions discharge in 2008. He seeks to 
obtain a security clearance. He attended college for a period without earning a degree. 
He is married with one child.1 
 
 Applicant has had stable employment since he left the military, and his finances 
were in order before 2015. In 2014, he bought and financed cars in his name for him 
and a former fiancée who is not his current wife. The cars were financed for about 
$23,000 and $46,000. He accepted a job, and they moved to another state in early 
2015. He worked overseas in 2015 and was earning a good salary. His ex-fiancée had 
access to his finances and was supposed to pay the car loans and other bills. When he 
returned, in addition to the car loans, he owed back rent, utilities, and other past-due 
debts. He broke off his engagement with his ex-fiancée. Having somewhere to live was 
more important than having something to drive. He paid the back rent, utilities, and 
other bills, and let the cars be repossessed.2 
 
 The SOR alleges a $198 delinquent debt and charged-off debts of $18,942 and 
$13,650 for the deficiencies owed on the car loans for the two repossessed cars. He 
was unaware of the $198 debt until he received the SOR. He paid it in November 2017.3  
 
 Applicant paid other debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He attempted to 
negotiate with the creditors for the two repossessed cars, but they insisted on large 
lump-sum payments, which he could not afford. His employer will send him back 
overseas if he receives a security clearance. His finances are otherwise in good shape. 
He credibly testified that he fully intends to pay or settle the debts. He has not received 
formal financial training other than what he received in the military.4 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 16, 26-33; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 14, 17-28; GE 1-4. 
 
3 AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 16-17, 29-30, 33-35; GE 2-4; AE B. 
 
3 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, including two repossessed vehicles. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 When Applicant returned from working overseas, he discovered that his former 
fiancée did not pay the bills. He broke up with her and attempted to put his finances 
 
5 
 
back in order. He paid the back rent, utilities, and other bills, but he was unable to catch 
up on the car loans, and they were repossessed.  
 
 Applicant paid the small debt alleged in the SOR. He attempted to negotiate with 
the creditors for the two repossessed cars, but they insisted on large lump-sum 
payments, which he has been unable to make. His finances are otherwise in good 
shape. His employer will send him back overseas if he receives a security clearance. 
He credibly testified that he fully intends to pay or settle the debts.  
 
 I am convinced that Applicant will resolve his remaining two delinquent debts. His 
financial difficulties were the result of conditions that were largely beyond his control, 
and he acted responsibly under the circumstances by paying the debts that he could. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to 
the paid SOR debt as well as the paid debts that were not alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Withdrawn 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
