1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03267 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 16, 2015. On 
December 11, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
B,1 Foreign Influence. Applicant answered the SOR on January 5, 2018, and requested a 
hearing. On January 26, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On February 21, 2018, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the 
hearing for March 14, 2018. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A 
the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), effective June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 20, 2018. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts about 
Afghanistan. (HE 1) The facts administratively noticed are summarized in the Findings of 
Fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working as a role 
player/trainer. He was born in Afghanistan in 1975 and earned a bachelor’s degree in 1995. 
Applicant requested asylum in the United States in December 2007, and it was granted in 
2008. He received a “green card’ in 2009, and was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in April 
2015. He married for the second time in Afghanistan in 2015 to an Afghan citizen, who 
resides with Applicant in the United States. He sponsored his spouse for permanent 
residency. They have one child born in Afghanistan, but naturalized as a U.S. citizen. 
 
The SOR denotes Applicant’s ties and financial support to family members who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. He admitted all of the SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant attended the Afghan Military Academy from 1992 to 1995, and was 
commissioned an officer in the Afghan Army. He served from 1995 to 2007. In 1996, his 
service was suspended because the Taliban had taken control of Kabul. He lived in poverty 
during the Taliban reign, until they were overthrown by U.S. forces in December 2001. In 
2002, Applicant returned to the academy to work as a platoon leader until 2003. He joined 
the new Afghan Army in 2003 and served as a supply officer and as an aide to an Afghan 
commanding general in Kabul to 2006. He attended the U.S. Army Logistics Management 
School in 2005 and served alongside U.S. and coalition forces in Afghanistan. 
 
In 2007, he attended the Defense Language Institute and the U.S. Army 
Quartermaster School in the United States as a foreign exchange student, graduating in 
October 2007. He met an American housekeeper while he was attending school, and within 
a few months, they married in March 2007. They lived together for short periods on-and-off, 
until they were separated in October 2007. Applicant divorced his first spouse in 2011.  
 
While attending the U.S. Army school as an exchange student, Applicant applied for 
asylum status in October 2007 because of verbal and written threats against him and his 
family in Afghanistan while he served in the Afghan military. He noted in response to 
government interrogatories, that most Afghan locals viewed him as an informer for the U.S. 
and coalition forces, and saw him as their enemy. In testimony, he noted that his father and 
brother were “cornered” by the Taliban and had to escape, and threatening leaflets were 
distributed throughout their neighborhood. He was granted asylum in the U.S. in 2008 and 
he abandoned his Afghan unit without providing notice or receiving permission from the 
Army. He left the Army with the rank of captain and claims that he has had no contact with 
anyone from the Afghan military. 
3 
 
Applicant was permitted to work in the United States beginning in January 2008, and 
worked odd jobs until he was hired by his current employer in 2009. In response to 
government interrogatories, Applicant was asked to list his foreign travel from January 2010 
to October 2017. He failed to list travel to Afghanistan in December 2010 to January 2011 
while his mother was hospitalized, presumably using his Afghan passport. His U.S. passport 
was issued in 2015. Since that time, he reported additional travel to Afghanistan in May 2015 
to meet and marry his current spouse; October 2015 to arrange for a travel visa for his 
spouse; August 2016 to bring his spouse and child to the U.S.; and in October 2017 with his 
spouse to attend to his mother-in-law during surgery. Applicant does not hold any foreign 
property or financial interests. 
 
Applicant’s mother (65), father (72), three brothers, two sisters, and parents-in-law 
are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.  Applicant’s brothers are married with children. 
One brother is an officer in the Afghan Air Force. One brother is a nurse, and the other is a 
retail store manager. Applicant maintains contact with his brothers every three to six months. 
He speaks to his parents weekly.  Applicant’s sisters are in medical school. He sends them 
about $1,800 per year to assist with educational expenses. Applicant’s spouse speaks to 
her parents about once per month.  
 
Applicant and his spouse rent a home and have bank accounts worth about $62,000. 
They hope to buy a house. They have no other appreciable assets. His spouse intends to 
apply for U.S. citizenship when she is eligible. Applicant provided numerous certificates 
denoting his achievements and service schools, and several letters of strong support from 
his employers and colleagues, including a retired U.S. Army general. He is well liked and 
highly regarded as an honest and hard-working employee. 
 
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia that is approximately the size of Texas 
(249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran borders it on the 
west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country which has been fought 
over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population was about 28 million people 
with about three million Afghans living outside Afghanistan. 
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically-elected president. 
Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the Soviet Union 
in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union withdrew from 
Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and religious militias. By the 
end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of the country, imposing 
aggressive and repressive policies. 
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. 
 
A U.S. State Department Travel Warning remains in effect. The State Department 
warns U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats 
by terrorist organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel to all areas of Afghanistan remains 
4 
 
unsafe due to the ongoing risk of kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, 
landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, direct 
and indirect fire, suicide bombings and insurgent attacks, including attacks using vehicle-
borne or other improvised explosive devices (IEDs). Attacks may also target official Afghan 
and U.S. governmental convoys and compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, 
and other public areas. 
 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State of Iraq and 
the Levant - Khorasan Province (ISKP) and members of other armed opposition groups are 
active throughout the country. ISKP has shown its operational capability, having attacked 
both Afghan and foreign government facilities. The Taliban and its affiliates routinely attack 
Afghan, Coalition, and U.S. targets with little regard for civilian casualties. 
 
Due to security concerns, unofficial travel to Afghanistan by U.S. government 
employees and their family members is restricted and requires prior approval from the State 
Department. According to the State Department’s 2015 Country Reports on Terrorism, 
Afghanistan continued to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by the Taliban, 
including the Haqqani Network and other insurgent and terrorist groups. The Haqqani 
Network continued to plan and conduct high profile attacks and assassinations against U.S., 
Coalition and Afghan interests, particularly in Kabul and other key government centers. 
 
According to the State Department, the border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan 
remains a safe haven for terrorists. It is an under-governed area that terrorists exploit to 
conduct attacks in both countries. Terrorist groups active in Afghanistan, such as al-Qa’ida 
(AQ), the Haqqani Network and others, operate in Afghanistan and Pakistan. ISIL-Khorasan 
(ISIL-K) is largely based in Afghanistan, but its support network also reaches into Pakistan's 
tribal areas along the border. The Afghan government has struggled to assert control over 
this remote terrain where the population is largely detached from national institutions. 
 
According to the U.S. Defense Department's June 2016 report on Afghanistan, 
although al-Qa’ida’s core leadership in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border region has been 
degraded, elements continue to seek safe haven on both sides of the border to regenerate 
and conduct attack planning. The continued development of an al-Qa’ida affiliate in the 
region (al-Qa’ida in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS)), highlights the dynamic nature of the 
terrorist and militant landscape of the region, posing risks to the mission and to U.S. 
interests. 
 
In its annual Human Rights Report for  2015, the U.S. Department of State reported 
that the most significant human rights problems in Afghanistan during the year were 
widespread violence, armed insurgent groups' attacks on civilians and killing of persons 
affiliated with government, torture and abuse of detainees by government forces; 
widespread disregard for the rule of law, and little accountability for those who conduct 
human rights abuses, as well as targeted violence and societal discrimination against 
women and girls. 
 
The United States’ extraordinary commitment to Afghanistan is balanced against the 
inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan to its citizens and residents and 
Afghan Government problems developing and complying with the rule of law. A top national 
5 
 
security goal of the United States is to establish relationships, cooperation, training, and 
support of the Afghanistan Government and military in the ongoing war against terrorism. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to “control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has 
authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access 
to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, discretion, 
character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not 
met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from being 
eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
6 
 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, financial, 
and property interests, are a national security concern if they result in divided 
allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help 
a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent 
with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and interests should 
consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is known to 
target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in 
a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create 
a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect 
classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information or 
technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant is a U.S. citizen who maintains regular contact with his parents and siblings 
who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. He sends money to his sisters to assist with 
their medical school education, and one of his brothers is an officer in the Afghan Air Force. 
His spouse is an Afghan citizen residing in the U.S., and she maintains regular contact with 
7 
 
her parents in Afghanastan. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living in 
Afghanistan is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in 
the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03- 02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). There is a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their 
immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 
94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil liberties, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the government is 
engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of death or property 
damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the 
United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United States, places a significant, 
but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his 
relationships with his family members living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family member living in Afghanistan. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with his relatives who are foreign citizens living in Afghanistan 
create a potential conflict of interest because of the potential for pressure to be placed on 
his family living in Afghanistan in an effort to cause Applicant to compromise classified 
information. These relationships create “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG ¶ 7. Department Counsel produced 
substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with family who are citizens of Afghanistan and 
has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. In addition, 
Applicant received asylum in the United States based on his claims of threats against him 
and his family while he served in the Afghan military and assisted U.S. interests. Finally, his 
spouse is a citizen of Afghanistan and maintains regular contact with her family. He has 
traveled to Afghanistan several times since receiving asylum in the U.S. to marry, aid his 
family members, and to assist his mother-in-law. AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (e) apply, and further 
inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
8 
 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Based on the record, there is insufficient evidence to fully apply any of the mitigating 
conditions. Applicant has frequent contact with his parents and some siblings, who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan, and resides with an Afghan citizen who has regular 
contact with her parents in Afghanistan. He provides financial support for his sisters, and 
his brother is an Afghan military officer. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States.” Applicant was born 
in Afghanistan in 1975 and requested asylum in the United States in December 2007 
because of threats against him and his family from the Taliban. It was granted in 2008. He 
received a “green card” in 2009, and naturalized as a U.S. citizen in April 2015. He married 
in Afghanistan in 2015 to an Afghan citizen, who now resides with him in the United States. 
He and his family rent a home and have a bank account. They have no other appreciable 
assets in the U.S. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the potential 
conflict of interest created by his relationships with relatives who are citizens and residents 
of Afghanistan. Applicant’s parents and siblings currently live in Afghanistan. Like every 
other resident of Afghanistan, they are at risk from terrorists and the Taliban. However, 
unlike all, he and his family have been specifically targeted and threatened because of 
Applicant’s military service and support for U.S. and coalition forces. He served in the Afghan 
military in Kabul alongside U.S. and coalition forces, a highly risky and dangerous activity 
that likely put him in direct contact with enemy forces or intelligence operatives fighting 
against the United States and allied forces. Applicant and his relatives living in Afghanistan 
are potential targets of terrorists and the Taliban, and Applicant’s potential access to 
classified information could theoretically add risk to his relatives living in Afghanistan from 
lawless elements in Afghanistan. In addition, he traveled to Afghanistan on four occasions 
despite receiving asylum in the United States because of threats to himself and his family 
by the Taliban. 
 
Applicant has not shown evidence of “deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States.” His patriotism is not being questioned, rather he has not 
shown that his ties to the U.S. outweigh his familial interests in Afghanistan. After a brief 
relationship and marriage to a U.S. citizen while applying for asylum, Applicant abandoned 
his military obligations without notice or permission; traveled to Afghanistan despite his 
claims of threats requiring asylum in the U.S.; maintains regular contact with his family, 
including a brother serving as an officer in the Afghan military and provides financial support 
9 
 
for his sisters; and his spouse is an Afghan citizen who maintains regular contact with her 
family in Afghanistan. Applicant’s work with U.S. and coalition forces in Afghanistan while 
serving in the Afghan Army and his glowing letters of recommendation weigh in his favor. 
However, these factors are insufficient to overcome the foreign influence security concerns 
raised above. Those concerns have not been sufficiently mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.2 Afghanistan is a dangerous place because of 
violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue to threaten the 
Afghan Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. armed forces, and those who 
cooperate and assist the United States. Applicant and his family in Afghanistan have been 
specifically targeted by Taliban forces because of his cooperation with U.S. interests, 
resulting in his request for asylum. His brother continues to work as an Afghan Air Force 
officer, and his immediate family and in-laws remain in Afghanistan and are subject to 
terrorist activity that puts Applicant at significant risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Applicant’s interests in the United States do not 
overcome the foreign influence concerns. 
 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence security concerns raised in the 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient discussion 
of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
 
 
10 
 
SOR and described above. Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden 
of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.e, and 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
