 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 17-03881 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient information in response to the Government’s 
case to overcome the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Applicant’s 
request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On July 26, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified 
information as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the 
completed background investigation, adjudicators at the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) could not determine that it was clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have access to classified 
information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive). 
 
2 
 
On February 15, 2018, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).2 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a 
decision without a hearing.  
 
On May 21, 2018, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)3 in support of the SOR. 
Applicant received the FORM on July 5, 2018, and he was informed he had 30 days from 
the date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.4 The record closed on August 
19, 2018, after Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I received this case for decision 
on November 21, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that the mortgage on Applicant’s home 
was foreclosed in March 2016 (SOR 1.b), and that a $60,130 second mortgage on that 
home had been charged off and was still unresolved (SOR 1.a). It was also alleged that 
Applicant owed $184 for a delinquent medical account that was in collection (SOR 1.c). 
Applicant admitted, with explanations, each of the allegations.  
 
 All of the SOR allegations are supported by Applicant’s admissions to the SOR; by 
his responses to questions in Section 26 (Financial Record) of his e-QIP; by a summary 
of a personal subject interview (PSI) conducted on August 29, 2017; and by the contents 
of a credit report, dated August 10, 2017, obtained during his background investigation. 
(FORM, Items 2 – 8) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following findings 
of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has 
worked since November 2015. From May 2004 until November 2015, Applicant was a 
self-employed businessman working in the home improvement industry. He and his wife 
have been married since October 2004, and they have a seven-year-old child. (FORM, 
Items 2 and 3) 
 
 In 2008, Applicant’s business began suffering downturns in revenue as a result of 
the national economic recession. The recession had a disproportionately adverse effect 
on the housing and home improvement sectors, because at the heart of that downturn 
was the collapse of the national housing market. His loss of revenues resulted in lost 
income and difficulties in meeting his personal financial obligations. Starting sometime in 
2012, Applicant started falling behind on the first and second mortgages on his house. 
He also lost other personal assets to repossession. (FORM, Items 2 and 4) 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on five enclosed exhibits (Items 
1 – 5). 
4 See Directive, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In March 2016, as alleged in SOR 1.b, Applicant lost his home to foreclosure. 
There does not appear to be any remaining obligation for the first mortgage. As alleged 
in SOR 1.a, Applicant still owes $60,130 for his second mortgage. He claims he had been 
working with both creditors to arrange a short sale of the property, which was worth less 
than the remaining total balance of both mortgages; however, he claimed the second 
mortgage lender mishandled paperwork required for the transaction and the deal fell 
through. (FORM, Items 1 – 4) 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR, but he did not produce any information to 
document his efforts to resolve his mortgages. In the FORM, Department Counsel cited 
the absence of sufficient information to support Applicant’s claims as support for the 
Government’s argument against granting eligibility for clearance in this case. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM. (FORM at 3; FORM, Item 2) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
                                                 
5 See Directive, 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 
 
facts alleged in the SOR.7 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant 
to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.8 
 
  Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden 
of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for them to 
have access to protected information. A person who has access to such information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. 
Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 This record reasonably raises the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). By contrast, none of the information presented in this record supports 
application of any of the pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. Applicant’s loss of 
income was, arguably, beyond his control, thus requiring consideration of AG ¶ 20(b): 
 
the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
                                                 
7 See Directive, E3.1.14. 
8 See Directive, E3.1.15. 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 Because Applicant did not present any information showing he acted reasonably 
under the circumstances, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Additionally, he submitted no 
information that would require consideration of the other AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions. 
The security concerns raised by the adverse information about Applicant’s finances are 
not mitigated. 
   
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). My review of all of the available 
information leaves unanswered the doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information that were raised by his financial problems. Because protection of 
the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, any remaining doubts 
must be resolved against the individual. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
