 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04019 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and H (drug involvement and substance misuse). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E and H. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 18, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 13, 2018, and 
reassigned to me on July 26, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 13, 2018, scheduling the hearing for August 
18, 2018. An amended notice was issued on August 7, 2018, changing the courtroom 
location, while keeping the date and time. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Memorandums from U.S. Government officials about marijuana were marked as 
 
2 
 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and accepted for administrative notice. Applicant testified, called 
a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through EEEEE, which were 
admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since November 2015. He seeks to retain a security clearance, 
which he has held with some breaks since 2008. He has bachelor’s degrees, which 
were awarded in 1994 and 2014, and a master’s degree, which was awarded in 2010. 
He is married with an adult child.1 
 
Applicant was diagnosed with glaucoma when he was 16 years old. He also 
suffers from diabetes. He smoked marijuana from the 1990s to at least May 2015 to 
assist him in relieving his glaucoma symptoms, including while holding a security 
clearance. Marijuana is recognized as an effective treatment for glaucoma. He was not 
prescribed medical marijuana, and he does not live in a state that permits medical 
marijuana.2  
 
In May 2015, Applicant tested positive in a pre-employment drug test, indicating 
the use of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive ingredient in marijuana. There 
is some evidence to the contrary (see below), but he testified that he has not used 
marijuana since the May 2015 drug test, and he does not intend to use it again. He has 
other medication that he uses to treat his glaucoma. He signed a statement of intent not 
to use any illegal drugs in the future, with an acknowledgement that any future illegal 
drug use would be grounds to revoke his national security eligibility.3 
 
Applicant was prescribed dronabinol in 2015. Dronabinol, sold under the brand 
name Marinol, is a man-made form of THC. It is a Schedule II controlled substance, 
which means it can be prescribed by a doctor. Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled 
substance. Under federal law, it cannot legally be prescribed by a doctor even in those 
states that have legalized medical marijuana. Dronabinol is used to treat nausea and 
vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy. It is also used to treat loss of appetite and 
weight loss in patients with HIV infection.4 
 
Applicant testified that he was first prescribed dronabinol in 2014. He submitted a 
July 2015 prescription for seven medications, including dronabinol. The prescription 
called for 30 capsules with two refills. The other medications included eye medication 
for his glaucoma. Applicant testified the dronabinol was not for his glaucoma; it was to 
treat his nausea, eating disorder, and diabetes. He stated that his doctor was concerned 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 15-20, 36, 55; GE 1; AE SSSS, TTTT, XXXX.  
 
2 Tr. at 21-25, 32-33, 36, 55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4; AE B, C.  
 
3 Tr. at 23-27, 33-34, 42-45, 60; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5; AE A, CCCCC, DDDDD.  
 
4 Tr. at 39, 45-46 GE 4; AE DDDDD.  
 
 
3 
 
that Applicant had lost too much weight. He prescribed the drug so that Applicant could 
increase his appetite and gain weight. Applicant listed his height and weight as 5’11” 
and 210 pounds on Questionnaires for National Security Positions (SF 86) submitted in 
2007, 2015, and 2016. He testified that he weighed 192.5 He was examined by the 
physician who treats his glaucoma in March 2018. This was not the doctor that 
prescribed the dronabinol. The doctor noted in the medical records: 
 
Patient advised that they have background diabetic retinopathy which is 
stable and does NOT require laser intervention. Recommend patient work 
carefully with PMD and/or diabetic specialist to maintain optimal blood 
sugar, blood pressure, and cholesterol to minimize the risk of development 
or progression of diabetic complications. Additionally, the importance of 
healthy nutrition, frequent exercise, weight management, and avoiding 
smoking was emphasized.6 
 
Applicant submitted an SF 86 in November 2007. He intentionally provided false 
information when he denied using any illegal drugs in the previous seven years.7 
 
Applicant submitted another SF 86 in December 2015. Under the drug questions, 
he answered that he used “THC (such as marijuana, weed pot hashish, etc.)” and 
specifically “[w]eed,” with the first and most recent use both in May 2015. He wrote that 
it was “[m]edical use to treat nausea and vomiting. Once. Once.” (“Once” repeated in 
original) He wrote that he did not intend to use marijuana again because his doctor 
prescribed Marinol as a substitute for his marijuana use. He did not list his additional 
marijuana use, nor did he mention his glaucoma.8 
 
Applicant admitted that he intentionally provided false information on the 
December 2015 SF 86 when he failed to list the extent of his marijuana use. He stated 
that he reported his marijuana use in May 2015 because of the positive drug test. He 
stated that if not for the positive drug test, he would not have listed any illegal drug use. 
He stated that he had to remain consistent with the previous SF 86, even if it was a 
consistent lie.9 
 
Applicant submitted a third SF 86 in August 2016. Under the drug question he 
answered that he used “THC (such as marijuana, weed pot hashish, etc.)” and 
specifically “Dronabinol 2.5 MG.” He estimated that the first use was in January 1999 
and the last use was in August 2016. He wrote that it was “[m]edical use to treat 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 39-42, 47, 53; AE DDDDD.  
 
6 AE CCCCC.  
 
7 Tr. at 28-29, 35, 50; GE 3.  
 
8 GE 2.  
 
9 Tr. at 29-31, 38-39, 43, 47, 50.  
 
 
4 
 
nausea, vomiting and to treat loss of appetite and weight loss.” He did not report any 
marijuana use.10 
 
Applicant initially denied intentionally providing false information on the August 
2016 SF 86 when he failed to list his marijuana use. He stated that he was confused. 
He later appeared to admit that he lied on the SF 86.11 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in July 2017. He told 
the investigator that he had been smoking marijuana for about 20 years to treat his 
glaucoma. He stated that he still used marijuana, as needed, for his glaucoma. He later 
stated that he was not currently using marijuana, and he was willing and able to 
discontinue his marijuana usage if required, but it would be difficult for him to do so. 
When he responded to DOHA interrogatories in December 2017, he wrote that his last 
marijuana use was in May 2015, and that he did not intend to use marijuana again.12 
 
Applicant admitted the Guideline H allegations in his response to the SOR, 
including that he “used marijuana with varying frequency from about the mid-1990s to 
about 2017.” He wrote that “the use of marijuana in my past starting about mid 1990s to 
about 2017 is for medical use to treat my diagnosed disease of glaucoma naturally.” He 
also admitted the SOR allegation that he “intend[s] to continue to use marijuana.” He 
stated that he did not believe his marijuana use to treat glaucoma naturally should 
cause him to lose his security clearance. He wrote about the falsification allegations in 
the SOR: 
 
I was choosing the best answer to the questions. I did not intend to hold 
back information. I do not believe that this should cause me to lose my 
security clearance. 
 
Applicant submitted an extensive amount of documents and letters attesting to 
his excellent job performance and strong moral character. He is praised for his 
dedication, dependability, professionalism, initiative, intelligence, diligence, work ethic, 
responsibility, and integrity.13  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
                                                          
10 GE 1.  
 
11 Tr. at 39-42, 47-51. 
 
12 GE 4.  
 
13 AE D-RRRR. 
 
 
5 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement and substance misuse is set out in AG 
¶ 24:   
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
 (b) testing positive for an illegal drug;  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia;  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position; and 
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
 Applicant possessed and used marijuana from the 1990s until at least May 2015. 
He has held a security clearance since 2008. He tested positive for THC after a pre-
employment drug test in May 2015. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), 25(c), and 25(f) are applicable. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 2.b (SOR ¶ 2.b cross-alleges the SOR ¶ 1.d allegation under 
personal conduct) allege that Applicant intends to continue to use marijuana. There is 
insufficient evidence to support those allegations. AG ¶ 25(g) is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 
1.d and 2.b are concluded for Applicant.  
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
 
7 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility.  
 
 Marijuana helps to relieve Applicant’s glaucoma symptoms. I understand why he 
smoked marijuana, but I cannot condone its use. He claims that he has not used 
marijuana since May 2015. He signed a statement of intent not to use any illegal drugs 
in the future, with an acknowledgement that any future illegal drug use would be 
grounds to revoke his national security eligibility. His testimony about when he ended 
his marijuana use may be true, but he has lied so many times that his testimony is not 
credible. Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. His well-established pattern of illegal drug use is not mitigated.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
8 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant intentionally provided false information about the extent of his 
marijuana use on three SF 86s, which were submitted in 2007, 2015, and 2016. AG ¶ 
16(a) is applicable.  
 
Applicant’s marijuana use while holding a security clearance is cross-alleged 
under Guideline E. That conduct reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 16(c) is not perfectly 
applicable because Applicant’s conduct is sufficient for an adverse determination under 
the drug involvement and substance misuse guideline. However, the general concerns 
about questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are established.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
9 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant lied on his 2007 SF 86 and received a security clearance. He continued 
to use marijuana while holding a security clearance and lied on two subsequent SF 86s. 
He admitted that the only reason he reported his marijuana use in May 2015 was 
because of the positive drug test. He lied in his response to the SOR when he wrote 
that he did not intend to hold back information on the SF 86s. He provided inconsistent 
and contradictory testimony at his hearing. There was very little in Applicant’s testimony 
that I can accept at face value. Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Personal conduct security 
concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and H in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s strong 
character evidence and that his marijuana use was motivated by his glaucoma. 
 
10 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines E and H. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c-2.g:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
