 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03580 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
  
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Circumstances beyond her control contributed, in part, to Applicant’s financial 
problems. She has acted responsibly under the circumstances. She resolved the 
statement of reasons (SOR) allegations. With her current earnings, she should be able 
to pay for her family’s living expenses and current debts. Her financial problems are 
being resolved and are under control. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 18, 
2014, seeking to continue the clearance required for her position with a federal 
contractor. She was interviewed by a government background investigator in May and 
August 2016. After reviewing the information gathered during the background 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) on October 30, 2017, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on November 20, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA).  
 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on April 13, 2018, and issued a notice of hearing 
on June 1, 2018, setting the hearing for June 20, 2018. At the hearing, the Government 
offered seven exhibits (GE 1 through 7). Applicant testified and submitted seven 
exhibits (AE 1 through 7). AE 7 was received post-hearing. All exhibits were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 28, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 
and 1.f. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.g, and 1.h. Her admissions to the SOR and at 
her hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, including her testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She graduated from 
high school in 2009, and is currently working on her bachelor’s degree. She anticipates 
graduating from college in 2020. She has never married and has two children, ages six 
and one. Neither Applicant nor her children have received any financial support from her 
children’s fathers.  
 
Applicant worked part-time as an intern for a federal agency between August 
2008 and August 2009. She was unemployed while in school between August 2009 and 
February 2010. She worked full-time for federal contractors between February 2010 and 
March 2013. She was fired from her job because she had too many absences. 
Applicant credibly testified that her daughter was ill and Applicant had to stay home to 
care for her daughter because she could not attend school while sick. Applicant was 
unemployed between March 2013 and January 2014. She has been working for federal 
contractors since January 2014. Applicant current employer and clearance sponsor 
hired her in October 2016. Because of her internship with a federal agency, Applicant 
was granted a secret clearance in 2008, which she has held continuously to present.  
 
During her background interviews with investigators from the Office of Personnel 
Management in May and August 2016, Applicant disclosed that she had a judgment 
filed against her, her salary was garnished, she had delinquent student loans, and some 
consumer accounts were delinquent. The background investigation addressed her 
financial problems and revealed the eight delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR. The 
status of the alleged accounts follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a delinquent rent account in collection ($4,070). Applicant 
admitted she broke the apartment lease when she became pregnant with her second 
child and had to move back with her parents to make ends meet. Applicant established 
a payment arrangement with the collector in November 2017, and she has been making 
payments. She reduced her debt from $4,070 to $3,270. (AE 1, 7).  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d allege delinquent credit card accounts, the first in collection 
($325), and the latter charged off ($1,800). Applicant testified that these accounts and 
 
3 
 
 
others became delinquent when she was fired from her job and was unemployed 
between March 2013 and January 2014. She paid the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b in 
February 2018. (AE 1) She paid the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d in June 2018. (AE 7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a charged-off car loan ($20,644). Applicant purchased a 2012 
car in early 2014. The car was repossessed in around April 2017 when she was unable 
to make the note payments. Applicant testified that she tried to rehabilitate the loan, but 
the creditor wanted a large lump sum payment that she could not afford. In May 2018, 
Applicant settled the account for $6,000 and agreed to pay $250 a month to resolve the 
debt. (AE 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a delinquent telephone services account in collection 
($1,075). Applicant paid the account in February 2018. (AE 7, pg. 6) SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a 
delinquent medical account in collection ($264). Applicant paid the account in February 
2018. (AE 7, pg. 6) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a tax lien filed by a state authority in February 2015 ($2,582). 
Applicant paid the account via garnishment of wages and the lien was released. (AE 5) 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a judgment entered against Applicant for unauthorized 
unemployment benefits she received after she was employed ($3,449). Applicant paid 
the account via garnishment of wages. (AE 6 and 7) 
 
Applicant believes that she was unable to pay her delinquent accounts because 
of circumstances beyond her control. Applicant is a single mother of two young children 
and she is the only breadwinner. She only receives limited financial assistance from her 
parents. Her income was sufficient to pay only for her family’s living expenses and some 
debts. After her termination in 2013, she did not have the income to pay her debts. 
Applicant credibly testified that she was terminated because she had to stay at home to 
care for her sick daughter and missed too many days of work. 
 
Applicant’s financial situation improved after she started working for federal 
contractors in 2014. She believes that she has been working hard to resolve her 
financial problems. She wants to take care of her children and purchase a home. 
Applicant is aware that she has to demonstrate financial responsibility to be eligible for a 
clearance. With her current earnings, Applicant should be able to pay for her living 
expenses and finish paying her delinquent debts.   
 
Applicant believes she has learned a valuable lesson. She understands the 
seriousness of the security concerns raised by her financial problems. She credibly 
promised to timely pay her financial accounts in the future. Applicant highlighted her 
years of employment with federal contractors while holding a clearance without any 
issues or concerns, except for her financial problems. Applicant credibly promised to 
continue paying her debts. She believes that her financial situation is now stable.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the  Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG), implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. She 
developed financial problems in 2013 because she was terminated from her job and 
was unemployed for some time. Applicant rehabilitated the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
and established a payment arrangement for the debt in SOR 1.c. She paid off the 
accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, and 1.d through 1.h. The state’s tax lien and judgment 
for unauthorized unemployment benefits were paid through wage garnishments.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”; and “(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay . . . income tax as 
required.” The record established the disqualifying conditions, requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
 
6 
 
 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 Some of the above financial considerations mitigating conditions are 
raised by the facts in this case and mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing and recent because she is still paying some of her delinquent 
debts. However, her financial problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur 
and they do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) applies. 
 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are attributed to, or were aggravated by, her 
employment termination, child’s illness, period of unemployment, and being the sole 
breadwinner for her family. These factors, all conditions beyond her control, prevented 
her from paying her delinquent accounts more diligently. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant’s efforts to pay her debts are not ideal, but she made an effort to 
resolve her debts by contacting the creditors, negotiating payment agreements, and 
making payments on the debts. Her actions, although recent, show diligence and 
responsibility in the handling of her financial obligations. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, and including her recent actions, Applicant 
has been financially responsible under the circumstances. Her financial situation is 
improving and there are clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved 
and under control. Her earnings should be sufficient to pay for her family’s living 
expenses and current debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
federal contractors since 2008. She has held a clearance during her employment 
without any issues or concerns, except for her financial problems. The record evidence 
is sufficient to establish that her financial problems are being resolved and are under 
control.  
 
The AGs do not require an Applicant to immediately resolve or pay each and 
every debt alleged in the SOR, to be debt free, or to resolve first the debts alleged in the 
SOR. An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. Applicant has implemented a plan to resolve 
her financial problems and she has made significant progress implementing her plan. 
 
Applicant is fully aware of the security concerns raised by her failure to be 
financially responsible. She promised to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible 
for a clearance. The financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest of the United States to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
