 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 17-02448 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Charles B. Singleton, Esq. 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 24, 2017. 
On August 4, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 On November 2, 2017, the Government filed an Amendment to the SOR, alleging 
that Applicant failed to timely file federal and state income tax returns for tax years (TY) 
1998, 1999, and 2000. Applicant timely answered the SOR and Amendment to the 
SOR, admitting all of the SOR allegations. He admitted failing to file federal and state 
income tax returns for 14 years, and to owing the state approximately $13,000 for tax 
 
2 
 
 
years (TYs) 2009 through 2012. Applicant also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 20, 2018. On September 
4, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for September 25, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted  documents, which were 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A - J, and admitted without objection. I granted 
Applicant’s request to leave the record open until October 2, 2018, so that he could 
provide substantiating documentation. (Tr. 84) He submitted AE K and L, including 
copies of state A and federal income tax returns for TY 2009-2016, which were signed 
on September 25, 2018, and filed at the end of September 2018. I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on October 3, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in 2009, and he 
obtained a master’s degree in project management in 2011. He is twice divorced and 
has been cohabitating with a partner for nine years. (Tr. 61-62) He served honorably on 
active duty in the U.S. Army from 1985 to 2006, primarily as a signals soldier and 
telecommunications chief. (Tr. 38) He served in an extremely high visibility 
communications agency from 1987 to 1994. Applicant received awards including the 
Presidential Service Badge, a Meritorious Service Medal, and six Army Achievement 
Medals. (Tr. 61) Applicant has been employed as a project manager for a federal 
contractor, supporting the Army Reserve, since November 2012. 
  
The SOR alleges Applicant’s failure to file state and federal income tax returns 
for several years, and that he is indebted to state A for delinquent taxes in the amount 
of $13,000 to TY 2009-2012. Applicant admitted all of these allegations in his answer to 
the SOR. Applicant disclosed these tax issues in section 26 of his SCA. (Tr. 15) At the 
hearing, Applicant submitted copies of his 2009 - 2016 federal income tax returns 
(federal returns) that were recently prepared by his certified public accountant (CPA). 
(AE A) However, many of these were not yet signed and Applicant testified that they 
were not yet filed with the IRS. (Tr. 26, 42, 55) He also submitted copies of his state A 
tax returns for 2009 to 2016 (AE B) and testified that he was prepared and intended to 
file all of these state and federal returns on the day of the hearing. (Tr.43)   
 
Applicant filed a request for an extension to file his TY 2017 federal returns. (Tr. 
25, AE C) Applicant also submitted documentary evidence that he paid $16,797 for 
taxes owed to state A on the morning of the hearing. (Tr. AE D) His IRS Form W-2 
reflects adjusted gross income (AGI) of $140,245 earned in 2017, plus $25,494 in 
retirement income according to his IRS Form 1099. (AE E and F) Applicant also 
submitted a document showing that his 401k retirement plan has a balance of $87,212. 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s January 24, 2017 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) and his sworn statement dated March 25, 2003. (GE 1 and 4) 
 
 
3 
 
 
(AE G) His Employee Stock Option Program account reflected a balance of $88,075 
(AE H), and he provided a certificate of credit counseling completed on the day before 
the hearing. (Tr. 38, AE J)  
 
In his July 25, 2017 Answers to Interrogatories (GE 3), Applicant stated “I have 
routinely been late filing taxes from yearly . . . . I secured the services of [a] CPA for 
years 2009 – 2012 for approximately $1,600. Because some documentation was 
missing from various years, the taxes were not filed prior to the IRS filing for me using 
standard deductions.” In the same Answers, Applicant indicated he had failed to file 
federal and state B income tax returns timely for TYs 2002 – 2004. He also failed to file 
state A and federal income tax returns timely for TYs 2007 – 2015. He stated that he 
filed his state B and federal tax returns for TYs 2002 - 2004 in April 2006; his TY 2006 
federal return in May 2007; and his TYs 2005 and 2007 federal returns in September 
2008. He claimed that his TY 2008 returns were filed in 2012, and his TYs 2009 - 2012 
returns had been filed for him by the IRS in December 2016. (GE 3) The 2013 - 2016 
returns were pending filing, and he expected refunds for each of those TYs.   
 
Applicant testified that he spoke to his CPA, who prepared the unfiled tax returns 
for his signature including returns for TYs 2009 and 2010, despite the fact that the IRS 
had already filed these on his behalf. (Tr. 42) That is because he already paid 
approximately $20,000 in taxes for these two years, although the returns were not yet 
filed, because the IRS had filed simple, non-itemized returns on his behalf.  Applicant 
thought he was only harming himself by not timely filing tax returns, because he had 
always received refunds in previous years. (Tr. 43-44) His failures to file had nothing to 
do with financial hardship. (Tr. 45) He recently received a raise in October, and his 
salary is now approximately $150,000 plus over $25,000 in military retirement benefits. 
(Tr. 46) Post-hearing documents submitted by Applicant, including copies of income tax 
returns for TY 2009-2016 filed at the end of September 2018, indicate that he had 
average AGI of $171,734 during those years. (AE K and L)  
 
 Applicant testified that he paid his CPA $3,110 to prepare federal and state A 
income tax returns for TYs 2009-2016. (Tr. 50) He has never filed for bankruptcy 
protection, and he has no judgments against him. (Tr. 48) Applicant completed financial 
counseling online the day before the hearing. (Tr. 48, AE J) He prepared a personal 
financial statement attached to his June 2017 answers to interrogatories. (GE 2) It 
reflects a $2,200 remainder each month after Applicant pays all of his expenses. He 
owns a house valued at $165,000. (Tr. 53) Applicant testified that this has been a 
humbling experience when he realized the ramifications of not timely filing his tax 
returns. He stated “I acknowledge fully that I was negligent in making this happen, but I 
assure you that . . . this will never happen again.” (Tr. 54-55)  
 
 Applicant testified that his state A tax returns for TYs 2009 – 2016 were also 
prepared by his CPA, but were not filed yet. (Tr. 75) He owes over $30,000 to state A 
for income taxes for TYs 2012-2016, and he paid $17,000 to the state department of 
revenue on the day of the hearing. Post-hearing documents indicate that the state A 
income tax returns have now been filed. (AE L) Applicant testified that his 1998 to 2004 
 
4 
 
 
federal income tax returns were also not timely filed, but he is now up to date on filing all 
income tax returns, and payment of all back taxes up to 2008. (Tr. 70) Applicant 
contends that he has been paying taxes all along, that were deducted from his 
paychecks, but he just didn’t file returns timely.   
 
 Applicant is extensively involved in community activities including as co-chairman 
for a national fraternity involved in fundraising for charities and awarding various 
scholarships. (Tr. 51-52) He is a devoted father, a great role model, and selfless leader 
in his community according to the testimony of three character witnesses who testified 
on his behalf. (Tr. 80-92) A subordinate testified that Applicant is his supervisor and he 
has known him for 12 years. Applicant trains other employees on the requirements for a 
security clearance, and he is brutally honest, trustworthy and reliable. (Tr. 79-83) A co-
worker of Applicant for nine years testified that Applicant is a great leader with 
impeccable character. (Tr. 84-87)A doctor who has been dating Applicant for nine years 
said he is highly respected and very active in volunteering for various organizations in 
their community. (Tr. 92) Applicant’s daughter testified that Applicant is fiscally 
responsible, a great leader and role model.   
 
                                      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
5 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state or local income taxes as 
required.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent taxes and  failure to file state and federal income tax 
returns, alleged in the SOR, are confirmed by his SCA, answers to interrogatories, 
sworn statement, and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f), 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.2 Applicant has not met that burden. He exercised poor 
judgment in repeatedly failing to file, or filing federal and state income tax returns late, 
going back to 1998. He also failed to pay his federal and state income taxes when due, 
although he has recently paid them at the time of the hearing.   
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with appropriate tax authority to 
file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant labored under the misconception that he did not have to file income tax 
returns if he expected to receive a tax refund. He suffered through a divorce, and 
transition from military service. To some extent, these conditions were beyond his 
control. However, he has not produced relevant and responsive documentation 
                                                          
2 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He self-disclosed his 
delinquent income taxes and failure to timely file income tax returns in his SCA in 
January 2017. He provided elaboration about his tax issues in his answers to 
interrogatories in June and July 2017. Yet, as of the time of the hearing in late 
September 2018 he had not resolved these issues. He did provide supplemental post-
hearing documentation, showing that he has now filed the TYs 2009 - 2016 state and 
federal returns. It is unclear why he has collected a military retirement and federal 
contractor salary for many years, yet he waited so long to comply with the law and file 
his tax returns. In short, his eleventh hour effort is too little, too late, to overcome 14 
years of failure to timely file income tax returns and delinquent taxes.  
 
 The allegations of failure to timely file federal and state income tax returns 
alleged in the SOR have not been resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(g) apply only partially 
for the back taxes owed and failure to file in several TYs.  The back taxes owed to state 
A have now been paid. Inadequate reasons were offered for the delay in filing these tax 
returns, and paying the back taxes. Otherwise, the mitigating conditions enumerated 
above do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant served honorably in the Army for 
over 20 years, including some prestigious assignments. He also raised a daughter and  
made significant contributions to the DOD for several years as a contractor. Several 
character witnesses attested to his honesty, integrity, and leadership in his community.  
 
8 
 
 
Most importantly, Applicant has not addressed the specific allegations in the SOR  
about timeliness of his filings. He has not met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                 AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:                            Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.d:                                                 For Applicant  
 
 Subparagraph 1.e:                              Against Applicant   
  
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
