 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03978 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant exercised questionable judgment by falsifying his June 21, 2017 
electronic questionnaires for investigative processing (e-QIP) and by engaging in a 
series of acts that shows his unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. His 
conduct raised security concerns under the guideline for personal conduct. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 15, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under 
Guidelines B, C, and E. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to another administrative 
 
2 
 
judge and then reassigned to me on September 5, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 20, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for September 7, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted 
without objection, and Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and 
presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through K. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on October 25, 2018. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.10 and E3.1.17, of the 
Directive, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR issued to Applicant to 
withdraw the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2 and 3 under Guideline B and C. Applicant had no 
objection to the amendment and I granted the motion. (Tr. 9.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is employed as 
a driver for a ride-sharing service. He earned a bachelor’s degree and is enrolled in a 
master’s degree program. He has applied for a job with the defense contractor 
sponsoring his application for national security eligibility. (GE 1; AE A; AE B; AE I; Tr. 
16-18.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant had approximately 15 motor vehicle citations 
from 2004 to 2016. Those citations include multiple infractions for speeding; 
uninspected vehicle; and failing to comply with traffic signals. He attributed the large 
number of citations to his job as a driver, although many of his infractions occurred prior 
to that employment. He testified that clients pushed him to disobey the law sometimes. 
He admitted that he has received two additional traffic citations in 2018 for making an 
illegal left turn and for using his cell phone while driving. (GE 4; AE I; AE J; Tr. 18-20, 
32-35.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant used marijuana in 2015. He claimed he did not 
recall the date of his last marijuana use, but asserted he had not used it since 2015. He 
testified that he used marijuana fewer than six to eight times at parties. When 
questioned about his previous admission of marijuana “10 times” in the course of two 
months in 2015” disclosed to an investigative agent in July 2017, he claimed he only 
used it “five or so max.” (GE 5; Tr. 36.) Applicant took drug urinalysis tests on March 18, 
2018, and August 30, 2018, which was negative for all tested substances. He signed a 
statement of intent, pledging to abstain for further use of illegal substances. (GE 5; AE 
C; AE D; AE F; Tr. 21-24.) 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that Applicant was arrested in April 2007 for Felony 
Embezzlement. The charge was later reduced to a misdemeanor, and he was found 
guilty. He was given a suspended sentence and required to pay restitution and perform 
community service. At that time, he was 18 years old and was working as a clerk for a 
retail store. He took store merchandise, scanned it, and issued himself a refund directly 
deposited to his bank account, as if he was returning previously purchased goods. He 
explained that at that time, he did not understand that his actions were illegal. He was 
terminated from his employment as a result of the embezzlement. (GE 2; GE 4; Tr. 25-
29, 36-37.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant was arrested and charged with Forging Public 
Records in April 2007. He admitted he forged a date on court records relating to the 
arrest in SOR ¶ 1.c. He provided the forged records to his high school to account for his 
absence. The charges were dismissed. (GE 3; Tr. 29-31, 37-40.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges that Applicant falsified his e-QIP when he denied drug use in 
the past seven years. In his Answer, Applicant admitted he falsified his e-QIP. He 
testified that he omitted his drug use on the e-QIP because he “wanted to know more 
about the question” and did not fully understand it.  However, in his interview with an 
investigative agent, he claimed he did not list his marijuana use because he did not 
think experimental use had to be disclosed. (GE 1; GE 5; Answer; Tr. 32, 42-43.)  
 
 Applicant’s professor wrote a letter of support on Applicant’s behalf. The 
professor indicated Applicant is dedicated, responsible, and “an outstanding and 
motivated student.” (AE E.) A program director from his master’s program indicated 
Applicant is diligent and has done an excellent job. (AE G.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
 
4 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
5 
 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
  Applicant deliberately omitted his 2015 marijuana use on his 2017 e-QIP. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 16(a) with respect to that omission.  
 
  Further, Applicant has an extended history of dishonesty, questionable judgment, 
and conduct that indicates an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. He 
incurred numerous traffic citations; used marijuana in violation of federal criminal laws; 
lied about that marijuana use on his e-QIP; embezzled from his employer; and forged 
court documents submitted to his school. These events occurred between 2004 and 
2017, and reflect that he may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 16(c). 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
 
6 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 None of the above conditions fully apply. While Applicant’s embezzlement and 
forgery arrests occurred more than 12 years ago, they remain relevant, especially in 
light of his recent falsification to the Government. His behavior extends from 2004 
through the present, as he gave inconsistent answers about his drug usage at hearing 
and during the investigation. His conduct shows that he continues to engage in 
inappropriate behavior. His additional 2018 traffic citations demonstrate that he has not 
yet learned to comply with traffic rules or is ambivalent about them. While he is credited 
for excellent work in his master’s program and with two negative drug tests, he has not 
demonstrated sufficient rehabilitation to show similar behavior is unlikely to recur. He 
did not attempt to correct his falsification in a timely manner.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Despite 
Applicant’s success in higher education and favorable recomendations, his judgment 
remains questionable. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concern.  
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
