 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02349 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
  
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Circumstances beyond his control contributed, in part, to Applicant’s financial 
problems. He has been acting responsibly under the circumstances. With his current 
earnings, he should be able to pay for his family’s living expenses and current debts. 
His financial problems are being resolved and are under control. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 5, 2016, 
seeking to continue the clearance required for his position with a federal contractor. He 
was interviewed by a government background investigator in August 2016, and 
answered a set of interrogatories in June 2017. After reviewing the information gathered 
during the background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 4, 2017, alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the SOR on August 28, 
2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on April 13, 2018, and issued a notice of hearing 
on May 31, 2018, setting the hearing for June 20, 2018. At the hearing, the Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered six exhibits (GE 1 through 6). Applicant testified and submitted five exhibits (AE 
1 through 5). AE 4 and 5 were received post-hearing. They are comprised of federal 
and state income tax returns and IRS statements for tax years 2014 through 2017, and 
a record of payments for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. All exhibits were admitted 
without objection. I also marked and admitted as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 the 
Government’s discovery letter to Applicant. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on June 28, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 
1.f. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. His admissions to the SOR and at his hearing 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record 
evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He graduated from 
high school and received an associate’s degree in 2004. He completed additional 
college courses while working towards his unfinished bachelor’s degree. He married his 
spouse in 1989, and they have six children, ages 28, 26, 23, 21, 18, and 16. Four of his 
children live with Applicant and depend on his financial support to attend college and 
high school. 
 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in 1994. He served on active duty until he 
was honorably retired as a chief warrant officer 4 (CW4) in January 2017. Because of 
his military occupational specialty, he has held a secret clearance continuously since 
2001. The clearance was upgraded to top secret with access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI) in 2010. In March 2017, Applicant’s current employer, 
a federal contractor, hired him. (Tr. 7-9) 
 
In his January 2016 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he owed the IRS taxes for tax 
year 2013 (In fact, he owed for tax year 2012, not 2013). The background investigation 
addressed his financial problems and revealed the three consumer accounts alleged in 
the SOR, a federal tax lien filed in March 2017, and that Applicant failed to timely file 
returns and pay federal and state income tax for tax year 2012.  
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file and pay federal and state income 
taxes for tax years 2013 through 2016. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) Applicant’s IRS Tax 
Return Transcripts show that he timely filed his returns for tax years 2014 through 2017. 
Moreover, for tax years 2014 through 2017, he had sufficient funds withheld from his 
earnings to pay his taxes in full and received refunds. In 2014 he received a refund of 
$1,554; in 2015 he received a refund of $3,197; in 2016 he received a refund of $2,712; 
and in 2017 he received a refund of $1, 826. According to Applicant’s testimony, those 
returns were applied by the IRS to his back taxes for 2012. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his 2012 federal and state income tax returns, and 
he also failed to pay his taxes for that year. The IRS filed a $19,317 lien against 
Applicant in March 2017. (GE 3) IRS correspondence, dated October 6, 2017 (AE 2), 
indicates that Applicant owes taxes only for tax year 2012, in the amount of $22,885. 
Moreover, the IRS document confirms that Applicant was placed on a “Currently Not 
Collectible” status, and that his case has been closed. Applicant submitted a state court 
document showing that he satisfied a $1,249 lien that was released. The lien release 
document pertains to a state tax authority lien and not to an IRS lien. (AE 1) 
 
Based on the record documentary evidence, I find that Applicant timely filed his 
federal and state income tax returns and paid his taxes for tax years 2013 through 
2017. (AE 2, 4, and 5) Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal and state 2012 income 
tax returns, and to pay his taxes of those years, was not alleged in the SOR. Therefore, 
I may not use that information to disqualify Applicant for a clearance. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant established a payment plan in June 2017, and 
he has been making payments. (AE 4 and 5) Applicant testified that he contacted the 
creditors for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e and attempted to establish 
payment agreements. The creditors refused because both accounts were charged off. 
He was advised to dispute the accounts through the credit bureaus to remove them 
from his credit report. He failed to present documentary evidence of his contacts with 
the creditors and of any disputes filed.  
 
Applicant explained that his tax problems started in 2012 when he failed to 
withhold sufficient income from his military and part-time jobs to pay taxes, which 
resulted in him owing taxes for the first time in his career. He testified that he prepared 
his income tax return, but failed to file it when he realized he did not have the $4,000 to 
pay the tax owed. He intended to pay the back taxes with earnings from his part-time 
job. Before he could resolve the tax situation, Applicant was deployed overseas in early 
2013, lost his part-time job, and did not have the money to pay the back taxes. To 
complicate matters, he was diagnosed with cancer, was operated on overseas, and 
returned to the United States for chemotherapy in late 2013. While convalescing, he let 
his tax problems lag. 
 
In September 2015, Applicant retained the services of a tax company to help him 
resolve his tax problems. The company helped Applicant file his returns and negotiated 
with the IRS until Applicant was placed on a “Currently Not Collectible” status in October 
2017. (GE 2, AE 2) The IRS has been collecting any back taxes owed by keeping 
Applicant’s yearly tax refunds and applying them to his debt. Applicant noted that he 
satisfied his state lien (presumably for 2012 taxes owed), and that he is current with his 
state tax authority and owes no back taxes.  
 
Applicant testified that he was unable to pay his back taxes because of several 
circumstances beyond his control. Applicant has a large family and he is the only 
breadwinner. His income was sufficient to pay only for his family’s living expenses and 
some debts. After his deployment in early 2013, he lost his part-time job and could not 
 
4 
 
 
make additional income to pay the taxes. He underwent a cancer operation while 
deployed in late 2013, and went through chemotherapy and a long recovery process. 
Some of Applicant’s children were attending college. He has been providing financial 
assistance to his children to attend college. Applicant believes the combined expenses 
did not leave him enough money to pay the taxes.  
 
Applicant’s financial situation has improved. He started working for his current 
employer and is making $90,000 a year. With an additional $24,000 a year from his 
military retired pay, Applicant should be able to cover his living expenses, debts, and 
help his children with college.   
 
Applicant acknowledged that he made a mistake when he failed to timely file his 
2012 income tax return because he did not have the money to pay the taxes owed. He 
should have been more diligent. He believes they he has learned a valuable lesson. He 
understands the seriousness of the security concerns raised by his tax problems. He 
credibly promised to timely file and pay his taxes in the future. Applicant highlighted his 
22 years of service and current employment with federal contractors while holding a 
clearance without any issues or concerns, except for his financial problems. Applicant 
credibly promised to continue paying his legal debts and to resolve his tax problems. He 
believes that his financial situation is now stable.  
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the  Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position 
(AG), implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. He 
developed financial (tax) problems in 2012 because of his insufficient income 
withholdings. He failed to timely file and to pay his federal and state taxes for tax year 
2012, and acquired a substantial tax debt of over $20,000. He also had three delinquent 
accounts and a tax lien filed against him. Applicant rehabilitated the debt alleged in 
SOR 1.c. He established a payment arrangement and he is current on it. The other two 
accounts were charged off. He satisfied the state tax lien.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(c) a 
 
6 
 
 
history of not meeting financial obligations”; and “(f) (failure to file or fraudulently filing 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or failure to pay . . . . income tax as 
required.” The record established the disqualifying conditions, requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 Some of the above financial considerations mitigating conditions are raised by 
the facts in this case and mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems 
are ongoing and recent because he is still paying his back taxes and two of his debts 
were charged off. However, his financial problems occurred under circumstances 
unlikely to recur and they do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems could be attributed to, or were aggravated by, his 
overseas deployment and cancer illness. Additionally, providing financial support for six 
children, some of which were attending college, and his inability to pay other debts and 
living expenses because of the large size of his family are factors that prevented him 
from paying his back taxes more diligently.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged he made a mistake with his insufficient withholdings, 
and that he should have been more diligent. Notwithstanding, Applicant established that 
as far back as 2015, he was making arrangements with a tax company to help him 
resolve his tax problems with the IRS. Applicant increased his withholdings for tax years 
2013 through 2017, thereby eliminating the tax payment shortfall after tax year 2012.  
 
 Applicant’s efforts to pay his tax debt are not ideal, but he made an effort to 
resolve his tax debt by contacting a tax company to help him negotiate with the IRS. He 
is paying his tax debt by applying his tax returns to the tax debt. I note that Applicant 
has timely filed and paid all his taxes for tax years 2013 through 2017. He owes no 
taxes for those years. His actions show diligence and responsibility in the handling of 
his tax obligations. 
 
 Applicant paid a state lien filed against him for back taxes (not alleged in the 
SOR), brought one account to current and is making payments on it. He received 
financial counseling through the tax company he retained in 2015. The evidence does 
not support a finding that he was negligent paying his back taxes. He simply was not 
able to pay all his debts at the same time. He divided his financial resources between 
his tax obligations and his living expenses in order to provide for his children’s 
education.  
 
8 
 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, and including his recent actions, Applicant 
has been financially responsible under the circumstances. He disclosed his financial 
problems in his 2016 SCA. His financial situation is improving and there are clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved and under control. His 
earnings should be sufficient to pay for his family’s living expenses and current debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He served 22 years 
in the military service and has worked for federal contractors since 2017. He held a 
clearance during his service without any issues or concerns, except for his financial 
problems. The record evidence is sufficient to establish that his financial problems are 
being resolved and are under control.  
 
The AGs do not require an Applicant to immediately resolve or pay each and 
every debt alleged in the SOR, to be debt free, or to resolve first the debts alleged in the 
SOR. An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. Applicant has implemented a plan to resolve 
his financial problems and he has made significant progress implementing his plan. 
 
Applicant is fully aware of the security concerns raised by his failure to timely file 
and pay his taxes. He promised to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a 
clearance. The financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:     For Applicant  
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest of the United States to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
