KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s finding of deliberate falsification is supported by substantial evidence. 
Moreover, given the seriousness of Applicant’s misconduct, his various inconsistent statements,
and the Judge’s adverse credibility determination, we find no reason to disturb the Judge’s
analysis of the security concerns raised in this case.  We are required to give deference to
Judges’ credibility determinations. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-00323.a1
DATE: 11/20/2018
DATE: November 20, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-00323
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 21, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline K (Handling Protected Information) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Department Counsel requested a hearing.  On August 31, 2018, after the
hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Mark Harvey
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against him;
whether the Judge erred in finding that his omissions from his security clearance application (SCA)
were deliberate; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.1  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s adverse decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Thirty-four years old, Applicant has a wife and a child.  He served in the military from 2001
to 2008, deploying overseas three times in support of U.S. military objectives.  He has also deployed
overseas while in the employ of Government contractors.  
In 2010, officials at Applicant’s place of employment conducted a forensic analysis of three
unclassified hard drives and two unclassified external drives from Applicant’s work station.  The
reason for the analysis was that Applicant had loaned a hard drive to another employee, who
discovered classified documents on it and reported it to security officials.  The officials found over
a million classified documents on the drives that they examined.  Applicant speculated that someone
may have taken a drive from his office and placed classified information on it.  He also stated that
he “had no idea of how [the classified information] got there or why it was there.”  Decision at 3. 
He suggested that the Government reuses hard drives and that one of them that was provided to
Applicant contained classified information on it.  He also suggested that they could have come from
Wikileaks or a similar website.  He blamed security officials for having lax security practices.
On his SCA, Applicant denied that he had ever provided financial support to any foreign
national.  In fact, he sent about $40,000 to recipients outside the U.S.  He also sent about $26,000
to his girlfriend, a Columbian national, and about $7,000 to a foreign account for the benefit of a
woman in Columbia.  Some of the recipients were Applicant’s wife and her parents.  Applicant
attributed his omission to haste in completing his SCA.  During his clearance interview, Applicant
stated that he did not understand the question, that he had been in a hurry to complete his SCA, and
that he was embarrassed about the fund transfers.   
The Judge’s Analysis  
1Applicant submitted a second appeal brief for our consideration.  The Directive permits only one brief per
party.  Directive ¶ E3.1.30.  
2
The Judge concluded that none of the Guideline K mitigating conditions applied to
Applicant’s circumstances.  He stated that Applicant did not provide a credible explanation for how
classified documents came to be on his personal media.  Regarding his omissions from his SCA, the
Judge noted Applicant’s statement during his security clearance interview to the effect that he did
not understand the question.  At the hearing, however, Applicant admitted that he understood the
question.  The Judge characterized Applicant as intelligent and found that Applicant intentionally
decided not to disclose the information in question.  He described the omission as recent, serious,
and unmitigated.
In the whole-person analysis the Judge reiterated that Applicant’s explanations for his
omissions were not credible and cited to the provision of the Directive to the effect that failure to
provide truthful answers during security investigations is of special concern.  He also reiterated his
adverse credibility determination regarding Applicant’s explanation for the presence of classified
information on Applicant’s personal electronic media.
Discussion
Applicant’s brief includes information from outside the record.  We cannot consider new
evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant contends that various security personnel were biased against him.  Among other
things, he asserts that the Judge failed to mention that security officials did not revoke his clearance
upon discovery of his security infractions.  He argues that this demonstrates the Judge’s bias.  We
have evaluated the Judge’s decision in light of the record as a whole.  We find nothing therein that
would likely persuade a reasonable person that the Judge lacked the requisite impartiality.  Adverse
rulings and decisions do not establish judicial bias.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-05047 at 3 (App.
Bd. Nov. 8, 2017).  Applicant has not met his heavy burden of persuasion on this issue.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 17-02391 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2018).  
Applicant’s brief draws our attention to record evidence that he believes is favorable to him,
such as his claims about the possible origin of the classified data on his computer drives and his
denial that he deliberately falsified his SCA.  He argues that the years that have elapsed since his
last security-significant conduct contradict the Judge’s finding that the misconduct was recent.  The
Judge’s finding of deliberate falsification is supported by substantial evidence.  See ISCR Case No.
17-02145 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 10, 2018).  Moreover, given the seriousness of Applicant’s
misconduct, his various inconsistent statements, and the Judge’s adverse credibility determination,
we find no reason to disturb the Judge’s analysis of the security concerns raised in this case.  We are
required to give deference to Judges’ credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Applicant
has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor has
he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-02145 at 3.  Applicant states that without a clearance he will
be unemployed.  We are not permitted to consider the impact of an unfavorable decision.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 17-01950 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2018).   
3
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  Security violations “strike at the heart of the industrial security program” and must receive
a Judge’s strict scrutiny.  ISCR Case No. 16-01077 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 25, 2018).  Moreover, failure
to provide truthful answers to lawful questions in connection with a security clearance investigation
is of special concern and “will normally result in an unfavorable . . . determination.”  Directive,
Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 15.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a
clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” 
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶
2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
  
 
  
5
