 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04249 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On December 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on February 15, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on August 3, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 13, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for October 2, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, 
which were admitted without objection.  
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old president and owner of a limited liability company 
(LLC). She had employees at one time, but at present, she is the only employee. She 
has operated the LLC since 2003. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 1984 and a 
master’s degree in 1997. She has been divorced for many years. She has two adult 
children.1 
 
 Applicant’s business was successful for several years. Her company was 
awarded what was for them a sizable contract in about 2007. About six months into the 
contract, the prime contractor stopped paying Applicant’s company. Applicant used her 
own funds to pay her employees and other expenses. Her company’s financial distress 
continued for years. She did not pay all of her employees’ payroll taxes; she did not pay 
her personal federal and local taxes; and personal debts became delinquent.2 
 
 Applicant did not file her federal and local income tax returns for 2010, 2011, and 
2012 when they were due. She indicated that the company that maintained the LLC’s 
financial data would not turn it over to the LLC until it was paid. She stated that she 
terminated her contact with the company in about 2012, but the company continued to 
withhold her financial information until it was paid. She stated that in 2015 a friend paid 
the company so that Applicant could retrieve the data. The 2010 through 2012 tax 
returns were filed in 2015, but her 2016 income tax returns have yet to be filed.3 
 
 The IRS filed tax liens against Applicant in 2008 ($31,937), 2010 ($35,942 and 
$9,123), 2012 ($26,264), and 2017 ($17,613). She owes her local government about 
$42,000 in back taxes. Applicant stated that she has worked with the IRS and the local 
government and made some payments when she had the available funds, but she has 
been unable to completely pay her taxes.4 
 
 In December 2017, the IRS determined that Applicant’s taxes were not 
collectable at that time, and temporarily closed the collection case against her. The IRS 
informed her that she still owed the taxes, and they could reopen the case if her 
financial situation improves. Interest and penalties would continue to be added to her 
account. The IRS indicated that she owed taxes for tax years 2006 through 2010, 2013, 
and 2014. Applicant testified that she owed about $6,000 to $7,000 to the IRS for tax 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18, 27-29, 32, 38; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 24, 29, 34-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-25, 51-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. The SOR did not allege the unfiled 2016 tax 
returns. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may 
be considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
4 Tr. at 19, 24-27, 56-57, 70-73, 87, 90; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
 
3 
 
year 2017. She estimated her total debt to the IRS to be more than $190,000. She 
stated that she intends to pay her taxes when she has the income to do so.5 
 
Applicant employed a credit-counseling company to assist her in resolving her 
delinquent debts. She settled the $16,575 deficiency owed on an auto loan for $8,202. 
She paid $1,599 to reduce the balance from $18,175 to $16,575, and she agreed to 
make $276 monthly payments from November 2017 through October 2019. She 
credibly testified that she paid all the monthly settlement payments, with the exception 
of the last payment. She also paid other debts that were not alleged in the SOR.6 
 
 Applicant called a witness who attested to her professional competence, 
trustworthiness, and honesty. The witness also noted that Applicant volunteers in her 
community.7 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 24-25, 59-60, 73, 88; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 57-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE B. 
 
7 Tr. at 77-80. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
5 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, including tax returns not filed on 
time, unpaid taxes, and a delinquent auto loan. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has been paying the settlement on the deficiency owed on the auto 
loan (SOR ¶ 1.c). That debt is mitigated. She owes the IRS more than $190,000 and 
her local government more than $40,000 in taxes. She did not file her federal and local 
income tax returns for 2010, 2011, and 2012. Failure to comply with tax laws suggests 
that an applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established government rules and 
systems. Voluntary compliance with rules and systems is essential for protecting 
classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-01726 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 
2018). A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as paying 
taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-
01382 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2018).  
 
 
6 
 
The company that maintained the financial data for Applicant’s LLC would not 
turn it over to the LLC until it was paid. She terminated the contract with the company in 
about 2012, and the company was paid in 2015. The company turned over the data, 
and the 2010, 2011, and 2012 tax returns were filed in 2015. AG ¶ 20(g) is applicable to 
those returns. However, Applicant has not filed her 2016 tax returns, and did not pay all 
the taxes owed for 2017. Her tax liability is well over $200,000 and growing. Applicant 
stated that she intends to pay her taxes when she has the income to do so. Intentions to 
pay debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other 
responsible approaches. See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013). 
 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s tax problems 
will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They 
continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I 
believe Applicant is sincere, and she may reach a point where her finances are 
sufficiently in order to warrant a security clearance, but she is far from that point at this 
time. I find that financial considerations security concerns remain despite the presence 
of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
