1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01540 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Tokay T. Hackett, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct), F (Financial Considerations), and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 5, 2014. On 
June 24, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines J, F, and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2018. On June 29, 
2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for September 20, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which were 
admitted without objection. At Applicant’s request, I kept the record open  until September 
27, 2018, for additional submissions. Applicant submitted (AX) E in a timely manner. The 
exhibit was entered into the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on September 28, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old materials handler employed by a defense contractor 
since March 2014. He has worked for defense contractors for about 18 years. Applicant 
graduated from high school in 1992. He is single with two adult children. Applicant is 
currently working two jobs. He has held a security clearance for 18 years. Applicant 
completed his most recent security clearance application in November 2014. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
  The SOR alleges eight incidents of criminal conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-h) under 
Guideline J and cross-alleges the same conduct under Guideline E, but adds two new 
allegations for driving without a required license in 2014 and driving without a required 
license in 2012. He denied four of the allegations and provided explanations. He admitted 
SOR ¶ ¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1. g. 
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal activity beginning in 1993 to 2014. The early 
criminal arrests and charges included possession with intent to distribute cocaine,; armed 
unregistered firearm; charge and arrest of possession with intent to distribute cocaine 
while armed; and simple possession of cocaine. The last charge in 1993 resulted in one- 
year probation. (GX 2; GX 3) In 1996 and 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
violation of the Uniform Control Substance Act and possession with intent to distribute 
cannabis, and charged with possession with intent to distribute amphetamines. (SOR ¶ 
1.e-1.h) These arrests and charges in 1993, 1996, and 2007, resulted in one conviction. 
(GX 2) 
 
 In 2009 and 2010,Applicant was arrested and charged with reckless driving, driving 
under the influence -1st offense, and fleeing law enforcement. For the first DUI, Applicant 
pleaded guilty to the DUI and was sentenced to one-year of probation and completion of 
a drug treatment program and assessment. For the 2010 arrest and charge of DUI -2nd 
offense and operating a vehicle while impaired, Applicant pleaded guilty and was 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
sentenced to confinement, one-year of probation and completion of various traffic and 
alcohol programs. (GX 2) (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-d) 
 
 In 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with operating after suspension and 
contempt. He pleaded guilty to operating after suspension and was sentenced to a 30-
day confinement and one-year of probation. (SOR ¶ 1.b) Applicant admitted that he did 
drive on a suspended license. He stated that he needed to get home from an Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meeting. (Tr. 42) 
 
 In 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with disorderly conduct; trespass-
posted property; and trespass-private property. (SOR ¶ 1.a) This incident occurred when 
Applicant was arguing with a neighbor. It was evening and he was checking on his mom 
at her house. He is on the lease with his mother. He was not prosecuted, but he was 
ordered to do 24 hours of community service, which he completed. (Tr. 41; GX 2) The 
misdemeanor was put on a stet docket. (GX 2; GX 4) 
 
 Applicant’s explanations for the early (1993) criminal involvement revolve around 
his geographic location when he was young. He  stated he was in the wrong place at the 
wrong time. Applicant stated that he was 19 and allowed his friends to influence him. He 
denied the fact that he possessed cocaine or a firearm. He claimed that he was riding in 
a car with friends and the drug was found in the car. He was arrested, but the charges 
were dropped. He stated that since 2007,  he no longer associates with those  persons. 
He emphasized that he is now a grandfather and not the person he was in 1993 or 1996. 
Again, in 1996, he was 22 years old and he was in a group that participated in drug 
activities. He explained that he was arrested with a group. Again, he noted the charges 
were dropped. (Tr. 53)  
 
 However, in 2007, he was associating with people who were “engaged in bad 
activities.” He denied that he  sold or possessed amphetamines. He was again riding with 
friends and was arrested with them. He stated that the charges were dropped against 
him. He believes he was punished for the activity of others. He terminated those 
friendships in 2007. 
 
 As to the incidents involving alcohol in 2009 and 2010, he states that his actions 
were reprehensible but he was going through a separation and he was very stressed. He 
drank instead of facing the situation. He admits the second alcohol incident was one year 
later and he regrets driving after drinking.  He again used alcohol to cope with the stress 
in his life. (Tr.45) He completed probation and various alcohol programs. (AX A, 
Enclosure)  After the alcohol convictions, his driver’s license was suspended, but he drove 
his car in 2011. He admits it was wrong and he  believes he has matured. He stated that 
he was driving home from an AA meeting.  He states that it would not occur again. He 
believes his drinking is under control. (Tr.42) He does not attend AA any more. (Tr. 46) 
He believes the last time was in 2015. 
 
 
 
4 
 
Financial 
 
 The SOR alleges in ¶ ¶ 2.a-2.m, 11 collection accounts totaling about $5,988, and 
delinquent taxes  to the Federal Government in the amount of $4,382 for tax year 2012 
and delinquent taxes to the Federal Government in the amount of $8,159 for tax year  
2011. 
 
 Applicant has been in a payment plan with the IRS since February 2017. He 
initiated the plan and pays $175 monthly. In 2015, he worked with a company to negotiate 
a plan. He paid the company $1,650 for advice. They advised him to stop  paying the IRS. 
However, they did not negotiate on Applicant’s behalf and he called the IRS to start a 
payment plan. He is compliant and current with the installment plan. The money is debited 
from his checking account. The delinquent taxes for the two years have been combined 
for 2011 and 2012 under the Federal payment plan.  (AX A) Originally he was is paying 
the IRS for about 17 months for the delinquent taxes for tax year 2011 and 2012. He was 
auditied in 2015 and that is how he learned about the delinquent taxes. He always used 
a tax preparer for completion of his taxes. (AX D; Tr. 61-64) Thus, SOR ¶  2.a and 2.b 
are found in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 Applicant denied all the financial SOR allegations, except for SOR ¶ 2.g. The 
reasons that he gave for the denials of the various collection accounts were that he was 
not aware of the accounts. (Tr. 65) He also stated that he believes he has no delinquent 
bills and that the accounts are no longer on his credit report. Applicant does not recall 
disputing any of the accounts. Applicant stated that the medical bills should have been 
taken care of by his insurance. He also noted that one account belonged to his father. 
Applicant had no receipts for any bills that he believed he paid.(SOR ¶ 2.d and 2.e)  The 
debt in 2.f is duplicative of 2.e. Applicant had no documentation that he paid any of the 
debts, except for 2.d. (AX A, Enclosure 5) Applicant could not find any other receipts for 
debts he believed he had paid. One other receipt is  for the debt in SOR ¶ 2.k. 
 
 As to SOR ¶ 2.g, Applicant admits the debts, but stated he got behind in his 
payments and the bill was not paid. He believes he has better money management skills 
now. He also stated that he had not looked at his credit report and was not aware of the 
various accounts. 
 
 Applicant has received financial counseling and he has created a budget. (AX A) 
He earns about $60,000 combined from his two jobs.  He pays his bills in a timely manner. 
Applicant has no current creditors.  He has a 401(k) and other savings. (Tr. 85; AX ) 
Applicant has filed his 2017 tax return. (AX E) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The personal conduct allegations in the SOR ¶¶ (3.a-3.d) cross allege the 
information under criminal conduct and financial considerations. It also adds two 
allegations as mentioned under criminal conduct of a 2014 charge of driving/attempting 
to drive a motor vehicle on a highway without a required license and authorization (SOR 
5 
 
3.c) and a 2012 charge of driving a motor vehicle on a highway or public use property on 
a revoked license and privilege.(SOR 3.d) The driving incidents without a proper license 
were both nolle prosequi. (GX 5) 
 
 Applicant admitted both allegations of driving on a revoked license, based on his 
DUI’s, but he explained that he was responding to an emergency in one situation and in 
the other, he was returning from work. He did not have anyone to transport him to work.  
He regrets the actions, but his license was reinstated in July 2014. Applicant stated that 
this will never happen again.  
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant presented a witness who has known him since 2014. The witness 
worked with Applicant and was his team lead for a few years. The witness characterized 
Applicant’s duty performance as excellent.  He noted that he was reliable and always 
handled the job. The witness knew about the issues in the SOR and discussed them with 
Applicant several years ago. He believes that Applicant is trustworthy and recommends 
him for a security clearance. (Tr. ) The witness stated that Applicant has learned lessons 
from his past mistakes.  
 
 Applicant has earned many awards and certificates during his long career as a 
contractor. (AX A, Enclosure 15) He has been awarded “Great Performer” from his 
employer on several occasions. He earned training certificates with high scores in areas 
such as web-based training in environmental management, individual risk management, 
storm water information, and several others. (AX A, Enclosure 16) 
 
 Applicant submitted four letters of recommendation from colleagues and friends. 
Each letter attests to Applicant’s professionalism and trustworthiness. (AX A, Enclosure 
16) A former project manager wrote that Applicant  worked for him for one year and he 
was adept at following  the company’s rules and regulations. The writer also stated that 
Applicant has been exposed to classified information and has been very protective of the 
information. 
 
 Applicant volunteers with the Mayor’s Office on Returning Citizens Affairs 
(MORCA). He helps with community events to help high risk teens. He also assists in 
administrative and special projects to provide assistance to recently incarcerated men 
and women. (AX E ) Applicant  is active in church activities.  
 
     Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
6 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations.” Applicant’s admissions, testimony at the hearing, and the documentary 
evidence submitted by the parties establish the following disqualifying conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 32(c): no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed 
the offense; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 AG ¶ 32(a) is not established as Applicant has a history of involvement with the 
law since 1993. The early events from 1993 to 1996 involved possession of cocaine and 
intent to distribute while armed. Despite the fact that only one conviction resulted from 
those charges, and they occurred a long time ago, they are not mitigated due to 
subsequent criminal involvement. The criminal conduct spans a period of about 20 years. 
In 2007, there is another charge with possession and intent to distribute amphetamines. 
Appllicant has two DUI’s  in 2009 and 2010. In 2011, 2012, and 2014 there are other 
criminal incidents.  Applicant has held a security clearance since 2000. These criminal 
conduct situations cast doubt on Applicant’s good judgement. 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶ 32(d) is partially established for the conduct alleged in the SOR concerning 
alcohol incidents because Applicant has completed his treatment and has not had any 
DUI’s since 2010. However, he drove on a suspended license several times and admitted 
that there were other times that he did as well. Applicant has had some charges dismissed  
or nolle prosequied, but his involvement with the law spans a long time. Applicant has 
good recommendations, completed probation, is involved with the community, but he has 
held a security clearance since 2000 and his latest criminal citation was in 2014. His 
rehabilitation did not prevent further involvement with the law. This mitigating condition is 
not fully established. 
 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, and failure to pay 
Federal taxes that became delinquent, establish three disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”); and 19(f) (”failure to file . . .  or pay annual Federal,  state, or local 
..income tax returns as required.” 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20 (g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant reported no prior unemployment. He is working two jobs. He stated that 
as to the Federal taxes that were delinquent, he was audited and found out about the 
issue. He explained that he was not aware of many of the items that were on the SOR for 
financial concerns because he had not looked at a credit report, or because he thought 
the health insurance company should have paid. Applicant stated that he had paid some 
accounts and disputed others. He disputed one debt, but as to the ones that he stated he 
paid or were closed, he provided no documentation. He acknowledged that he started to 
pay some accounts after the SOR was issued. Applicant also believed one or two 
accounts may have belonged to his father.  
 
 Applicant provided his information concerning his installment payments to the IRS 
and all his documentation supports his assertion that he has addressed the delinquent 
Federal taxes and is current. (AX D) Thus, AG ¶ 20(g) applies to SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. 
 
 As to documentation for any  delinquent accounts that he has paid, Applicant only 
provided a few receipts. He had evidence to support that the phone collection account in 
SOR ¶ 2.d was paid. (AX A Enclosure 5)  Applicant produced  receipts for SOR 2.e. and 
2.k. Applicant referred to the fact that the othert accounts are closed and not his 
responsibility. He states that there are no delinquent accounts on his credit report.  
 
 Applicant has received financial counseling and has a budget. AG ¶ 20(c) partially 
applies.  He has presented insufficient information to show that he has  the problems 
under control. However the other mitigating conditions do not apply in this case and 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern.  
 
 
   
10 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .” Applicant’s criminal history 
establishes the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ (c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of . . . (2) any disruptive, violent, 
or other inappropriate behavior; [and] (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: (1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate 
the stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
11 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 The personal conduct allegations are-cross alleged with Guideline J and F. These 
have been fully discussed above. The additional two allegations in  SOR 3.d and 3.e 
involve the driving on a suspended or revoked license in 2012 and 2014. Applicant’s 
misconduct  has continued from 1993 until 2014. Although he has completed his alcohol 
classes and has not had any other alcohol incidents, he has not shown the ability to follow 
rules, laws, and regulations. Therefore, none of the mitigating conditions apply. He has 
not mitigated the personal conduct concerns. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J, F, and E in my whole-
person analysis and applied the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid, sincere, 
remorseful, and credible at the hearing. He is working two jobs and has held a security 
clearance since 2000. He has letters of recommendation. He has been entrusted with 
classified information. He completed alcohol rehabilitation and has not had a DUI since 
2011. He is involved in the Church and community activities. 
 
 However, Applicant has a long history of involvement with the law. He has had 
some early cases dismissed, but taken together with the conduct from 2007 until 2014, 
and the lack of proactivity with his financial affairs, although he has made strides in that 
area, and sought counseling, insufficient time and action has passed to mitigate. After   
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J, F, and E, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his criminal conduct, financial concerns,  
and personal conduct. 
12 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c-2.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.d-2.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.f:     Duplicate 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagrphs 3.a-3d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
