 
 1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  17-01661 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on December 14, 2015. 
On June 5, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H, (Drug Involvement). The DOD CAF 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006 (2006 AG).  
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on July 12, 2017, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. On November 2, 2017, a complete copy of the File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, was mailed to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on December 11, 2017. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. Items 
 
 2 
1 through 4 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me 
on May 7, 2018.  
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they were 
in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would have been 
the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 34 years old, unmarried, and has no children. He has attended some 
college. Applicant has worked as a junior systems administrator since March 2015. This 
is his first security clearance application. 
  
In 2008, Applicant started using marijuana after he developed a knee condition. At 
the time, he did not have health insurance. He used marijuana because it was cheaper 
than prescription medication and helped with his insomnia. (Item 2; Item 3 at 26; GE 4 at 
4)  
 
Applicant started growing marijuana at home for his personal use in August 2010. 
“Since I was using marijuana for chronic knee pain and sleep, I took it upon myself to 
learn how to grow marijuana from August 2010 through February 2013.” Additionally, he 
grew his own marijuana because he did not trust “anyone.” (Item 2 at 2; Item 3 at 27; GE 
4 at 4) 
 
From February 2012 until June 2015, Applicant misused various prescription 
medications and illegal drugs3 for pain management associated with knee problems. He 
asserted that he stopped misusing drugs in 2015, because he “consulted with a health 
care professional . . .  and [he] no longer needed to engage in controlled substances.” 
(Item 2 at Item 3 at 26-28) 
 
In his December 2015 SCA, Applicant admitted he used marijuana once a night 
until May 2015. At that time, he claimed that “[he did] not intend to use this drug as [he is] 
getting older and starting [his] career.” (Item 3 at 26) However, during his January 2017 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 
(SEAD-4), establishing a “single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial 
or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-
4 ¶ B, Purpose). The SEAD-4 guidelines became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). 
The National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to 
determine eligibility for initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, 
Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Applicant used “morphine, hydrocodone, oxycodone, Oxycontin, tramadol, suboxone, xanax, Ativan, 
amphetamines, Ritalin, soma.” (Item 3 at 28) 
 
 3 
personal subject interview (PSI), Applicant disclosed that despite his 2015 assertions, he 
used marijuana two times between August 2015 and January 2017.  
 
Applicant’s last admitted marijuana use was in January 2017, at his home with 
friends. He used marijuana at that time because it was there. During his January 2017 
PSI, he stated that it was possible that he could use marijuana in the future. (Item 4 at 4) 
 
In Applicant’s July 2017 Answer to the SOR, he asserted that he no longer had 
contact with the people who provided him with marijuana and other drugs. He also stated, 
“If [he] would have known that [he] would be in this outstanding career right now in [his] 
life, [he] never would have used marijuana and other opiates that would have impacted 
this clearance decision.” He provided a signed statement of intent to not use drugs in the 
future. (Item 2 at 2-3) 
  
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”4 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”5 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”6 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
5 Egan at 527. 
 
6 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
 4 
Adverse clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”7 Thus, 
a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Security Executive Agent have established for 
issuing national security eligibility. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.8 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”9 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.10 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.11 An applicant has the burden of proving a potential mitigating condition, and the 
burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.12 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”13 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”14 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, but because such behavior may 
                                                          
7 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
9 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
11 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
14 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 5 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted 
in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern. The following 
conditions are potentially disqualifying: 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, or 
failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
Applicant admitted he used marijuana from 2008 until at least January 2017. For 
several years, he misused prescription medication, illegal drugs, and grew marijuana for 
his own use. Additionally, he told a government investigator in January 2017 that he could 
use marijuana in the future. The evidence raised the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The burden shifted to Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of the resulting security 
concerns. AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs used; and 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; and 
 
 6 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended. 
Applicant used a variety of illegal drugs and misused prescription medications for 
a significant period of time. He also grew marijuana for his own use. Much of this drug 
use was for pain management related to a medical issue because of pain from his knees. 
However, this use was illegal and continued after he received medical treatment and 
applied for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant disclosed and described drug use in his 2015 SCA, his January 2017 
PSI, and his July 2017 Answer to the SOR. Specifically, in his December 2015 SCA he 
stated his last marijuana use was in May 2015, and in his January 2017 PSI he admitted 
he used marijuana in August 2015 and January 2017. 
 
 In his December 2015 SCA, Applicant claimed he intended to no longer use 
marijuana because it was inconsistent with his career goals. In January 2017, he said it 
was possible that he would use marijuana again. After he received the SOR, Applicant 
again claimed he would no longer use marijuana. These inconsistent and apparently self-
serving statements are insufficient to alleviate concerns regarding his history of drug use 
and the potential for future use. 
 
Applicant’s decision to use illegal drugs, after he applied for a security clearance 
in 2015, cannot be considered a minor lapse in judgment, but rather a pattern of behavior 
that indicates his unwillingness to follow rules and regulations. Security clearance 
decisions are not limited to conduct during duty hours; off-duty conduct, especially where 
it reflects poor judgment, provides a rational basis for the government to question an 
appellant’s security worthiness.15 Appellant’s behavior showed a disregard for the law, 
regulations, and the fiduciary relationship he voluntarily entered into with the government 
when he applied for access to classified information. 
 
Applicant did not establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 26(a), 26(b), and 26(c). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
15 See, e.g., Cole v. Young, 351 U.S. 536, 550 n.13 (1956); Croft v. Department of Air Force, 40 M.S.P.R. 
320, 321 n.1 (1989). 
 
 
 7 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under these guidelines, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, Applicant has not mitigated the drug involvement and 
substance misuse security concerns at issue. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security of the 
United States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security of 
the United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
