KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: We note the Judge’s statement in the analysis that he is not convinced that Applicant
would abide by a different payment arrangement, insofar as he had failed to make sufficient
child support payments in the past.  Given the Judge’s analysis, we find no reason to conclude
that, even if the document in question had been included in the record, it would have resulted in
a different decision.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-01915.a1
DATE: 11/21/2018
DATE: November 21, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-01915
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
21, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On September 10, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether he submitted evidence that was not
included in the record or considered by the Judge.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant has been employed as
a Government contractor since 2015.  He has a master’s degree.  Applicant served in the military
for seven years and later in the Reserves.  He has two children, ages seven and nine.  
Applicant was unemployed from late 2013 until mid-2014.  His current income is about
$145,000.  He pays about $1,000 a month in child support payments.  Applicant’s SOR lists a child
support debt of over $35,500.  He had been unable to make his payments due to his period of
unemployment.  In 2015, the court increased Applicant’s monthly payments to about $1,580, with
a specified amount going towards his arrearage.  These payments were to be made by means of a
wage lien.  Applicant attempted unsuccessfully to get his payments reduced, and for a while he paid
about $800 a month and has been paying $1,000 a month since 2016 or 2017.  He is hoping to settle
his  arrearage.  Applicant did not provide proof of payments after mid-2017, and his arrearage is now
about $42,000.  Three weeks before his security clearance hearing, Applicant hired an attorney to
help resolve this debt.
In May 2018, Applicant submitted to the court a request for a change to his child support
obligation.  The proposed amendment allows Applicant to make his child support payments directly
to the mother.  It requests the court terminate both his child support obligation and the arrearage. 
The Judge held the record open until September 2018 for Applicant to submit the signed order. 
However, the Judge did not receive post-hearing documentation from Applicant after May 2018.1 
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge cleared Applicant on all of the SOR allegations except the one concerning child
support, noting that Applicant did not explain why he paid reduced amounts of child support in 2017
and thereafter.  Significantly, he stated that, even if Applicant had provided a new child support
payment plan he was not convinced that Applicant would abide by it, citing to evidence that, in
2015, Applicant had been required to make his payments automatically from his salary but failed
to comply.  
1The hearing occurred on April 2, 2018.  
2
Discussion
 
Applicant contends that he submitted evidence that did not make it into the record.  He states
that he had a signed copy of a court order.  This order removed his obligation to make child support
payments to a state agency and abolished his arrearage to the agency.  He states that he sent this
document to the attorney who represented him at the hearing2 and that he sent a copy to the Judge
as well.  He contends that this document, had it been considered, would demonstrate mitigation of
the one debt that the Judge resolved against him.  Applicant’s brief contains new evidence, which
we generally cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.2.29.  However, we will consider new evidence on
threshold issues such as due process or jurisdiction.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01472 at 2 (App.
Bd. Aug. 6, 2018).
Applicant has attached to his brief a copy of a signed court order that removes his obligation
to make payments to the state child support agency and that removes his arrearage to that agency. 
As he contends, this document is not part of the record.  However, the record does contain a signed
copy of the parties’ motion setting forth the proposed terms of the requested court order and the
reasons therefor, along with an unsigned copy of a suggested order submitted for the court’s
consideration and use.  The final order that Applicant has included in his brief contains similar terms
to those set forth in documents included in the record and that the Judge addressed in his decision. 
We note the Judge’s statement in the analysis that he is not convinced that Applicant would abide
by a different payment arrangement, insofar as he had failed to make sufficient child support
payments in the past.3  Given the Judge’s analysis, we find no reason to conclude that, even if the
document in question had been included in the record, it would have resulted in a different decision.4 
Therefore, even if this document failed to make it into the record due to fault by personnel at
DOHA,5 any such error would be harmless.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.17-01181 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr.
2To the extent Applicant has a claim regarding a purported failure by his attorney, there is no relief available
in this forum.  A remedy, if there is one, would be found elsewhere.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-21045 at 3 (App. Bd.
Feb 21, 2007).
3The written motion signed both by Applicant and the mother asserted  that, while Applicant’s debt to the state
child support agency would be removed, he would still be obligated to make arrearage payments directly to the mother. 
“[T]he parties have agreed that [Applicant] will now pay child support directly to the [mother], including an amount that
will go toward the arrears.”  (Emphasis added).  Applicant’s Exhibit M.  Therefore, while the evidence that Applicant
has attached to his brief removes his liability to the state, it does not discharge the arrearage itself, it only changes the
payee.  
4Moreover, even if an applicant has actually resolved a debt, the Judge may still consider the circumstances
underlying the debt for what they reveal about the applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
02394 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 18, 2015).
5Applicant states in his brief that he mailed a copy of this document to the Judge.  He did not include a mailing
receipt or some other document in corroboration.  He also asserts that he was confused by the Judge’s having extended
the date by which Applicant was to submit his additional evidence.  Insofar as he claimed he mailed the court order
within the time frame established by the Judge, we conclude that Applicant has not demonstrated any harm by virtue of
the Judge’s actions.  Indeed, extending the length of time within which an applicant may submit additional
documentation is by definition favorable to the applicant. 
3
30, 2018).  We conclude that there is no reason to remand the case to the Judge to take in the
additional evidence.  
We have examined Applicant’s brief in its entirety and conclude that he has not established
harmful error by the Judge.  The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant
data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection
between the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v.
State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v.
United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this
record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with
the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
 
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
   
5
