 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01191 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guidelines for financial 
considerations and foreign influence. He resolved state tax liens incurred while residing 
overseas and credibly testified that he now understands his tax obligations. His service 
as a government contractor overseas shows strong ties to the United States, despite his 
family’s property and ties to the Philippines. National security eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 1, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F and B. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Security Executive 
Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 
2016), effective June 8, 2017.  
 
2 
 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on October 10, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on April 13, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on May 8, 2018, scheduling the hearing for May 31, 
2018. Applicant failed to appear in person, but attempted to appear telephonically. The 
matter was rescheduled on June 7, 2018, for an in-person hearing on July 26, 2018. The 
case was transferred to me for hearing on July 17, 2018. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on July 26, 2017. Applicant was present, as was Department Counsel. The 
Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted without 
objection, and two hearing exhibits (HE) marked HE I and II. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf, and presented Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on August 8, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 2.a, 2.c, 2.d, and 2.f with explanations. He 
denied SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.e. Under the financial considerations concern, the SOR alleged 
that Applicant was indebted to his state for a 2014 tax lien in the amount of $9,272; and 
a 2016 tax lien in the amount of $9,551. These liens were identified on his October 20, 
2016 credit report. (GE 5.) Under foreign influence, the SOR identified concerns relating 
to his contacts with family and property in the Philippines. After a thorough and careful 
review of the testimony, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He is a high school graduate. He served on active duty 
in the Army from 1993 to 1999. He was honorably discharged. He has been employed by 
various government contractors in the Middle East since 1999 as a skilled laborer, except 
for a six-month period in 2001 when he returned to the United States, and a six-month 
period of unemployment in 2002. He married in 2006, and has two minor children. He 
often works in areas where accompanying family members are not permitted. (Tr. 23-26.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife, age 45, is a citizen and resident of the Philippines.1 She is a 
homemaker. She and their two U.S. citizen children reside in a house that Applicant 
financed in the Philippines for $106,000.  Because property in the Philippines must be 
owned by a citizen, his wife holds the majority interest in the home. He sends her $2,500 
every two weeks for living expenses. Applicant intends to file for a Visa to allow his wife 
to move to the United States with their children within the next year. When Applicant has 
time off he resides with his wife and children in the Philippines. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 49-58.) 
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen. His parents reside in the United States and 
he is close to his mom. He has two storage units filled with possessions and a vehicle in 
the United States. His mom receives all of his U.S. mail. (Tr. 20, 42, 46.) 
 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel stated, “Generally, we don’t consider the Philippines to be a country of heightened 
risk in and of itself.” As a result, the Government did not offer any administrative notice material on the 
Philippines. Applicant testified that his family lives an area unaffected by terrorists. (Tr. 61-62.) 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s wife’s four sisters are also citizens of and residents in the Philippines. 
Two are homemakers, one is a school teacher, and one works in food service. None of 
his wife’s siblings work for the government or military of the Philippines, or know what he 
does for a living. He sees them two to three times per year at family holiday gatherings. 
(GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 49-60.) 
 
 Applicant attributed the state tax liens to living abroad and failing to understand the 
requirements when faced with preparing his tax returns unassisted. He admitted that he 
is at fault for failing to file federal and state income tax returns since 2008. Before 2008, 
his mother hired a tax preparer to prepare his tax returns and sent them to him for 
signature. He had always qualified for the foreign income tax credit, did not owe any 
additional taxes, and filed in a timely manner. Beginning approximately 2008, he no longer 
had assistance and preparing tax returns, and did not know how to do it alone. He was 
confused about the foreign income tax credit. He neglected to fulfill this requirement. (Tr. 
18-28.) 
 
IRS tax transcripts reflect Applicant filed his 2009, 2010, and 2011 Federal income 
tax returns late in 2013. His 2012 and 2013 Federal tax returns were filed in a timely 
manner.2 (GE 3.) He does not owe any Federal taxes for those years.  
 
Applicant testified that he filed all his past-due state tax returns for tax years 2008 
through 2015, in 2016, after he learned of the $9,272 state tax lien filed in 2014 for tax 
year 2011 during his security clearance interview. A second state tax lien for $9,551 was 
filed against him in 2016 for tax year 2012. He timely filed 2016 and 2017 Federal and 
state tax returns. He testified he paid off the state tax liens through a collection agency. 
He provided documentation to show that they are resolved and released, although the 
dates of payment are unclear from the record evidence. While it could be presumed that 
the liens were resolved sometime between February 28, 2017, when the Government 
accessed a credit report showing them as unresolved, and October 2, 2017, when the 
state issued a copy of the satisfaction of lien, Applicant credibly testified that he paid them 
off sooner, through the collection agency, but the collection agency failed to update the 
records in a timely manner. He petitioned the state to remove the liens, which had been 
previously paid in 2017, before receiving the SOR. His state tax debt is fully resolved. 
(GE 5; AE A.) 
 
Applicant now understands his obligations to file Federal and state tax returns 
while overseas in a timely manner and is committed to doing so in the future. He has filed 
both Federal and state tax returns in a timely manner since 2016. In 2017, he owed 
approximately $9,000 in 2017 Federal taxes and he immediately set up a voluntary 
payment plan with the IRS, upon which he testified he is current. He also contacted his 
employer and requested an allotment for taxes so that he does not have a balance owed 
to the IRS at the end of the year. He promised to file in a timely manner in the future. (Tr. 
32-44.) 
 
                                                          
2 The overseas filing deadline is June 15. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant testified that he earns sufficient income to meet his financial obligations. 
His mortgage loan payment on the home in the Philippines is $1,200 per month. He has 
savings of approximately $5,000, which he plans to use to resolve his 2017 Federal tax 
balance. He recognizes that he needs to be more frugal with his expenditures and has 
made adjustments in the amounts he spends, preferring less extravagant products than 
he used to buy. (Tr. 75.)  His 2017 credit report reflects that he is in good standing on all 
commercial accounts. (GE 6.) He has not participated in financial counseling because it 
is hard to find overseas. (Tr. 45-49.) He now has a calendar alarm set to remind him to 
file his tax returns. It is set to alert him every 15 days beginning in January of each year, 
until they are filed. (Tr. 71.) 
 
Applicant testified with candor and honesty. He accepted responsibility for his past 
actions and vowed to act responsibly toward his tax obligations in the future. He is a proud 
American and enjoys serving his country overseas. He testified that he would not do 
anything to harm U.S. interests. (Tr. 70-72.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely pay his state income taxes, as required by state law, for 
tax years 2010 and 2011, which resulted in the 2014 and 2016 tax liens in the amounts 
 
6 
 
 
of $9,272 and $9,551. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 The DOHA Appeal Board has well established case law concerning how to 
evaluate an applicant’s failure to meet their tax obligations: 
 
A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as 
filing tax returns and paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high 
degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted access to 
sensitive or protected information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-02884 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2018). See Cafeteria and Restaurant Workers Union 
Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 
886 (1961). Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a 
problem with complying with well-established government rules and 
regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is essential for 
guarding sensitive or protected information. See, e.g., ADP Case No. 15-
00198 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 30, 2017). 
 
Applicant admits that he exercised poor judgment in the past when he failed to 
timely file Federal and state tax returns and pay his state taxes. He was working overseas 
during this period and was confused about the foreign income tax credit. His failure to pay 
state taxes led to the liens. Those liens were resolved by Applicant prior to receiving the 
SOR, and his delinquent tax returns, which were not alleged in the SOR, but were 
considered for assessing mitigation, 3 have all been filed for a number of years. He has 
filed the last five years of Federal tax returns in a timely manner and filed the past two 
years state tax returns as required by law, thereby demonstrating a recent track record of 
responsibility and a change in his behavior. Applicant testified credibly and at length about 
his remorse for his past poor judgment and the steps he has taken to rehabilitate himself, 
including proactive steps like setting a calendar reminder to make sure he remembers to 
file and setting up an allotment to save funds for his Federal taxes. He has reduced his 
spending on frivolous items.  
 
                                                          
3 See, ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).   
 
7 
 
 
In weighing Applicant’s good-faith efforts to resolve his state tax liens, I must 
consider the timing of Applicant’s actions. The Appeal Board has consistently held that 
timing of an applicant’s resolution of his tax filing problems is relevant in evaluating 
mitigation. An applicant who resolves financial or tax problems only when his clearance 
might be imperiled raises questions about his willingness to follow the sometimes 
complex rules governing classified information when his personal interests are not at 
stake.4 In this case, Applicant cured all of his state tax liens before receiving the SOR. 
Further, the failure to file his past-due tax state and Federal returns was cured prior to the 
issuance of the SOR, known to the Government, and not in the SOR. It is clear from the 
record that Applicant resolved his state tax liens and is in compliance with tax 
requirements. His promise to fulfill his annual state and Federal tax obligations in a timely 
manner was credible. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(g) provide full mitigation. 
  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG 
¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; 
 
                                                          
4 ISCR Case No. 15-06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 26, 2017). 
 
8 
 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
  Applicant’s wife is a citizen of and resident in the Philippines; his children reside in 
the Philippines as do his sisters-in-law; and his largest asset is the property that he owns 
jointly with his wife in the Philippines. He visits his wife when on leave from work and 
provides financial support for his family. These facts raise concerns under AG ¶ 20(b) 
because a potential conflict of interest exists between his obligation to protect classified 
or sensitive information and his desire to help his family in the Philippines. However, AG 
¶¶ 7(a), 7(e), and 7(f) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The Government 
contended there was no heightened risk present. As a result, the evidence is insufficient 
to raise AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(e), and 7(f).  
  
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army from 1993 to 1999. He decided to 
continue serving his country as a government contractor and has been employed at 
overseas locations in that capacity largely for more than 18 years. While Department 
Counsel argued that “[A]pplicant’s ties to the United States have faded over the years,” I 
find service to the United States for more than 20 years to be compelling evidence of his 
deep longstanding ties to this country. In this case, there is no conflict of interest, because 
the Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States 
show that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. The routine 
nature of his family home in the Philippines makes it unlikely that it could be used to 
manipulate him. The above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for national security eligibility by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Failing to pay income taxes is a 
serious transgression. It indicates that Applicant may have a problem abiding by well-
established rules and regulations. Applicant is not highly educated but was exceptionally 
honest at hearing. It is clear he was confused about filing tax returns while overseas. He 
has accepted responsibility for his negligence and has documented behavioral changes. 
He has paid the entire delinquency, and is now actively engaged in the management of 
his finances. He is current on his payments to the IRS for his 2017 Federal taxes. He has 
filed Federal tax returns in a timely manner since 2013, and state tax returns in a timely 
manner for the past two years. His dedication and service to the U.S. government make 
it unlikely that his Filipino family members or property could be used to coerce him. In 
sum, the presence of rehabilitation outweighs the nature and seriousness of the security 
concerns. Applicant has mitigated the security concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
  
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
National security eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
