 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04234 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GLENDON, John Bayard, Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement 
and Substance Abuse) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 22, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guidelines E and H. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
(Exec. Or.); DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016) (AG) 
for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 13, 2018, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on May 2, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
2 
 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on May 11, 2018. His response was undated. It was 
received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals on June 5, 2018. Department 
Counsel did not object to Applicant’s response, and it is admitted into the record. In his 
response to the FORM, Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, which 
was attached to Department Counsel’s FORM as Items 1 through 5. This evidence is 
admitted into the record and is referred to herein using Department Counsel’s numbering 
for each Item. The case was assigned to me on July 26, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He also provided 
explanations and clarifications regarding his actions. His admissions are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and is a 2006 graduate with a bachelor’s degree. He has 
worked for a government contractor since 2007 and has held a secret clearance since 
2008. In 2010, his clearance was upgraded top secret. 
 
 On June 23, 2015, he submitted a new application (SCA). In the SCA, he disclosed 
that he used marijuana during the period 2004 to 2015. He commented that his use in the 
last seven years was less than ten times. He also disclosed that he used marijuana while 
holding a security clearance.  
 
 In his August 2015 background interview, he confirmed his marijuana use while in 
college (2004-2006) and his use in the last seven years, which was limited to less than 
ten times. His most recent use was in April 2015, shortly before his application and his 
background interview. He reported no other drug use on either his SCA or during his 
background interview. (Item 5 at 3.) 
 
 On June 2, 2017, Applicant responded to interrogatories from the DOD CAF in 
which he addressed his history of using alcohol and drugs. In his responses, he disclosed 
for the first time that he purchased and used illegal mushrooms twice in 2009. (GE 4 at 
7.) He also modified the date of his first use of marijuana from 2004 to 2002, when he 
was a college freshman. (GE 4 at 6.) He also claimed that he had stopped using any 
drugs in March or April 2014 (GE 4 at 6), which was one year earlier than his admission 
in his SCA. He wrote that he has no intention of using either drug in the future. (GE 4 at 
9.) 
 
 Applicant used marijuana from 2002 to April 2015. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) He states he 
regrets using drugs while holding a security clearance. He also purchased and used 
mushrooms at a music festival with friends in 2009 while holding a clearance. (SOR ¶ 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application, dated June 23, 2015 
(FORM Item 3), unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
1.b.) As of June 2018, he states that his behavior will not be repeated in the future. (Item 
2 at 1; Item 4 at 8-9.) 
 
 Applicant also admits the falsification allegation regarding his failure to disclose his 
use of mushrooms in 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.a) and the falsification allegation regarding his failure 
to disclose his use of mushrooms while holding a security clearance. (SOR ¶ 2.b.) He 
commented that he thought the use might have been in 2008 and might have been 
outside of the seven-year timeframe of the question. He conceded, however, that he was 
wrong on the date and the timeframe and that this “was both a character mistake and a 
mathematical mistake on my part.” (Item 2 at 1.) He apologized for withholding this 
information and repeated that he has no intention to use drugs in the future. (Item 2 at 1.) 
 
 Applicant’s response to the FORM focused exclusively on an error by Department 
Counsel in her reading of Applicant’s admission in his interrogatory responses regarding 
the frequency of his use of marijuana and mushrooms. He clarified that he used 
marijuana, not mushrooms, 30-40 times during his four years in college. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
 
4 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016). 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24:  
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under Guideline H are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
AG ¶ 25(f): any illegal drug use while granted access to classified  
 
5 
 
information or holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
potentially disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(f). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under Guideline H are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(a) is partially established. Applicant’s last illegal use of a controlled 
substance occurred about three and one-half years ago. This period of abstinence 
suggests that the behavior may not recur. However, Applicant was 31 years old at the 
time he last used marijuana. At that age, he was old enough to know better, especially as 
a federal contractor employee with a top-secret clearance. The fact that he used both 
mushrooms and marijuana while holding a security clearance casts serious doubts on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) is partially established. Applicant has established a pattern of 
abstinence. However, he used illegal drugs over a 13-year period, which undercuts the 
mitigation value of his much shorter period of abstinence. Moreover, Applicant provided 
no evidence of actions he has taken to overcome his past problems of drug abuse by 
providing any evidence such as that detailed in subparagraphs 1-3 of this mitigating 
condition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
The following disqualifying condition under this guideline is potentially relevant: 
AG ¶16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the FORM establish the 
above disqualifying condition under this guideline. The record satisfies the Government’s 
burden of proving by substantial evidence that Applicant intentionally falsified his 
responses to questions in Sections 23 of his June 23, 2015 SCA.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant failed to disclose his 2009 
use of mushrooms in both his SCA and in his August 2015 background interview. To his 
credit, he did disclose this 2009 drug use in his interrogatory responses, but that was two 
years later. Accordingly, he failed to make a prompt, good-faith effort to correct his 
omissions. In fact, he repeated the falsification in his background interview by only 
disclosing his marijuana use. Moreover, the falsifications in his SCA were not minor 
 
7 
 
because he held a top-secret security clearance when he made them. The falsifications 
cast serious doubt about his reliability, trustworthiness and judgment.  
 
The security clearance investigation is not a forum for an applicant to intentionally 
omit potentially derogatory information. The Federal Government has a compelling 
interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information. That compelling interest 
includes the government's legitimate interest in being able to make sound decisions, 
based on complete and accurate information, about who will be granted access to 
classified information. An applicant who deliberately fails to give full, frank, and candid 
answers to the government in connection with a security clearance investigation or 
adjudication interferes with the integrity of the government’s industrial security program. 
ISCR Case No. 01-03132 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2002). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines E and H in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his past actions. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1. Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2. Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
John Bayard Glendon 
Administrative Judge 
