 
1 
 
 
         
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 17-02689 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 19, 2015. 
On October 13, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 14, 2017, admitting four of the SOR 
allegations and denying ten of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
August 20, 2018. On September 4, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
2 
 
 
(DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for September 25, 2018. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
The Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 – 5 were admitted without objection. At the 
hearing, Applicant requested that the record remain open until October 9, 2018, for 
supplemental documentation. (Tr. 26) At his request, I extended the period to November 
14, 2018. He submitted post-hearing documents consisting of seven pages that were 
marked as Applicant ’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He graduated from high school in 2001 and obtained a 
bachelor’s degree in 2011. Applicant never married but he reports a daughter, age 12.  
(Tr. 21) Applicant reports no military service and he has been employed as a security 
professional at a federal agency since March 2016. Applicant had several periods of 
unemployment over the last 10 years. Applicant disclosed his child-support arrearage in 
section 26 of his SCA, stating that he could not keep up with payments due to an 
automobile accident in 2011 and periods of unemployment. The IRS is withholding his 
income tax refunds and his wages are being garnished to pay child support. He 
provided post-hearing documentation from a state child support services division 
reflecting a current balance of $13,430, down from $15,349. (AE A)  
 
 The SOR alleged 14 delinquent debts totaling approximately $20,404, including 
the child support arrearage and two judgments. Applicant answered interrogatories on 
July 5, 2017, stating that his federal income tax refund was being applied to his $15,349 
child support arrearage. (GE 3) He testified that he pays $442 each month by 
garnishment of his wages toward the child support debt. (Tr. 22) He fell behind when he 
was living in state A and his mother became gravely ill and lost her job. He moved in 
with his mother and became her caretaker while supporting her financially for two to 
three years before he moved to state B in 2016. (Tr. 30-33)  
 
Applicant testified that he worked as a special police officer and an armored car 
driver in a large city (Tr. 37-39) before moving south. He was on a detail in late 2012 
when his partner was shot in the face during an armed robbery. His employer offered no 
support, such as psychological counseling, therapy, or time off, following this traumatic 
event. (Tr. 39) The employer expected him back at work the next day. So, Applicant 
was fired from this job in February 2013 and endured a period of unemployment for 
approximately one year. (GE 1) He was also unemployed from 2008 to 2011, while 
attending college. He received a basketball scholarship for his freshman year of college, 
but when his coach was fired, Applicant lost the scholarship. (Tr. 45) His mother co-
signed for his student loans after that. The student loans are now in a deferred status. 
(Tr. 44-45) Applicant also incurred child support responsibilities while he was in college. 
(Tr. 47)  
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 5, 2017 security 
clearance application (SCA). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant testified that he was in an automobile accident in 2011 and he 
sustained injuries including fractures and incurred medical bills that were supposed to 
be covered by insurance. (Tr. 48) He has reached out to the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
and 1.i – 1.k, to dispute these medical debts. Applicant testified that the delinquent debt 
placed for collection by Time-Warner in the amount of $236, has been paid in full. (Tr. 
50) Also, the utility bill placed for collection by the public works department in the 
amount of $328, and the $100 parking ticket at SOR ¶ 1.m, have been paid in full. 
Applicant provided post-hearing documents corroborating that these delinquencies have 
been satisfied. (AE A) He testified that he returned the book to St. Joseph’s University 
accounting for the $164 debt placed for collection at SOR ¶ 1.n. (Tr. 52) He provided a 
document from the University stating that this has been paid in full. (AE A)  
 
Applicant submitted a post-hearing document from a bank indicating that the debt 
in the amount of $400 that was charged off at SOR ¶1.f, was paid off on March 21, 
2015. The last payment of $320 was received on that date and the creditor reported it 
as paid in full. (AE A) Similarly, the judgment entered against him as the result of 
breaching a lease, was satisfied on April 30, 2015, when Applicant paid $437.93 to 
settle it. (AE A) The delinquent debt in the amount of $196 that was placed for 
collections in SOR  ¶  1.l was paid in full in June 2013 and Applicant testified that he still 
has an active account with this telecommunications provider. (Tr. 53) He testified 
credibly that the debt at SOR ¶ 1.e placed for collection in the amount of $874 by an 
apartment complex has been paid in full when he paid $656 on May 15, 2015. (Tr. 52, 
AE A)  
 
Applicant provided budget information including his $23.60 per hour pay rate, 
and his monthly rent in the amount of $1,396. He also makes his monthly child support 
payments and has utility and transportation costs. He did not receive formal financial 
counseling but he has his finances under control now that he has steady employment. 
(Tr. 59-60) He hopes to obtain a loan by the end of this calendar year to completely 
eliminate his child support arrearage. (Tr. 54-55)  
 
                                          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
 
4 
 
 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports and documents submitted at the hearing. The Government produced substantial 
evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts.2  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant endured financial problems when his mother became severely ill, he 
was involved in an automobile accident, and he had prolonged periods of 
unemployment. These conditions were beyond his control. He demonstrated that he 
tried to resolve his delinquencies in good faith by entering into a repayment plan with 
the state division of child services and by making additional monthly payments, on this 
child support debt. He has now produced relevant and responsive documentation, 
                                                          
2 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
appropriately disputed his medical debts, which were co-payments that should have 
been covered by insurance. He has worked hard to address his delinquencies, and paid  
most of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. The others were disputed.  He has 
met his burden to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts 
were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The mitigating 
conditions enumerated above in AG ¶ 20 apply.  
 
      Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant is a devoted son and father. He 
has worked for several years as a special policeman and security specialist, without 
issues. He survived a series of personal setbacks and trauma including an armed 
robbery that resulted in a fatality. He has struggled to overcome his financial travails 
and pay off his debts. He has made substantial progress in repaying his child-support 
arrearage and to resolve his financial problems. Applicant testified credibly and 
persuasively that his finances are now under control. Applicant has addressed the 
specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to resolve them.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer are a security concern. Many of the delinquent 
debts in the SOR were paid several years ago. Others were successfully disputed. The 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:              For Applicant 
 
        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                 Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                Administrative Judge 
 
