 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00703 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case alleges security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 29, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 11, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
September 4, 2018, scheduling the hearing for October 11, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf. He submitted a packet, which was marked 
 
2 
 
as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and was accepted into the record without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 19, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 38, is married and has one stepchild. He obtained his 
undergraduate degree in 2006. Applicant completed his security clearance application on 
March 4, 2017. He has never held a security clearance. (GE 1) His former employer is 
sponsoring him for a security clearance. (Tr. 13) Applicant has been unemployed from 
September 2017 to March 2018, and is currently collecting unemployment. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has delinquent debt in the approximate amount of 
$29,000. The debts include six delinquent student loans, and three collection accounts. 
Applicant admitted the allegations relating to the student loans, but denied the three 
collection accounts. He denied the allegation SOR ¶ 2.a. under personal conduct 
concerns. He provided explanations for each allegation. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his financial hardship. He takes responsibility and is 
attempting to correct the issues. He does not want to make excuses, but wanted to clarify 
the situation.  Applicant suffered a major heart attack in March 2011. He explained that 
he almost died. (Tr. 21) He was in rehabilitation for about three months. At the time, he 
was working for an agency that he had been employed with for 13 years, but he was let 
go. His illness and medical costs drained his savings and he was unable to pay his student 
loans. (AE A)  After the surgery, he was not able to work for various times over the past 
few years. (Answer to SOR) His wife is unemployed as well. (Tr. 31) 
 
Applicant had medical setbacks after the surgery. He was not able to walk and 
needed surgery again in 2018 for blood clots in his leg. (AE) A. He continues with his 
visits to the doctor. (Tr. 29) He decided to let his health issues take precedence over the 
student loan issues. (Tr. 27) 
 
Applicant explained that the hospital worked out a payment arrangement with him. 
He noted that he was focused on gaining back his health. He talked to some credit repair 
agencies and was told to continue paying on his car loan, which he did.  (Tr. 32) The car 
loan is now paid. (See attachment to Answer) Applicant’s plan was to use the money that 
he had been paying on his $500 monthly car loan to start paying his student loans. (Tr. 
27, 31) 
 
During his OPM investigative interview, Applicant spoke about his six student loans 
that had been deferred from 2012 and are now due. He stated that he did not have the 
money to make payments. Since he has not been working and collecting a salary he had 
no money for student loan payments. (GE 2) 
 
As to SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f., Applicant admitted that he owes the six student loans. He 
has not made any payments in the past seven years. He was credible when he stated 
that he had made some payments in 2010 and 2011, but he was at times delinquent 
before his health problems in 2011. (Tr. 35)  
 
3 
 
 
As to SOR 1.g and 1.h for phone bills in collection for a total of $715, Applicant 
denied that he owed these accounts. He stated that another phone company had a 
promotion and the other two phone accounts were to have been paid. He has been 
working with them for a while. He received notices for payment from the two phone 
companies and forwarded them to the new phone provider. (Tr. 38) He has not yet 
officially disputed the accounts. (Tr. 39).  
 
As to SOR 1.i, a medical account in the amount of $407, Applicant admits that he 
owes this account. His father is going to help him pay this medical bill and some other 
ones as well. He states that he is willing to pay this account, but does not have the money 
to do so. He cannot pay until he resumes his employment and is earning a salary. He 
also would like to ask for another deferment for the student loans.  
 
Applicant’s last salary in 2017 was about $62,000. He was about to set up payment 
arrangements for the student loans when the SOR arrived. He provided proof that he has 
paid his car loan in full. However, he has no health insurance at this time and is relying 
on savings and his unemployment benefits. (Tr.48) His surgery in 2018 has affected his 
finances as well. Applicant has taken about $7,000 from his 401(k) to help pay his bills. 
(Tr. 49) 
 
When Applicant completed his 2017 SCA, he answered “No” to Section 26 
concerning judgments or liens in the past seven years. He also answered “No” to Section 
26 concerning bills or debts turned over to collection accounts.  
 
Applicant denied that he intentionally falsified his 2017 SCA. In his answer, and in 
his testimony at the hearing, he claimed he had not thought of the student loans. He knew 
he was paying his household bills and did not have a look at his credit bureau report until 
his OPM investigation. At the investigation, he told the investigator that he had satisfied 
a judgment, which was confirmed by a recent credit report and that the phone bills were 
to have been resolved. He did not think they were delinquent. He knew he had student 
loans but didn’t think of them in that category. He testified that he did not deliberately 
falsify his SCA in 2017. He answered “No” because the student loans were not on his 
radar. (Tr. 66) Applicant stated that he kept no information from the investigator during 
his interview. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
 
5 
 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s student debts are long-standing and he acknowledges that he has not 
paid on them in about seven years. He has a medical debt and other medical accounts 
that are the result of circumstances beyond his control. He had been paying on his student 
loans before his heart attack, but not on a consistent basis. AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unresolved. Although he promises to address them 
when he is gainfully employed. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. While Applicant’s unemployment, heart attack and 
other health issues were beyond his control, he has not acted responsibly to address the 
resulting debts.  
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant did not receive any financial 
counseling nor are there clear indications that his financial situation is under control. He  
talked to some credit repair agencies and has paid his car loan in full.  His current ability 
to pay his delinquent debts is in doubt as he stated that he lives on his unemployment 
benefits and some savings. His financial problems are not under control.  
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the 
SOR. For these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i. against Applicant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsification of his SCA, the following 
disqualifying condition could apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied that he falsified his 2017 SCA, in his answer, and in his remarks 
at the hearing, he was adamant that he was not trying to defraud the Government.  He 
did not consider the student loans as belonging in that category. He had a satisfied 
judgment. He had not seen his credit report and did not know of the phone accounts that 
 
7 
 
were still on his credit report. In fact, he had denied those allegations on the SOR. An 
omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the 
time of the omission.1 An applicant’s level of education and business experience are 
relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on an SCA was 
deliberate.2  
 
In this instance, it is clear from Applicant’s comments that he was not aware of 
some of his delinquent debts, and was relying on the deferment or consolidation of 
student loans. He should have disclosed the delinquent debts he had knowledge of on 
his SCA. However, I find insubstantial evidence of an intent by Applicant to intentionally 
omit, conceal, or falsify facts from and on his SCA. Therefore, AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
established. 
 
 Applicant made prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his falsification or 
concealment.  He spoke openly to the investigator during his interview. Applicant was 
credible and has shown that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. He provided 
sufficient information in this record to demonstrate that he has met his burden of proof for 
his personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, including his credibility and openness at the hearing, I 
conclude that Applicant did not deliberately falsify his SCA, but he has not mitigated the 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
2 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
8 
 
security concerns raised by his financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
