 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-00514 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 26, 2016. On 
March 12, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 15, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 25, 2018, and 
the case was assigned to me on August 15, 2018. On August 27, 2018, the Defense 
 
2 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled 
for September 27, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 
1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were admitted without objection. I kept the 
record open until October 6, 2018, to enable him to submit additional documentary 
evidence. He timely submitted AX D, which was admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on October 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c-1.f. He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old pipefitter employed by a defense contractor since June 
2006. He married in October 2016 and has three children, ages 18, 14, and 1. His wife is 
employed by the same defense contractor. His two older children are from a previous 
relationship, and he pays child support of $196 for them. (Tr. 24.) His wife also has two 
children from a previous relationship, and they live with her and Applicant. He has never 
held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s take-home pay is about $872 per week. Child support is automatically 
deducted from his pay. (Tr. 31.) He knows that his wife earns about $27 per hour, but he 
does not know the amount of her take-home pay. He testified that his rent is $1,400 per 
month and his wife’s car payment is about $400 per month, but he did not provide any 
other information about his monthly living expenses. (Tr. 45-46.)  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling about $16,000. Applicant’s pay was 
being garnished to satisfy the judgment for $5,240 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a until he settled it 
for $3,700 in July 2018.2 (AX C; AX D.) He hired a credit-repair company in June 2018 
and pays the company $89 per month to contact creditors, dispute debts, and negotiate 
settlements. As of the date of the hearing, none of the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b-1.f had 
been paid, disputed, or otherwise resolved.3 Applicant has not received any credit 
counseling from his credit-repair company or anyone else. (Tr. 57.) Applicant denied the 
medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, on the ground that he did not recognize it. However, 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
2 The settlement offer from the debt collector lists a different name for the creditor, apparently a collection 
agent, but the court document reflecting satisfaction of the judgment has the same case number and 
matches the name of the creditor alleged in the SOR and reflected in the credit report from October 2016. 
(GX 2 at 1.). 
 
3 The other debts alleged in the SOR were three medical debts for $7,147; $200; and $106; an unsecured 
loan for $3,263; and a credit-card debt charged off for $901. 
 
 
3 
 
as of the date of the hearing, he submitted no evidence showing that he had disputed it 
or otherwise resolved it. 
 
 In addition to the debts alleged in the SOR, he owes about $30,000 in federal 
income taxes and $5,000 in state income taxes, incurred because he intentionally claimed 
too many exemptions in an effort to reduce the withholding of taxes from his pay. He 
recently paid a tax-preparation company $1,500 to help him resolve his tax debts. (Tr. 40-
42.) Because the federal and state tax debts were not alleged in the SOR, I have 
considered them for the limited purposes of evaluating evidence of mitigation and as part 
of my whole-person analysis. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
 Applicant recently borrowed $30,000 from his 401(k) retirement account. He used 
the funds to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, repay a $4,000 loan his mother had given him, 
and pay the tax preparer to resolve his federal and state tax debts. He has about $16,000 
remaining from the loan, and he is waiting for his credit-repair company to advise him 
how he should use it. (Tr. 42-43.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
 
4 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the evidence submitted at the hearing establish the 
following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to 
satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following 
mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. None of the above 
mitigating conditions are established for the remaining debts. They are recent, numerous, 
and were not incurred under conditions making them unlikely to recur. He submitted no 
evidence of conditions beyond his control. He has not obtained credit counseling. He has 
not disputed the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b. He submitted no evidence of payments, 
payment agreements, or other resolution of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.f. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
 
6 
 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by 
his delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
