 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 18-01250 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on August 15, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on August 28, 2018, and 
had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and she provided a 
response to the FORM with attached documents including: a payment agreement with 
the comptroller of state A; an installment agreement with the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS); an enrollment with [Blank] Debt Relief; an IRS FORM 1099C; and several letters 
of correspondence with her numerous creditors or their collection agents. The 
Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 13, is admitted into evidence 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 14, 2018.  
 
2 
 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. She graduated from high school in 1980 and attended 
college briefly but did not obtain her associate’s degree. Applicant has been employed 
as an administrative assistant or intelligence analyst by a federal contractor since March 
2005. She reports no military service and she never married. She has three grown sons. 
She reported a period of unemployment from February 2014 to July 2014 after she was 
laid off by her employer of nine years. She received three months of severance pay. 
Applicant had previous security clearances from the Department of Energy and DOD 
since 1992.  
 
Applicant reported financial problems in section 26 of her security clearance 
application (SCA).2  These included a tax lien by state A in the amount of $3,405; a 
federal tax lien in the amount of $12,524; and two Chapter 7 bankruptcy petitions filed in 
1994 and 2003. She stated that she did not pay state taxes in 2007 due to a mistake 
made by her income tax return preparer. She claims that she entered into a payment 
plan in late 2013 of $120 a month to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for taxes owed 
for tax years (TY) 2010-2013. However, she lost her job in early 2014 and was unable 
to make payments in accordance with the agreement. Applicant also disclosed 
delinquent student loans with a balance owed of $15,468, and several automobiles that 
were repossessed, as well as delinquent cable television and cell phone debts. 
Applicant repeatedly stated that she was overwhelmed by these debts.   
 
Applicant admitted to all of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR as well as 
the two tax liens and two bankruptcy cases in her answer to the SOR on July 28, 2018. 
She attached a chart showing the status of each of her financial delinquencies. The 
chart reflects that SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g are in a payment plan. However, 
she produced no documentary evidence to show that she followed through and actually 
made payments pursuant to any repayment arrangement. The chart also reflects that 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.l, 1.m, 1.o, 1.y, and 1.z are enrolled in a debt relief program. The 
agreement with [redacted] Debt Relief was attached to her response to the FORM, and 
shows that Applicant enrolled in the program on September 10, 2018. She agreed to 
make regular deposits of $160 for a period of 24-28 months. No evidence of a 
continuous stream of payments pursuant to this agreement has been provided as she 
enrolled just recently.    
 
In her personal subject interview (PSI) on October 20, 2017, Applicant explained 
that she was chronically behind on her rent payments and other debts and she felt 
overwhelmed by these debts and failed to pay state income taxes in 2007 and federal 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 11, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 3), or his personal subject interview (PSI) on October 20, 
2017. (Item 4)  
 
2 Item 3.  
 
 
3 
 
 
income taxes in TY 2010–2013. At that time, the balance owed to the IRS was $12,524, 
and she claimed to be paying $120 per month to the IRS. The judgment in the amount 
of $1,714 at SOR ¶ 1.k resulted from an automobile accident, which occurred when her 
boyfriend drove Applicant’s vehicle in June 2011. She claimed to be making payments 
of $100 a month on that judgment, but produced no documentary evidence. Applicant 
stated her plan for the pay day loan judgment entered in 2013 at SOR ¶ 1.j in the 
amount of $342, which was to be entered into a repayment plan that is not yet in place.  
 
In her PSI, Applicant stated that her student loan delinquencies at SOR ¶¶ 1.r 
and 1.s started in October 2012 and claims she has been paying $5 per month to 
NELNET on a $16,591 balance owed. She opened these loans in 2003-2004. The debt 
charged off in the amount of $7,385 at SOR ¶ 1.n was a loan for an automobile that 
Applicant obtained in 2009. She had mechanical difficulties with this vehicle and she 
abandoned it at the repair shop. The credit-card debt placed for collection in the amount 
of $348 at SOR ¶ 1.p was for a revolving credit account opened in 2008. The debt in the 
amount of $176 placed for collection at SOR ¶ 1.q was for a cable-television account 
opened in 2010. No evidence of payments on these delinquent debts was provided.  
  
The charged-off debt in the amount of $8,673 at SOR ¶ 1.c and the debt placed 
for collection in the amount of $ 6,609 at SOR ¶ 1.d were also for automobile loans. She 
could not afford the payments on these vehicles when she lost her job in 2014. 
Applicant stated in her PSI that she had previous automobiles repossessed when she 
did not make payments in 1996, 1997, and 2002.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.t, 1.u, 1.v, 1.w and 1.x were all debts placed for collection by the 
District of Columbia government because Applicant did not pay the fines for her 
numerous traffic violations. She still has not produced evidence of payments on these 
delinquencies totaling $650. Her only explanation was that she was overwhelmed by 
debt.  
 
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, she attached documentary evidence that 
she had established a repayment plan with the comptroller of state A in which she 
would pay $103 a month for a period of 36 months with the first payment due in January 
2018. Again, no evidence was produced that she actually complied with the terms of 
this plan. The balance owed to state A was still $3,402. Similarly, she provided an 
installment agreement entered into with the IRS in September 2015 requiring payments 
of $150 a month and a balance of $15,607. No evidence of actual payments has been 
provided. She enrolled in [redacted] Debt Relief program on September 10, 2018, and is 
supposed to make deposits of $160 for 24–48 months to be meted out to her numerous 
creditors.  
 
Applicant provided documentary evidence of a $75 payment by check to the 
medical creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.i against a balance remaining of $687. She also 
made a payment of $60 to the creditor at SOR ¶ 1.h on September 18, 2018 against a 
balance remaining of $434. Applicant provided a 2015 IRS Form 1099-C showing that 
the debt charged off in the amount of $7,385 at SOR ¶ 1.n was cancelled. There was no 
 
4 
 
 
indication that she paid income taxes on this cancelled debt. The debt in the amount of 
$348 placed for collection in SOR ¶ 1.p was settled in full with a payment of $156 made 
on January 25, 2018. The balance owed on the judgment at SOR ¶ 1.y is now up to 
$1,110. Applicant provided evidence of her request made on September 14, 2018, to 
the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.z for itemized records supporting the judgment lawfully obtained 
against her in the amount of $3,083. However, she provided no evidence of good faith 
efforts to resolve this or any of the four judgments against her alleged in the SOR.   
 
 Applicant provided evidence that she received financial counseling by [redacted] 
Debt Relief and an earlier debt relief company. She provided no budget showing income 
against expenses, or other documentation to show progress on her delinquent debts. 
Most of her delinquent debts are more than six years old including federal income taxes 
owed from TY 2010-2013, state income taxes owed from 2007, and student loans 
obtained in 2004-’05. (Item 12) She has had financial problems over several decades, 
going back to her first bankruptcy petition in 1994. (Item 13) She professed her 
intentions to repay the tax deficiency and other debts when she entered into a 
repayment plan in 2011, but failed to make the payments as scheduled. She was  
aware that her financial problems were a concern to the government when she 
completed her 2015 SCA and in her PSI in October 2017. She produced no 
documentary evidence that she has followed through on any repayment plans.    
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Administrative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated in 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 
2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
5 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
 
6 
 
 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local  
             income tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local 
             income tax as required.   
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by her credit 
reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c) and 19(d), thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts.3 Applicant has not met that burden.   
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;   
                                                          
3 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant endured a five month period of unemployment four years ago, and a 
downturn in the economy. Arguably, these conditions were beyond her control. Yet, her 
financial irresponsibility predates the period of unemployment. Despite her knowledge at 
least three years ago that these delinquencies might affect her eligibility for a security 
clearance when she completed her SCA, and reinforcing her intention to make payment 
arrangements in her PSI, she has done little to resolve these delinquencies. She has 
produced no relevant or responsive documentation either with her Answer to the SOR, 
or in response to the FORM, showing a continuous stream of payments made to tax 
authorities or her multitude of creditors. She has not demonstrated that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to show that her financial problems are under control, and that her debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit report and her 
answer to the SOR reflect the delinquent debts. Applicant did not provide enough 
details with documentary corroboration about what she did to address her SOR debts. 
She did not provide documentation relating to any of the SOR debts: (1) proof of 
payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter 
from the creditor proving that she paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;4 (3) 
credible debt disputes indicating she did not believe he was responsible for the debts 
and why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment 
plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that she was attempting to 
resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because she did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was important for 
her to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts in 
                                                          
4 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or his] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
8 
 
 
the SOR. (FORM at 4) Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements, there is scant 
documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts. She did not provide her budget. The record lacks 
corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes 
for her financial problems, except that she was overwhelmed, and other mitigating 
information. The FORM informed Applicant that she had 30 days from the receipt of the 
FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, 
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections 
or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative 
Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM 
at 4) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has gone through a brief period of 
unemployment and an unexpected loss of household income. She has been employed 
most of her adult life, with the exception of the five month period of unemployment in 
2014. Most importantly, Applicant has not addressed the specific allegations in the 
SOR. Instead, she has made hollow promises of her intent to repay her delinquent 
debts. She has not met her burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has not met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
9 
 
 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-m:               Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.p:                          For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.o:                                  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.q -1.bb:                       Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
