 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-00778 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 28, 2018. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 5, 2018. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on August 16, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
 
2 
 
 
through 4.1 Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D. There 
were no objections to any exhibits offered, and all were admitted into evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on August 24, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. She graduated from college earning a bachelor’s degree 
in 2012. She began a master’s degree program in 2014, but later withdrew from the 
program. She has never been married and has no children. She is presently employed in 
a temporary job and has a job offer pending while the security clearance process is being 
completed.2 
 
In 2015, Applicant’s mother had to leave her job after she was diagnosed with a 
serious degenerative disease in March 2017. Applicant testified that this had an impact 
on her because her father became the sole source of income for the household.3  
 
Applicant completed her security clearance application in September 2017. She 
was interviewed by a government investigator in November 2017. She disclosed her 
financial issues. The debts alleged are corroborated by Applicant’s admissions, 
testimony, and credit reports from October 2017 and March 2018.4 
 
Applicant was employed immediately after her graduation from college from 
December 2012, until she resigned in approximately September 2014 to pursue a 
master’s degree. She estimated her annual salary in 2013 and 2014 was about $32,000. 
She sought financial funding for her master’s degree through a private loan from the 
university. She was advised by the university that she qualified. After being told she would 
receive a private loan from the university for approximately $20,000 and after she had 
started classes, she was informed that there was an error, and she would not receive the 
funding. Only $10,000 of the original amount could be refunded. Applicant could not afford 
to pay tuition and other living expenses on her income, and she withdrew from the 
program. Applicant was responsible for approximately $10,000 of the loan. She moved 
home because she could not afford to go to school and looked for a job. She was 
unemployed for six to nine months and underemployed until the present. Applicant 
testified that she contacted the university’s lender in April 2018 after receiving the SOR, 
but the lender wanted a lump sum payment before a payment plan would be arranged, 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the exhibit list and II is the discovery letter.  
 
2 Tr. 15-17, 25-26. 
 
3 Answer to SOR. 
 
4 GE 1, 2, 3, 4. 
 
3 
 
 
which she could not afford. She disputed the lender’s handling of the loan and intends to 
resolve it in the future when she is financially able (SOR ¶ 1.f-$10,112).5 
 
Applicant testified that she paid about $300 a month for about a year and a half on 
her federal student loans after she graduated from college and was employed (SOR ¶¶ 
1.g-$14,210 and 1.h-$17,142). She had the loans deferred for a period when she was 
going to attend graduate school. When she withdrew from graduate school, her loans 
became due in October 2014. She testified she talked to the lenders at the time, but she 
did not communicate with them since. The loans were deferred for a period due to her 
insufficient income, and she was advised that she could participate in an income-base 
repayment plan, but she failed to follow through when the deferment ended. She believed 
the loans were placed in default status in 2016.6  
 
In May 2018, Applicant agreed to participate in a rehabilitation program for her 
federal student loans (combined balance-$40,525). She agreed to pay $5 a month for 
nine months until April 2019. Once this rehabilitation program is completed a new monthly 
payment plan will be established. At the time of the hearing, four monthly payments of $5 
had been made.7 
 
 In 2015, Applicant was underemployed and earned less than $2,000 during the tax 
year. Based on the type of earnings, she was required to file a tax return, despite her low 
income. She was unaware of this requirement and neglected to timely correct her 
mistake. She has since done so. She filed her 2015 tax return in May 2018 and paid the 
amount she owed.8 
  
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($72) is for a cell phone account Applicant opened in 2014. 
She testified that she canceled the account before service started; was told she would 
not have to pay a bill; she received a bill, but never disputed or paid it. Applicant provided 
a receipt that she paid half the bill and testified she paid made the final payment in May 
2018. The debt is resolved.9 
 
Applicant opened an account with a telephone provider in 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.c-$790). 
She testified she disputed the bill when she believed the provider was adding fees she 
had not previously agreed to. The bill got more expensive and she could not pay it.10 The 
debt is not resolved. 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 17-26, 54-56. 
 
6 Tr. 26-35. 
 
7 Tr. 26-35; Answer to SOR; AE B.  
 
8 Tr. 35-41; AE A. Applicant provided copies of subsequent tax years that returns were filed.  
 
9 Tr. 41-46; Answer to SOR. 
 
10 Tr. 46-51. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant incurred the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($514) in 2014, owed to a pet hospital for 
the care of her dog. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($103) is a medical debt for laboratory tests 
for her incurred in approximately 2016. The debts are not paid or resolved.11 
 
Applicant testified that in 2014 she was issued a credit card by her employer (SOR 
¶ 1.i-$1,360). She said she was told that she would be reimbursed for certain expenses, 
but was not. Some of the expenses on the credit card were for personal use. She said 
she has not made a payment since the account was transferred to a collection account. 
She contacted the current creditor and it wanted a lump sum payment, which she cannot 
afford. The debt is unresolved.12  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j-$733 is for an apartment Applicant rented when she started 
graduate school. When she withdrew from school, she gave the landlord notice, but she 
could not afford to pay what she owed. She contacted the creditor about a settlement 
agreement, but she could not afford to pay it. It is unresolved.13  
 
In May 2018, Applicant sought financial counseling from her credit union, which 
offered to assist her in resolving the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.i 
and 1.j, but it cannot start the process until she is gainfully employed with more income 
than she currently earns.14 Applicant testified that she intended to develop a budget. She 
explained that her financial problems are due to insufficient income. She is living at home 
and contributes about $100 to $250 a month to the household. She has about $25 in 
savings and no other assets. She does not have credit cards. At her current job, she 
earns about $5 an hour and tips. She does not have health insurance. She intends to pay 
her debts when she has the resources to do so.15  
   
A character letter from a friend, who has known Applicant since 2014, stated that 
she is patriotic, loyal, and trustworthy and has an outstanding work ethic.16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
                                                          
11 Tr. 51-54. 
 
12 Tr. 56-59. 
 
13 Tr. 59-60. 
 
14 Answer to SOR.  
 
15 Tr. 61-65. 
 
16 AE D. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent federal and private student loans and other unpaid debts 
owed since about 2014 that she is unable to pay or resolve. There is sufficient evidence 
to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
7 
 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant filed her delinquent 2015 Federal income tax return, as alleged in SOR . 
She paid the debt owed in SOR 1.b. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these allegations.  
  
 Applicant continues to owe the debts in the remaining allegations of the SOR. She 
attributed her financial problems to insufficient income. This situation began when she left 
her job in 2014 to pursue an advanced degree. After starting the program, her financial 
funding was withdrawn, apparently due to an error. She was left with a partial loan, which 
was insufficient for her to continue her program. This caused her to terminate her lease 
and return home. Her student loans, which were deferred became delinquent. Applicant 
has been underemployed since 2014. She is unable to pay her delinquent debts and AG 
¶ 20(a) cannot be applied.  
 
 As explained above, Applicant’s financial problems were beyond her control. For 
the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. It has been almost four years since Applicant left full-time employment 
and decided to go back to school. She has had a series of low paying jobs. She admitted 
she did not responsibly manage her student loans. Since receiving the SOR, she has 
contacted some creditors in an attempt to resolve her debts, but she is unable to meet 
their proposals. Some of Applicant’s debts are small, but only one has been paid. She 
recently started a rehabilitation program for her federal student loans. This did not occur 
until after receipt of the SOR. She has made four $5 payments of the nine required 
payments. Although, the circumstances she was confronted with impacted her finances, 
the evidence is insufficient to fully apply AG ¶ 20(b) as most of Applicant’s efforts occurred 
after she received the SOR, and there is minimal evidence she has acted responsibly. 
AG ¶ 20(b) has some application, but it is insufficient to fully mitigate the issues raised 
under this guideline.  
 
 Applicant sought financial counseling after receiving the SOR. At this juncture the 
financial counselor cannot assist Applicant until she has more income. There are no clear 
indications that the problem is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) has minimal application. 
 
 Applicant indicated she disputed the validity and legitimacy of the amounts owed 
on certain debts and intended to dispute her private student loan. However, she did not 
provide evidence of actions she has taken to resolve her claims. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a college-educated 28-year-old woman. She is unable to pay her 
delinquent debts and recently began a rehabilitation program for federal student loans. It 
was not until after she received the SOR that she began to take any action. Although she 
stated that she intends to resolve her delinquent debts in the future, at this juncture, she 
has an unreliable financial track record. Applicant’s conduct raises questions about her 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.j:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
